Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2013/lihegelheimer.pdf 
October 2013, Volume 17, Number 3 
pp. 135–156 
 
Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501  135 
MOBILE-ASSISTED GRAMMAR EXERCISES: 
EFFECTS ON SELF-EDITING IN L2 WRITING 
Zhi Li, Iowa State University 
Volker Hegelheimer, Iowa State University 
In this paper, we report on the development and implementation of a web-based mobile 
application, Grammar Clinic, for an ESL writing class. Drawing on insights from the 
interactionist approach to Second Language Acquisition (SLA), the Noticing Hypothesis, 
and mobile-assisted language learning (MALL), Grammar Clinic was designed as a series 
of outside-class grammar exercises in the format of sentence-level error identification and 
correction. 19 intermediate level ESL students at a large Midwestern American university 
used this mobile application in an English academic writing class during a 16-week 
semester. A mixed methods approach was chosen to investigate (a) the effect of Grammar 
Clinic on the efficacy of ESL students’ self-editing as well as (b) their perceptions of this 
mobile application as a tool to improve their English writing. Our analyses show that 
students’ performance on Grammar Clinic assignments reflects their progress in self-
editing. This progress is seen in the positive correlation of the students’ Grammar Clinic 
performance with their gains on a grammar post-test, an increase of self-editing 
corrections, and a reduction in errors in the final drafts of two major paper assignments. 
The impact of this web-based mobile application was documented using qualitative data 
that considered the students’ use of and perception of Grammar Clinic.  
Keywords: Web-based Mobile Application, Mobile Assisted Language Learning, 
Interactionist Approach to SLA, Noticing Hypothesis, Self-Editing 
APA Citation: Li, Z., & Hegelheimer, V. Mobile-assisted grammar exercises: Effects on 
self-editing in L2 writing. Language Learning & Technology, 17(3), 135–156. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2013/lihegelheimer.pdf 
Received: July 2, 2012; Accepted: July 5, 2013; Published: October 1, 2013 
Copyright: © Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer 
INTRODUCTION 
Research related to both second language acquisition (SLA) and second language writing has had as its 
major concern over grammatical errors in L2 writing. Accordingly, the effects of corrective feedback in 
L2 writing have been extensively studied (Bitchener & Ferris, 2012). Nevertheless, ESL learners’ self-
editing—an important self-regulatory learning step in both grammar acquisition and writing development—
has not been widely investigated (Bitchener & Ferris, 2012; Diab, 2010, 2011). This study aims to fill that 
gap and has two purposes: (a) to outline the SLA-informed development process of a mobile application 
and (b) to evaluate the effect of such a mobile application on the efficacy of ESL learners’ self-editing, 
defined as the learners’ capability to identify grammatical errors and to correct them in their L2 writing 
(i.e., the development of their grammatical precision in academic writing). This study is situated in an 
intermediate-level ESL writing class that is not grammar-focused, though the needs for grammar instruction 
still exist. Therefore, outside-class grammar exercises—exercises that target specific errors and provide 
corrective feedback—serve this context well. In this paper, we report on the development and 
implementation of a web-based mobile application, Grammar Clinic, as a supplementary tool for ESL 
learners’ self-editing activities. 
 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  136 
BACKGROUND 
The Role of Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
Studies related to grammar errors in L2 writing have largely focused on written corrective feedback from 
teachers. However, the efficacy of corrective feedback has been challenged by Truscott, and the academic 
debate over the effect and use of corrective feedback continues (Ferris, 2004; Bruton, 2009; Truscott, 
1999, 2007). Truscott’s (1999) rejection of corrective feedback for its minor positive effects—and his 
assertion of potentially harmful effects—on the development of English learners’ grammar competence 
has sparked a series of theoretical arguments and empirical studies. Recently, a number of empirical 
studies on both short-term and long-term effects of written corrective feedback have lent support to the 
proponents of corrective feedback (Bitchener & Ferris, 2012; Ferris, 2006, 2010; Sheen, 2007). 
Nevertheless, this does not mean that the practice of corrective feedback is without its problems. 
Corrective feedback, by nature, acts as a reactive measure to highlight and address learners’ weaknesses 
in their written production. This process can be burdensome to teachers due to time constraints and the 
necessity to prioritize feedback of various error types. As one potential solution, pre-emptive measures 
can be taken to raise learners’ awareness of the typical errors made at their proficiency level, to help them 
avoid making the same mistakes in new pieces of writing (Long & Robinson, 1998; Ellis, Basturkmen & 
Loewen, 2001). At the same time, such pre-emptive measures can help complete the learning-writing-
feedback-revision cycle. This is where the process of self-editing can play a role in L2 writing, because 
unlike passive corrective feedback, learners will be required to identify and correct errors actively in self-
editing activities. 
The importance of self-editing during process-based writing classes has been acknowledged by many. 
Recently, Bitchener and Ferris (2012) described the activity of self-editing as a source of corrective 
feedback, and more importantly they view the competence of self-editing as an ultimate goal of providing 
corrective feedback. Self-editing, a learner initiated activity, has been recognized as a critical step in L2 
learners’ writing and grammar development, as it facilitates acquisition processes and promotes learner 
autonomy (Cresswell, 2000; Fathman & Whalley, 1990; Suzuki, 2008). Polio, Fleck, and Leder (1998) 
studied this topic when they examined the performances of two groups of ESL learners who were given 
extra time for self-editing. They found that even though learners showed significant improvement across 
the writing assignments, both experiment groups, which received grammar review and feedback, did not 
perform better than the control group, which had no treatment at all in terms of developing grammatical 
precision in their writing. This finding demonstrates the potential of self-editing in L2 writing; 
nevertheless, it asks us to reconsider the effectiveness of grammar instruction used in the experiment. To 
investigate self-editing in terms of the effects of teachers’ cues on Japanese college students’ self-
correction in English writing, Makino (1993) compared the performance of three groups of learners. She 
found that when no cues were given, learners could make limited and fewer self-corrections of grammar 
errors, compared with the other two groups that respectively received cues on general error location or 
cues with specific underlines. This further suggests that training or support of self-editing for ESL 
learners is necessary. 
Some comparative studies focusing on self- and peer-editing have shed light on learners’ actual 
performances during each stage of the editing process. Suzuki (2008) took a qualitative approach in 
examining 24 Japanese university students’ self- and peer-editing processes. By analyzing verbal reports, 
she found that peer-editing generated more episodes of negotiation whereas self-editing resulted in more 
text changes focused on word choice and grammar error correction. Diab (2010) also found that peer-
editing helped reduce more rule-based errors, but not non-rule-based errors, compared with self-editing 
practice. On the whole, these studies indicate that learners generally can notice their errors during self-
editing, but that supplemental instruction or training is also needed. A tailored web-based mobile application 
may be one option that can provide learners with opportunities to improve their self-editing practices. 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  137 
In order to help students improve the efficacy of their self-editing, we designed a web-based mobile 
application, Grammar Clinic. This pre-emptive measure was implemented in an ESL academic writing 
class. The design of Grammar Clinic was informed by principles of the interactionist approach to SLA, 
the Noticing Hypothesis, and mobile assisted language learning (MALL). 
Designing a Mobile-Assisted Grammar Application 
Grammar Clinic is an application that asks users to identify sentence level errors and to correct them.  It 
provides instant feedback for its exercises and includes a short grammar handbook. A total of 15 common 
grammatical error types are identified and used in this application: sentence fragments, run-on sentences, 
article use, verb use, noun use, adjective use, adverb use, pronoun use, preposition use, conjunction use, 
relative pronoun use, punctuation use, word choice, word order, and ambiguous expressions (see 
Appendix A and B) for sample items and for the distribution of item types). These grammatical errors, to 
some extent, represent the proficiency level of this ESL class because they were identified as the most 
prevalent error types in a learner writing corpus developed locally using writing from the same level ESL 
classes. All the items were piloted in an ESL class of the same level and proofread by an experienced ESL 
instructor in the fall semester of 2011. 
Each Grammar Clinic assignment consists of a set of 10 items which are selected depending on the 
distribution of error type, error gravity, and item difficulty. Students are required to identify the only error 
in each item by tapping on the error and then selecting an error type from four options (see Figure 1 for 
Grammar Clinic screenshots). Once students identify the error, they are required to correct it, something 
that usually requires minimal input. After completing a set of grammar exercises, students see their 
performance report in the format of 10-point score; then, they view detailed feedback about each item. 
The feedback page is accompanied with a messaging function for student communication with the 
instructor (see Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1. Grammar exercise application work flow. 
Interactionist Approach to SLA and the Noticing Hypothesis 
Drawing on the Input Hypothesis (Krashen, 1985) and the Output Hypothesis (Swain, 1995), the 
interactionist approach  to SLA emphasizes the complete learning cycle, moving from input and 
interaction, to feedback and output (Gass, 1997; Gass & Mackey, 2007). With an expansion of the term 
interaction to learner-computer interaction, the interactionist theory has been widely used in computer-
assisted language learning (CALL) software design and research (Chapelle, 2009; Heift, 2004; 
Hegelheimer & Chapelle, 2000). In CALL program design, another important theory that has been 
influential and that has been adapted to include modalities beyond face-to-face communication is 
Schmidt’s Noticing Hypothesis (1990, 1993). This hypothesis states that noticing is a necessary condition 
for learning. We employed the principles in the interactionist approach to SLA and the Noticing 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  138 
Hypothesis to guide our design of web-based mobile application in an English academic writing class. 
According to the interactionist theory, input includes materials that learners should be exposed to for 
language development; input is typically a target like model, which provides positive evidence to learners 
(Mackey, 2006). Even so, input should also include negative evidence for learners, information about 
ungrammatical or unacceptable linguistic production (Long, 1996). The input materials in Grammar 
Clinic are extracted from a small local learner corpus, which consists of about 100 student essays from the 
same level of ESL classes at the same university. To keep the input material authentic, relevant, context-
independent, original erroneous sentences in the corpus were modified and then used in Grammar Clinic 
item writing. Each item in Grammar Clinic is a complete sentence with only one grammatical error. To 
make the input more noticeable to learners, only one item or sentence is displayed on the screen, and the 
error alone is highlighted once it has been spotted by learners. This focused visual enhancement can direct 
learner’s attention to feedback uptake and follow-up error correction (Heift, 2009). 
The term interaction in the interactionist approach embodies the importance of a learning environment in 
which a learner must both interact with input and modify his or her output based on feedback. Within the 
interactionist approach, an interaction can be either interpersonal or intrapersonal (Chapelle, 2001; Ellis, 
1999). During the process of interpersonal interaction, learners will engage in the negotiation of meaning 
and should notice a linguistic gap (Schmidt, 1993). In intrapersonal interaction, as in typical CALL 
activities, the learners’ attention is guided to certain problematic aspects of linguistic materials and is 
prompted by computer feedback to process the materials or reconstruct their responses with cognitive 
effort (Chapelle, 2001; Cotos, 2011). This can be regarded as a process of negotiation of form (Heift, 
2010). As Grammar Clinic assignments require students to identify and correct only one grammar error 
per item, intrapersonal interactions are developed as students only direct their attention to the potentially 
erroneous part of each sentence and process this information consciously. 
Feedback is usually regarded as a type of negative evidence that helps learners notice the mismatch 
between their linguistic performance and the target model, thus facilitating their linguistic development 
(Bitchener & Ferris, 2012). In CALL activities, feedback can be in the form of evaluation plus 
explanation, following learners’ intrapersonal interaction with a task on a computer or other devices. 
Thus, feedback serves to enhance learners’ development. In Grammar Clinic, feedback is provided 
instantaneously, so that learners know whether their error identification and correction are indeed on the 
right track. In addition, a detailed explanation for each item is offered to assist learners in acquiring 
grammatical rules. A short grammar handbook has been built into Grammar Clinic for learners as a 
supplementary resource. 
Output or modified output is the phase in which learners apply what they have learned from their 
interactions and feedback to their production (Gass, 1997). Modified output is believed to be beneficial in 
terms of supporting the development of the learners’ automaticity in their linguistic production (Gass, 
1997). Serving as a stage for modified output in the learning cycle, Grammar Clinic in our ESL academic 
writing class is embedded into the paper writing process and is immediately followed with self-editing 
and peer review. 
Mobile-Assisted Language Learning (MALL) 
With the rapid growth of mobile device ownership,1 mobile learning—also known as m-learning—has 
recently become a focus of attention in education (Cho, 2009; Kukulska-Hume, 2009). Not surprisingly, 
mobile assisted language learning (MALL) has also attracted much attention with its perceived 
advantages over traditional computer-assisted language learning (CALL). Mobility defines this relatively 
new trend, which includes various aspects in a learning environment, such as mobile technology, learner 
mobility, mobility of content, and so forth (Kukulska-Hume, 2009). In an overview of MALL, Kukulska-
Hume and Shield (2008) point out that “MALL differs from computer-assisted language learning in its 
use of personal, portable devices that enable new ways of learning, emphasizing continuity or spontaneity 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  139 
of access and interaction across different contexts of use” (p. 273). 
Despite the favorable perception of MALL, few empirical studies have focused on the effect of its 
mobility on learners or its potential; indeed, most existing studies related to MALL have considered 
vocabulary-related research (Godwin-Jones, 2011). For example, Song and Fox (2008) conducted a 
multiple-case study to investigate how advanced undergraduates at a university in Hong Kong used their 
Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs) for vocabulary learning. They found that mobile devices were used in 
various ways for this task. In some cases, mobile device use was integrated with computer use and thus 
shaped learners’ vocabulary learning activities. In Taiwan, Lu (2008) conducted a quasi-experimental 
study on the effectiveness of English vocabulary learning through mobile phone short message service 
(SMS) lessons for a group of 30 high school students. After a two-week treatment, the SMS lesson group 
showed more gains in vocabulary recognition as reflected in the comparison of pre- and post-tests of 
target word recognition. In addition, students were found to hold a positive attitude towards SMS lessons 
via mobile phones. Unfortunately, Lu’s delayed post-test of the same target words showed that the 
students did not retain many of the words learned through SMS. Stockwell (2010) compared the 
vocabulary learning performance and vocabulary gains from pre-intermediate learners of English, when 
using mobile platforms and computers/laptops. His study’s results indicate that there were no consistent 
differences on vocabulary activity scores or vocabulary learning improvements between the two groups. 
In designing Grammar Clinic, we adopted the principles of mobile learning advocated by Herrington, 
Herrington, and Mantei (2009), which centers on the key feature of mobility. Considering the nature of 
academic writing and the limitations related to mobile phones’ relatively small screen size, it would not 
be very realistic to expect learners to write or edit a paper on mobile devices. Still, it is possible to use 
mobile devices for grammar learning, which in turn may contribute to improvements in writing quality. 
Thus, Grammar Clinic is designed to fit mobile devices, with the features of bite-sized and situated 
assignment sets, simplified user operation, optimal display setting for mobile devices, and cross-platform 
compatibility. Grammar Clinic assignments were modularized into bite-sized grammar exercises to make 
them more accessible and to capitalize on the mobility feature of m-learning. That is, students can use 
their mobile devices to finish Grammar Clinic assignments outside classroom whenever and wherever 
they want. 
In light of findings from a local needs assessment of educational technology, we intentionally designed 
this grammar application for use on various mobile devices as a web-based application, instead of a native 
application for a specific type of mobile device. According to a local campus-wide survey report of 
technology access from Kemis, Davis, and Haen (2011), over 99% of the student respondents have cell 
phones, and over 69% of them own a mobile smart device capable of internet access, including 
iPhone/iPod Touch, Droid, Blackberry, or Windows Mobile. Given the diversity in mobile devices, we 
discarded the plan of developing native apps for iPhone/iPod Touch or Android platforms. Instead, we 
opted for a web-based mobile application for its wide accessibility to student users. By using JavaScript, 
CSS, and HTML, Grammar Clinic has a flexible layout to match various mobile device displays. This 
decision is in line with the design principles suggested by Kwon and Lee (2010), that is, we considered 
mobile display characteristics when designing the graphic interfaces and the content layout (p. 1888).2 
To investigate the effect of Grammar Clinic on ESL students’ efficacy of self-editing and the 
development of their grammar precision, two research questions were considered in the implementation 
phase of this web-based mobile application: 
1. What was the effect of Grammar Clinic on ESL learners’ efficacy in self-editing and on the 
development of their grammatical precision in paper writing? 
2. How did the learners perceive Grammar Clinic as a learning application for academic writing? 
 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  140 
METHODOLOGY 
Implementation of Mobile-Assisted Grammar Application 
To investigate the effect of using Grammar Clinic on students’ efficacy in self-editing and to capture their 
perceptions of this mobile application as a tool to improve their grammatical precision in English writing, 
a mixed-method approach with a sequential explanatory model was taken, following Creswell and Plano-
Clark (2011). Quantitative data were collected and analyzed first to describe the students’ performance on 
Grammar Clinic and their improvements in self-editing. Qualitative data were then gathered to help 
explain quantitative findings. 
Participants 
This classroom-based study was conducted in an intermediate level ESL writing class. This intact class 
formed a convenience sample in our study as Grammar Clinic was integrated in the syllabus in that class 
and all the students were required to use this tool. There were no stand-alone grammar lessons in this 
course. The writing class met three times a week for the 16-week spring semester of 2012. All 19 
undergraduate ESL students in this class voluntarily participated in this study, including 10 male students 
and 9 female students. Students’ first languages included Chinese (14), Malay (2), Arabic (1), Korean (1), 
and Urdu (1). Student ages ranged from 19 to 22, and their length of stay at the university ranged from 
one to three semesters, with 50% of them being in their first semester in the United States. All participants 
were classified as high intermediate learners because they had met English proficiency requirements for 
university admission based on standardized English proficiency tests (TOEFL iBT, 71 or IELTS, 6.0). 
Their scores on an institutional English Placement Test (EPT) had placed them into this preparatory 
course of English academic writing. All students were competent users of computers and Internet 
services. 18 out of 19 students owned a smart phone or internet-enabled mobile device, such as iPod 
Touch, iPad or other tablets. 
Materials 
Grammar Clinic 
As previously described, Grammar Clinic was integrated into the course syllabus as a pre-emptive 
measure before students started self-editing all first drafts of major course papers. Accordingly, students 
were required to use Grammar Clinic regularly as an out-of-class-assignment and external resource. 
Students were encouraged to use their mobile devices for the Grammar Clinic assignments, but they were 
permitted to use computers to finish the assignments. Students were permitted multiple attempts on any of 
the Grammar Clinic assignments, though the data reported here are from their first attempt of each 
exercise. 
From a set of ESL learner performance data in a study of an automated writing evaluation tool (AWE) at 
this same university (Li, Lee, Lee, Karakaya, & Hegelheimer, 2011), fragment, run-on sentence, verb use, 
article use, and preposition use were found to be the most frequent  errors among ESL learners at the 
intermediate proficiency level. Therefore, considering the frequency differences among various error 
types and the treatability of these errors, only five rule-based error types were investigated in this study, 
namely, sentence fragments, run-on sentences, verb use, article use, and preposition use. 
Grammar Pre/Post Test 
A 20-item grammar quiz was used as an in-class activity at the beginning and at the end of the semester to 
gauge students’ development in grammatical precision. The items in the grammar quiz were in the same 
format as in Grammar Clinic assignments. They were taken from piloted Grammar Clinic assignments, 
which were not used in the spring semester of 2012. The reliability coefficients (Cronbach’s alpha) for the 
pre- and post-test quizzes were .726 and .723, respectively, which are acceptable for a 20-item test 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  141 
(Alderson, Clapham, & Wall, 1995). 
Major Paper Assignment 
There were four major paper assignments in this academic English writing class, a course designed to 
help ESL learners develop academic writing skills. These assignments included a personal essay  
(Paper 1), a cause-and-effect essay (Paper 2), a compare-and-contrast essay (Paper 3), and an 
argumentative essay (Paper 4). Starting at 400 words, the length requirement for each paper increased by 
an increment of 150 to 200 words. To form a longitudinal comparison of students’ self-editing activity 
and writing accuracy—and to highlight the possible immediate and long-term effects of students’ use of 
Grammar Clinic—only the first major assignment (Paper 1) and the last major assignment (Paper 4) were 
analyzed. 
Student Questionnaire 
In order to understand the ESL learner’s actual use and perception of Grammar Clinic, an online 
questionnaire was implemented at the end of the semester. The perception questions were constructed 
either in the format of statements accompanied by a six-point Likert scale or as open-ended questions (see 
Appendix C). This questionnaire only elicits students’ general responses (self-reports) and does not 
address or record students’ actual behavior using Grammar Clinic. Records tracking user behavior could 
be collected either through paper-based weekly reports as in Manochehri, Gromik, and Aw (2012) or 
using an online behavior tracking tool. 
Procedures 
The ESL academic writing class in this study followed a process-based approach, which required students 
to go through several rounds of revision and editing, writing multiple drafts for each major assignment 
(see Figure 2). In all the revision and editing work students carried out, the “Track Changes” and 
“Comment” functions in Microsoft Word were used to record all changes. In terms of the purpose of 
Grammar Clinic, this was made clear to students at the beginning of the semester.  
Figure 2. Paper writing process in the ESL writing class. 
A short in-class demonstration of and training on the use of Grammar Clinic was carried out at the 
beginning of the semester. The instructor used an iPod Touch and a document camera to demonstrate how 
to open and add Grammar Clinic to the home screen of the students’ mobile devices. The instructor 
explained and showed the functions of Grammar Clinic with a flow chart and then asked the students to 
explore the specific functions of Grammar Clinic on their own devices. The instructor also briefly 
repeated the demonstration throughout the first three weeks to make sure students felt comfortable using 
Grammar Clinic. Grammar Clinic assignments were embedded in the writing processes of the major 
papers. Between the first draft and second draft of each paper, students were asked to finish three sets of 
Grammar Clinic assignments on their mobile devices or computers outside class. The interval between 
the first and the second draft writing was usually three to four days. Peer review, which focused on 
content revision, was typically carried out three to five days after the completion of the second draft. 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  142 
In order to answer the research questions in this study, multiple sources of data were utilized for 
quantitative and qualitative analyses. Students’ performance on Grammar Clinic was automatically 
recorded in a server-side database and their self-editing efforts on the second drafts of two major paper 
assignments—Paper 1 and Paper 4—were manually coded in terms of error type and accuracy by the 
researchers. Qualitative data concerning students’ use and perception of Grammar Clinic were gathered to 
triangulate quantitative findings in this study. 
Analysis 
To study quantitatively the immediate effect of Grammar Clinic on the ESL students’ efficacy of self-
editing and on their development of grammatical precision, we compared students’ self-editing behavior 
and correction rate of self-editing in the second drafts of Papers 1 and 4. Then, to shed light on the long-
term effect of Grammar Clinic, the learners’ performance on Grammar Clinic was correlated with their 
score gains between pre and post test measurements, and differences in error rates between students’ final 
drafts of Papers 1 and 4. Error rates for each error type were calculated using the formula suggested by 
Chandler (2003): (error number/essay word count) × 100. Errors in students’ papers were identified by 
the instructor of the ESL class using the same set of error codes as found in Grammar Clinic. A second 
trained rater coded 20% of the data set (Gass & Mackey, 2005). The inter-coder reliability, calculated as 
the complete agreement of coding, was 0.84, which is considered to be acceptable in social science 
studies (Neuendorf, 2002). Responses concerning students’ perceptions were tallied. Their responses to 
two open-ended questions were identified and coded into attitudes towards Grammar Clinic and other 
concerns, which help explain quantitative findings. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Learners’ Performance on Grammar Clinic 
To help them better self-regulate their grammar learning, students were permitted multiple attempts or 
reviews of each Grammar Clinic assignment during the semester.10 out 19 students tried to practice 
Grammar Clinic assignments more than once. This may be indicative of their effort to get a higher score 
on Grammar Clinic or to review the items. For the students who did not try multiple attempts, they may 
have found it unnecessary to redo items either because of low item difficulty or lack of interest. Only the 
scores of students’ first completed attempt in each set of assignments are reported in Table 1, because 
scores from later attempts could be inflated due to a practice effect. As shown in Table 1, the learners 
generally scored higher in error identification (8.82 out of 10) and relatively lower in error correction 
(7.29 out of 10). This is not surprising considering that error correction usually requires productive  
Table 1. Students’ Performance on Grammar Clinic 
Assignments Error  
identification  
SD Error 
correction  
SD Overall  SD 
1–3 (Paper 1) 8.28  1.52 6.92 2.28 7.60 1.55 
4–6 (Paper 2) 8.62 1.12 7.44 1.27 8.03 1.04 
7–9 (Paper 3) 8.79 1.05 7.03 2.36 7.91 1.34 
11–13(Paper 4) 9.55 .53 7.95 1.62 8.75 .98 
Total 8.82 .79 7.29 1.39 8.05 .86 
Note. All scores were averages out of 10 possible points. Assignment 10 was a bonus assignment, focusing on ambiguous 
expressions found in the students’ own writing. Assignment 12 was a special assignment, specifically focusing only on run-on 
sentences and fragments. 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  143 
grammar knowledge and more cognitive effort (Diab, 2010). It is encouraging that students improved 
their Grammar Clinic performance in both aspects: error identification (from 8.28 to 9.55) and correction 
(from 6.92 to 7.95). However, only three comparisons show statistical significance in a series of paired 
sample t-tests: error identification scores for Paper 1 and Paper 4 (t = -4.11, 95% CI [-2.08, -0.67], 
p = .001; Cohen’s d = -1.12), error identification scores for Paper 2 and Paper 4 (t = -4.43, 95% CI [-1.49, 
-0.53], p = .000; Cohen’s d = -1.06 ), and error identification scores for Paper 3 and Paper 4 (t = -3.338, 
95% CI [-1.35, -0.30], p = .004; Cohen’s d = -.91). 
The Effects of Grammar Clinic 
In order to investigate the effect of Grammar Clinic assignments on the efficacy of learners’ self-editing 
and the development of their grammatical precision, we examined three related sets of variables: the 
students’ performance of self-editing on the second drafts of Papers 1 and 4, grammar pre/post-tests, and 
error rates in the final drafts of Papers 1 and 4. 
In the ESL writing class, students were required to use the Microsoft Word function “Track Changes.” All 
cases of self-editing3 were coded by the instructor using the same error code system as used in Grammar 
Clinic (see Appendix A). Table 2 shows the averaged occurrences of learners’ self-revisions and 
correction rates in the second drafts of Papers 1 and 4. Among the five rule-based error types, the most 
frequent revision type when editing in Paper 1 is verb use (5.3), (including verb tense, verb form, and 
subject-verb (SV) agreement), followed by article use (1.4) and preposition use (0.9). The most frequent 
revision type in Paper 4 is also verb use (1.5). Article use (1.4) is another major area of self-editing. This 
frequency pattern, to some extent, matches the item type distribution in Grammar Clinic (See Appendix 
B), which includes 30 verb items, 20 article items, 13 run-on sentence items, 10 fragment items and 10 
preposition items. It is noteworthy that the highest average occurrence of editing in Table 2 falls in the 
category of  meaning-based revision “Rewrite” in Paper 1 (8.7) and 4 (7.9) and “Word Choice” in Paper 1 
(4.9) and 4 (3.7). This high frequency of meaning-based revision reflects the students’ awareness of 
writing as a process and their efforts to make more accurate expressions. 
Comparing students’ self-editing practice in Paper 1, we find that the students tended to make fewer 
changes in Paper 4 in general (26.2 vs. 19.5), especially in verb-related types (5.3 vs. 1.5). This may 
Table 2. Students’ Self-Editing in the Second Drafts of Papers 1 and 4 
Editing type Paper 1 Paper 4 
Average 
occurrence 
Correction rate Average 
occurrence 
Correction rate 
Run-on sentence 0.2 100% 0.3 100% 
Fragment 0.1 100% 0.1 100% 
Word choice 4.9 87% 3.7 90% 
Article use 1.4 85% 1.4 70% 
Verb use 5.3 84% 1.5 94% 
Preposition use 0.9 76% 0.7 85% 
Rewrite 8.7 N/A 7.9 N/A 
Total 26.2 88.3% 19.5 92.7% 
Note. The error type “Verb use” includes the cases of verb tense, verb form and SV agreement in learners’ self-revision process. 
The category of “Rewrite” consists of learners’ insertions of new content, deletions of sentence(s), and/or rewriting of certain 
paragraphs. The category of Rewrite was not rated in this study. 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  144 
suggest that the quality of the learners’ fourth paper had improved by the end of the semester and that 
they found fewer grammar problems in their own first draft paper. This finding will be further explained 
in conjunction with the results of error rates in their final drafts of Papers 1 and 4. The only slight increase 
of self-editing occurrence is in the case of run-on sentences (0.2 vs. 0.3). A closer look at the students’ 
revision record reveals that only two student made revisions on run-on sentences in Paper 1 and four 
learners in Paper 4. This suggests an increase of learners’ awareness of sentence-level grammar problems. 
There are also some distinct differences between students’ performance of self-editing in terms of overall 
correction rate (88.3% vs. 92.7%). The category of rewrite was not rated in this study. Except for the 
categories of article use, an increase of correction rate can be found in two categories (verb tense and 
prepositions), while the correction rate of run-on sentence and fragment remains 100%. A series of paired 
sample t-tests were conducted in SPSS 19.0 to investigate whether there were any significant changes in 
the students’ self-editing practices between Papers 1 and 4. Despite clear patterns shown in Table 2, no 
statistically significant differences were found in the comparisons of error categories. 
To investigate the long-term effect of Grammar Clinic assignments on the development of students’ 
grammar ability, the relationship between Grammar Clinic performance and grammar pre/post-test scores 
was also analyzed. As shown in Table 3, the means for pre-test and post-test were 8.23 and 8.79 out of 20, 
respectively, indicating a relatively poor performance on both tests and a small improvement from pre-
test to post-test. 
Table 3. Descriptive Statistics of Grammar Pre-Test and Post-Test 
 Mean  
(out of 20) 
SD Minimum Maximum α 
Pre-test 8.23 3.56 2.5 15.0 .726 
Post-test 8.79 3.45 2.5 15.5 .723 
The descriptive statistics of the two tests reveal that compared with their scores on pre-test, 11 out 19 
students obtained higher scores on the post-test, whereas two students obtained the same scores on both 
tests and six students got lower scores at the end of the semester. Table 4 shows a series of correlation 
coefficients (Pearson’s r) between the learners’ performances on pre /post tests and on Grammar Clinic 
assignments. The correlation coefficients associated with pre-test scores and Grammar Clinic 
performances are low and not statistically significant. These negative correlations between averaged 
Grammar Clinic performance and pre-test scores (-.101 to -.138) suggest that two different 
developmental trends existed in the ESL class. Some learners who started with low pre-test scores 
performed well on Grammar Clinic assignments, whereas some learners who gained higher scores in pre-
test performed poorly on Grammar Clinic assignments. This finding calls for a closer look at students’ 
self-editing and revision processes. 
Table 4. Correlations Between Grammar Clinic Performance and Grammar Pre-/Post Test Scores 
 Identification score Correction score Total score 
Pre-test -.101 -.136 -.138 
Post-test .267 .051 .140 
Test gains .510* .114 .390 
Note. Test gains were obtained by subtracting pre-test scores from post test scores. *Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-
tailed). 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  145 
It is noteworthy that learners’ performance on Grammar Clinic assignments positively correlated with 
grammar post-test, even though the magnitudes are small and not statistically significant. The highest 
correlation in Table 4 is from averaged total identification score on Grammar Clinic and test gains 
(0.510). The positive correlations suggest that students made some progress in grammar ability. 
This progress is further supported by the analysis of students’ error rates in the final draft of Papers 1 and 
4. As shown in Table 5, there is a decreasing tendency in the total error occurrence from Paper 1 to Paper 
4 (25.8 vs. 20.0). Reductions in normalized error rate were found in three categories from the final drafts 
of Paper 1 to that of Paper 4: verb use (1.2 vs. 0.6), preposition use (0.3 vs. 0.2), and run-on sentences 
(0.2 vs. 0.05). The sharp drop of error rates in run-on sentences is very encouraging given the difficulty of 
this sentence-level error. This indicates that the learners may have gained a better meta-linguistic 
awareness and made fewer mistakes in their writing. Results of a series of paired sample t-test indicates 
that the error rate decrease in run-on sentence category is statistically significant (p = .016, t = -2.65 (18), 
95% CI [-1.51, -0.17]), whereas all other differences are not. 
Table 5. Error Rates in Students’ Final Drafts of Papers 1 and 4 
Error type Paper 1 Paper 4 
Average 
occurrence 
Normalized 
Error ratea 
Average 
occurrence 
Normalized 
error rate 
Article use 1.4 0.2 1.8 .23 
Preposition use 2.1 0.3 1.6 .20 
Verb useb 6.8 1.2 4.3 .60 
Run-on sentence 1.3 0.2 0.4 .05 
Fragment 1.4 0.2 1.2 .20 
Total 25.8 N/A 20.0 N/A 
Note. a) The error rate is calculated by (error number/essay word count) x 100. b) The error type “Verb use” includes the cases of 
verb tense, verb form and SV agreement in learners’ self-revision process (Table 2). 
Only the categories of article use and ambiguous expression show a slight increase in occurrence from 
Paper 1 to Paper 4 (0.2 vs. 0.23; 0.4 vs. 0.5). Article use has been recognized as notoriously challenging 
to English language learners to master (Ellis, Sheen, Murakami, & Takashima, 2008). In this study, 
students were offered a total of 20 article related items in Grammar Clinic. It is not surprising that no 
obvious progress was found in our analysis (see Table 5), given the nature of article acquisition and 
limited items on article use. 
In this classroom-based study, we are not able to attribute directly any improvements to the use of 
Grammar Clinic, due to a lack of comparative reference (i.e., a control sample that did not use Grammar 
Clinic). There are a number of compounding factors that may have contributed to the students’ 
improvement in their efficacy of self-editing or the development of their grammatical precision, such as 
collaborative learning during peer review and corrective feedback from the instructor. Future studies on 
the effect of Grammar Clinic may consider experimental design to have a better control of theses 
confounding variables. Nevertheless, the analysis results of the students’ self-editing data and error rates 
in the final drafts suggest an existence of both the immediate and long-term effects of Grammar Clinic 
assignments on the students’ writing performance. 
 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  146 
ESL Learners’ Perceptions of Grammar Clinic 
To better understand the effect of Grammar Clinic assignments on the development of students’ English 
grammatical precision, the responses to the end-of-semester questionnaire items were analyzed. 17 out of 
19 students responded to the questionnaire, representing a response rate of 89.5%, which represents the 
majority of the class. The first part of the questionnaire was about how students used their mobile devices 
and how they perceived mobile assisted language learning (MALL) in general. The responses to the 
question “What are the main uses of your mobile devices” indicate that 94% of the questionnaire 
respondents used dictionary apps on the mobile devices. Other major uses of mobile devices include 
texting friends or using chatting tools (82%), making phone calls (71%), using social networks (65%), 
listening to music (65%), and sending or receiving emails (53%). Only 41% reported using course 
management system such as Blackboard/WebCT/Moodle and 24% reported learning foreign languages 
(including English) on their mobile devices. These responses show many learners in this study did not use 
mobile devices as a learning platform at this point in time. 
When asked whether they were willing to use their mobile devices for learning purposes such as 
completing Grammar Clinic assignments, 71% of the questionnaire respondents gave a positive answer. 
82% reported that they completed Grammar Clinic exercises on their mobile devices mainly because it 
was convenient to do so. For example, a student supported his use of mobile device by saying that “we 
can complete Grammar Clinic assignment anywhere.” Only three students reported that they usually used 
computers or laptop to finish Grammar Clinic assignments and one of them thought that the computer 
was more convenient. This reflects a different view of using mobile devices for learning, as some students 
may be reluctant to use mobile technology. Overall, this background information supports the potential of 
mobile devices as a learning platform. 
In terms of other questions, in response to “Did you use Grammar Clinic on your own when it was not 
required?” only 35% of the students gave positive answers. This means that most students only treated 
this exercise as a regular class assignment, instead of a platform for active learning of grammar. 
Regarding the time spent on a single assignment in Grammar Clinic, 35% reported that they spent less 
than 20 minutes and 64% reported that they spent more than 20 minutes. This duration may include item 
review or grammar handbook consultancy. Originally, Grammar Clinic was designed to keep each 
assignment short so that students can complete an exercise in 10 minutes, such as on the bus. Admittedly, 
this is a dilemma for MALL. On the one hand, instructors and researchers alike want to keep assignments 
as bite-sized activities, so the application is more manageable in a relative short time period; on the other 
hand, they hope learners will invest more time on learning. Time management should be balanced in the 
future design of mobile learning applications. The way mobile applications are integrated into course 
syllabi can help make mobile learning a routine for language learners. Also, information about user 
behavior can help teachers adjust the Grammar Clinic assignment configuration for learners, to make 
assignments more focused by reducing or increasing item numbers. 
The second part of the questionnaire consists of eight statements about the learners’ use and perception of 
Grammar Clinic. This section used a six-point Likert scale with 1 meaning “completely disagree” and 6 
meaning “completely agree.” The responses to this section are summarized in Table 6. 82% of the 
respondents agreed that Grammar Clinic was easy to use on mobile devices or computers (M = 4.8; 
SD = 1.13). 88% of the respondents agreed that the explanations in Grammar Clinic item review were 
clear (M = 4.9; SD = 0.98). 76% of the respondents agreed that the error types in Grammar Clinic were 
very typical in their own writing (M = 4.4; SD = 1.01). In regard to the item difficulty, 41% of the 
respondents thought the assignments were difficult whereas 59% thought they were not difficult. This 
information brings the issue of item writing to our attention. When items are too easy for some learners, 
the learning outcome may be compromised due to the limited challenged imposed. Some detailed 
diagnostic analysis of the existing essays in the learner corpus may be needed to inform future item 
writing. Certainly, adding an adaptive item selection mechanism would be one good way to address the 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  147 
potential mismatch of learner proficiency and item difficulty. This system would present an item of a 
certain error type and difficulty level based on learners’ performance on previous item(s). 
As for aspects related to user behavior, only 65% of the respondents claimed that they reviewed the 
explanations after finishing an assignment. The review of explanations was designed to be a 
metalinguistic awareness-raising activity and a grammar learning opportunity for learners. This result 
may have impact on the way in which Grammar Clinic assignments affect the outcome of the learners’ 
self-editing. The reason why 35% of the respondents did not review the explanation was not clear. It is 
possible that some students found the items easy and did not need further explanation. It also could be due 
to some design issues. The current setting for Grammar Clinic item review is by assignment, instead 
being an on-demand review for a particular item. Some learners may have found it inconvenient to review 
items on the current version of Grammar Clinic. 
Table 6. Selected Responses to Mobile Application Use Questionnaire 
Statements 1 Completely Disagree – 6 Completely Agree Disagree Agree  
1 2 3 4 5 6 1-3 4-6 
1. GC is easy to use on my 
mobile device or computer. 
0% 0% 18% 18% 29% 35% 18% 82% 
2. The feedback or explanation 
on GC is clear to me. 
0% 0% 12% 12% 53% 24% 12% 88% 
3. The error types in GC are 
very typical in my writing. 
0% 0% 24% 29% 35% 12% 24% 76% 
4. The items in GC are difficult 
for me. 
6% 18% 35% 35% 6% 0% 59% 41% 
5. I usually read the review 
pages after finishing an 
assignment. 
0% 6% 29% 12% 29% 24% 35% 65% 
6. The practice on GC can help 
me notice errors in my own 
writing. 
6% 12% 6% 29% 35% 12% 24% 76% 
7. The practice on GC can help 
me notice errors in the essays 
written by my classmates 
(peer review). 
6% 12% 6% 29% 29% 18% 24% 76% 
8. I need more instructions on 
grammar points in 101C class. 
6% 6% 29% 18% 35% 6% 41% 59% 
Other questionnaire results showed that 76% of the respondents believed that Grammar Clinic helped 
them notice errors in their own writing and in reviewing others’ papers. This number is very encouraging 
because it shows a perceived positive effect of Grammar Clinic on students’ writing development. 
However, it is noteworthy that 59% of the students agreed that they needed more instruction on grammar 
points in this English academic writing class. This need may be related the lack of a stand-alone grammar 
teaching component in the English academic writing class. The short grammar handbook and Grammar 
Clinic assignment review may not give students a sense of formal grammar learning. 
The questionnaire also considered the students’ perceptions about how they were able to interact with the 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  148 
different error types on Grammar Clinic. Students were given the list of error types used in Grammar 
Clinic and were required to check the error types that they could identify and correct in others’ writing. 
Interestingly, the top five error types that they were confident in identifying were verb tense (82%), run-
on sentence (65%), fragment (59%), word order (53%), and conjunction use (53%). However, the top five 
error types that they felt comfortable correcting were verb tense (53%), noun use (53%), adverb use 
(53%), article use (53%), and conjunction use (53%). This difference in their perceived ability of 
identifying and correcting certain types of error prompts us to reconsider the configuration of future 
assignments. The learners’ perceptions of item difficulty and their actual performance should be taken 
into consideration when assembling future assignments. 
The last section of the questionnaire included two open-ended questions eliciting students’ feedback 
about the features of Grammar Clinic. Of the 18 total comments on the two questions, 10 were positive 
about the convenience and benefits of the Grammar Clinic assignments. For example, one student 
commented that 
Mobile device is very useful and portable, but sometimes it is too small to use (for website 
browsing). Thus, a website like this is much better so that we can see every questions in one page 
and easy to write the answers. (SJ, all abbreviations are pseudonyms) 
Another student WK shared his positive view on the representativeness of the items in Grammar Clinic 
assignments. He commented that “I like the sentences which are commonly used by every student. I can 
detect my common errors in my essay.” 
Other comments pertained to the functionality of Grammar Clinic. For example, regarding the item 
difficulty, SJ wrote: 
Since everybody has different level of grammar skills even if we are taking the same class, the 
program is somehow not suitable to everybody because sometimes some grammatical errors are 
very easy. Thus, by making different steps or categories, it could be easy for students to recognize 
which part of errors are week or need to make a progress. 
Another student XS complained about the usability of Grammar Clinic, saying that “Once you accidently 
close it you have to login in again.” Overall, these suggestions and comments can help us make Grammar 
Clinic more user-friendly and hopefully more effective in promoting ESL learners’ self-editing efficacy 
and grammar ability development. 
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS 
As with any study, some limitations emerged that we feel need to be addressed in future research. Firstly, 
only one group of students participated in this research. Ferris (2010) has recommended the use of a 
control group to investigate the effect of treatment in corrective feedback research. Secondly in this study 
the performances of all students were analyzed as one group. There were some important individual 
differences in both pre-test/post-test results and error reductions, which our procedure obscured. More 
qualitative methods will help investigate individual differences in user behavior and learning gains. 
Observation, user diary, and user behavior tracking can be implemented in future studies. 
There are some areas that can be strengthened in future versions of Grammar Clinic. The feedback 
information in the current version of Grammar Clinic is manually prepared by the instructor. An 
automatic feedback system based on natural language processing techniques and the use of an academic 
English corpus will greatly facilitate the application’s usability and maintenance. The incorporation of a 
grammar parser and other natural language processing-based feedback generators would help transform 
Grammar Clinic into an intelligent system that would provide customized assignments and feedback to 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  149 
ESL learners (Heift 2010). Other important features of effective mobile learning should be taken into 
consideration, such as those suggested by Herrington et al. (2009) (e.g., multimedia environment and 
cooperative learning platform). The feature of a user action log could be added in the future to track 
students’ browsing and interactive behavior. In this way, it would be possible to monitor the students’ 
investment of time and their progress on Grammar Clinic. Building on this information, the assignment 
content and schedule adjustments could be made for learners to optimize learning. The functionality of 
sharing comments was not well developed and utilized in this particular ESL class, a feature which could 
help build a learning community and promote collaborative learning. 
Despite some limitations, the analyses in this study show that the learners’ performance on Grammar 
Clinic was positively correlated with their score gains between pre- and post-tests of grammar. In the 
learners’ second drafts of two major papers (Papers 1 and 4), increased correction rates in verb use, 
preposition use, and word choice were found. Along with the decrease in occurrences of self-editing in 
Paper 1 and Paper 4, the increased correction rates indicate learners’ improvement in their English 
grammatical precision. This finding was further supported by the decreased error rates of the final drafts 
of each major paper. However, the results from multiple paired-sample t-tests reveal that only the error 
rate of run-on sentences was reduced significantly from the final draft of Paper 1 to that of Paper 4. 
Overall, Grammar Clinic is a positive example of mobile-assisted language learning as it was perceived 
by students as a useful learning application in an ESL writing class. Grammar Clinic was regarded as 
beneficial in helping learners raise their metalinguistic awareness and improve their self-editing ability in 
English writing. Continued research and development in the realm of MALL is necessary as it will help 
illuminate helpful factors for the development of a language learning specific application. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  150 
APPENDIX A. Error Types in Grammar Exercise Application 
Error Type  Example 
Adjective use  There is an interest story about the development of this video game. 
Ambiguous expression  I can’t understand these papers completely because my vocabulary foundation 
was unstable. 
Adverb use  People on this island have an extraordinary different way of living. 
Article use  She was having hard time because she didn't have many friends at school. 
Conjunction use  The reason that those inventions are so famous is because they are so 
successful in serving their purposes. 
Fragment  In my opinion, usually is best to take the puppy outside and play with him for 
a while everyday. 
Noun use  Visitors can gain information about aerospace science here. 
Preposition use  John chose engineering major when he attended into college. 
Pronoun use  Before I came to the United States, many people told you that America was a 
developed country. 
Punctuation use  However at last we succeeded in making a good film for all the students of the 
school. 
Relative Pronoun use  Last summer, I travelled with my parents to Dallas where was 400 km from 
my home. 
Run-on sentence  It was my first day in America, Ames was beautiful but too cold. 
Word Choice  I could image the suffering he had gone through. 
Word Order  Many people see him as a hero, no matter what ages or genders are they. 
Verb use  The hi-tech education which is provided in these halls are good. 
 
 APPENDIX B. Item Type Distribution in Grammar Clinic Assignments 
Assign
ments 
Adj Adv Art Conj Frga Noun Prep Prn RlPrn Run Vb WC WO Total 
1-3 3 0 4 1 2 2 2 1 2 3 8 1 1 30 
4-6 3 3 2 1 0 1 4 1 1 1 12 0 1 30 
7-9 2 1 9 0 5 2 2 0 1 2 5 0 1 30 
11-13b 0 0 5 1 3 0 2 0 2 7 5 3 2 30 
Total 8 4 20 3 10 5 10 2 6 13 30 4 5 120 
Notes. a) Frg = Fragment, Run = Run-on sentence, Verb = Verb form (including Subject-verb agreement, verb tense), Art = 
Article use, Prep = Preposition use, Adj = Adjective use, Adv = Adverb use, Noun = Noun use, Conj = Conjunction use, RelPro 
= Relative pronoun use, WO = Word order, Pron = Pronoun use, WC = Word choice. b) Assignment 10 is a bonus assignment 
focusing on ambiguous expressions in students’ writing. Assignment 12 is a special assignment focusing on run-on sentence and 
fragment only. 
 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  151 
APPENDIX C. Mobile Application Use Questionnaire 
 
 
 
1. 
Mobile device using experience 
How long have you been at Iowa State University? (including IEOP program.) 
  less than 1 semester 
 2 semesters 
  3 semesters 
 Other:  
2. Are you using any mobile devices? (a mobile device can be cell phone, personal digital assistant 
(PDA), tablet, electronic dictionary and etc.) 
  Yes 
 No 
  Other:  
2.1. What kind of mobile devices are you using now? (including tablets, such as kindle fire, iPad. 
Please check all that applies.) 
  iPhone/iTouch 
 Blackberry 
 Android mobile phones 
  
  No mobile device 
 Tablets (iPad, Kindle Fire 
and etc.) 
 Other: 
2.2. What are the main usages of your mobile device(s)? Please check all that applies. 
  playing games 
 using dictionary 
 reading stories (books, 
magazine and etc.) 
 listening to music 
(mp3, radio) 
 watching videos (e.g. 
Youtube) 
 learning foreign 
language  
 making phone calls 
 texting friends or using 
chatting tools  
  using social networks (such as Facebook) 
 shopping online 
 managing my schedule 
 using 
Blackboard/Moodle/WebCT  
 using GPS/maps 
 viewing webpages 
 sending/receiving emails 
 Other:  
2.3. Would you like to use your mobile device(s) for learning purposes, for example finishing class 
assignments (Grammar Clinic)? 
  No, I do not want to 
use it for assignments. 
 Yes, I am willing to use 
it for assignments. 
  I don’t care. 
 Other:  
3. Which device(s) did you usually use for Grammar Clinic assignments? Mobile devices or 
computers? Please explain your choice.  If you do not have a mobile device, please put ‘n/a’ in the 
textbox. 
 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  152 
APPENDIX C. Mobile Application Use Questionnaire, continued 
4. 
 
How much time did you usually spend on ONE assignment, including reviewing feedback? (for 
example, assignment 3 with 10 items in it.) 
  less than 10 minutes 
 between 10 to 20 
minutes 
 between 20 to 30 
minutes 
  more than 30 minutes 
 Other:  
4.1. Did you use Grammar Clinic on your own when it was not required? 
  Yes 
 No 
  Other:  
5. What is your impression of Grammar Clinic application used in this class? 
Please rating the following statements based on your own experience. 1: ‘completely disagree’, 2: 
‘disagree’, 3: ’somewhat disagree’, 4: ‘somewhat agree’, 5: ‘agree’, 6: ‘completely agree’. 
 
5.1 
5.2 
 
5.3 
5.4 
5.5 
5.6 
5.7 
 
5.8 
 
Grammar Clinic is easy to use on my mobile device or computer.  
The feedback or explanation on Grammar Clinic is clear to me. (The feedback or explanation is 
on the review pages.) 
The error types in Grammar Clinic are very typical in my writing. 
The items in Grammar Clinic are difficult for me.  
I usually read the review pages after finishing an assignment.  
The practice on Grammar Clinic can help me notice errors in my own writing. 
The practice on Grammar Clinic can help me notice errors in the essays written by my classmates 
(Peer review). 
I need more instructions on grammar points in 101C class. 
 
6. 
 
Please check the following categories that you can IDENTIFY in editing your draft or reviewing 
drafts written by others. 
  Verb use (tense, 
passive voice, linking verb 
and etc.) 
 Noun use (plural form) 
 Word Choice (wrong 
word class, ambiguous 
expression) 
 Preposition use (wrong 
or missing preposition) 
 Pronoun use (unclear 
pronoun) 
 Conjunction use 
(wrong conjunction) 
 Relative pronoun use 
  Run-on sentence 
 Fragment 
 Adjective use (comparative 
form) 
 Adverb use 
 Word Order 
 Article use (missing or 
wrong article) 
 Punctuation use 
 Other:  
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  153 
APPENDIX C. Mobile Application Use Questionnaire, continued. 
 
 
NOTES 
1. The term “Mobile devices” in this article refers to any internet-enabled handheld device that has a 
capability of using internet services. Typical mobile devices include personal digital assistant (PDA), 
smart phones, and tablets. 
2. Though a detailed account of technicality issues is beyond the scope of this paper, interested readers 
can find more information about web-based mobile application development in Firtman (2010) and Stalk 
(2010). 
3. In our analysis, students’ revision behavior was also included in Table 2 to present a more 
comprehensive picture of students’ effort in writing process. However, only the term “self-editing” is 
used for terminology consistency. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Zhi Li is a doctoral student in Applied Linguistics and Technology, Iowa State University. He holds an 
MA degree from Hunan University, China. His research interests are language assessment and 
technology, computer-assisted language learning, and mobile-assisted language learning. 
 
Volker Hegelheimer is a full professor in the Department of English and the Program in Linguistics at 
Iowa State University. His research interests include applications of the WWW and emerging 
technologies in language learning and language testing. He is the corresponding author for this article. 
 
 
6-1. 
 
Please check the following categories that you can CORRECT in editing your draft or reviewing 
drafts written by others. 
  Verb use  
 Noun use (plural form) 
 Word Choice  
 Preposition use  
 Pronoun use (unclear 
pronoun) 
 Conjunction use 
(wrong conjunction) 
 Relative pronoun use 
 Run-on sentence 
  Fragment 
 Adjective use (comparative 
form) 
 Adverb use 
 Word Order 
 Article use (missing or 
wrong article) 
 Punctuation use 
 Other: 
 
7. 
8. 
 
Can you talk about the features in Grammar Clinic that you like and dislike? 
Do you have any other comments or suggestions on Grammar Clinic exercise and/or 101C class 
teaching in general? 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  154 
REFERENCES 
Alderson, J., Clapham, C., & Wall, D. (1995). Language test construction and evaluation. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Bitchener, J., & Ferris, D. R. (2012). Written corrective feedback in Second Language Acquisition and 
Writing. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Bruton, A. (2009). Improving accuracy is not the only reason for writing, and even if it were. . . System, 
37, 600–613. 
Chapelle, C. (2001). Computer applications in second language acquisition: Foundations for teaching 
testing and research. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Chandler, J. (2003). The efficacy of various kinds of error feedback for improvement in the accuracy and 
fluency of L2 student writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12(3), 267–296. 
Chapelle, C. (2009). The relationship between second language acquisition theory and computer-assisted 
language learning. The Modern Language Journal, 93, 741–753. 
Cho, S. (2009). Smartphones used for foreign language learning. Multimedia-Assisted Language 
Learning, 12(3), 211–228. 
Cotos, E. (2011). Potential of automated writing evaluation feedback. CALICO Journal, 28(2), 420–459. 
Cresswell, A. (2000). Self-monitoring in student writing. ELT Journal, 54, 235–244. 
Creswell, J., & Plano-Clark, V. (2011). Designing and conducting mixed methods research. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Diab, N. M. (2010). Effects of peer- versus self-editing on students’ revision of language errors in revised 
drafts. System, 38, 85–95. 
Diab, N. M. (2011). Assessing the relationship between different types of student feedback and the 
quality of revised writing. Assessing Writing, 16, 274–292. 
Ellis, R. (1999). Learning a second language through interaction. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John 
Benjamins. 
Ellis, R., Basturkmen, H., & Loewen, S. (2001). Preemptive focus on form in the ESL classroom. TESOL 
Quarterly, 35(3), 407–432. 
Ellis, R., Sheen, Y., Murakami, M., & Takashima, H. (2008). The effects of focused and unfocused 
written corrective feedback in an English as a foreign language context. System, 36, 353–371. 
Fathman, A. K., & Whalley, E. (1990). Teacher response to student writing: Focus on form versus 
content. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second language writing: Research insights for the classroom (pp. 178–190). 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Ferris, D. R. (2004). The “Grammar Correction” Debate in L2 Writing: Where are we, and where do we 
go from here? (and what do we do in the meantime . . .?). Journal of Second Language Writing, 13, 49–
62. 
Ferris, D. R. (2006). Does error feedback help student writers? New evidence on the short- and long-term 
effects of written error correction. In K. Hyland & F. Hyland (Eds.), Feedback in second language 
writing: Contexts and issues (pp. 81–104). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Ferris, D. R. (2010). Second language writing research and written corrective feedback in SLA. Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 32, 181–201. 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  155 
Firtman, M. (2010). Programming the mobile web. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media. 
Gass, S. (1997). Input, interaction, and the second language learner. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Gass, S., & Mackey, A. (2005). Second language research: Methodology and design. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Gass, S., & Mackey, A. (2007). Input, interaction, and output in second language acquisition. In J. 
Williams & B. VanPatten (Eds.), Theories in second language acquisition: An introduction (pp. 175–
199). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2011). Emerging technology: Mobile apps for language learning. Language Learning 
& Technology, 15(2), 2–11. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/emerging.pdf 
Hegelheimer, V., & Chapelle, C. A. (2000). Methodological issues in research on learner-computer 
interactions in CALL. Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 41–59. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/hegchap/default.html 
Heift, T. (2004). Corrective feedback and learner uptake in CALL. ReCALL, 16(2), 416–431. 
Heift, T. (2010). Prompting in CALL: A longitudinal study of learner uptake. Modern Language Journal, 
94(2), 198216. 
Herrington, A., Herrington, J., & Mantei, J. (2009). Design principles for mobile learning. In J. 
Herrington, A. Herrington, J. Mantei, I. Olney, & B. Ferry (Eds.), New technologies, new pedagogies: 
Mobile learning in higher education (pp. 129–138). Wollongong, Australia: University of Wollongong. 
Retrieved from http://ro.uow.edu.au/newtech/Kemis, M., Davis, M., & Haen, K. (2011). ComETS needs 
assessment of educational technology at Iowa State University: ISU students. Ames, Iowa. Retrieved 
from http://www.comets.iastate.edu/downloads/ComETS_student_report.pdf 
Krashen, S. D. (1985). The input hypothesis: Issues and implications. New York, NY: Longman. 
Kukulska-Hulme, A. (2009). Will mobile learning change language learning? ReCALL, 21(2), 157–165. 
Kukulska-Hulme, A., & Shield, L. (2008). An overview of mobile assisted language learning: From 
content delivery to supported collaboration and interaction. ReCALL, 20(3), 271–289. 
Kwon, S., & Lee, J. E. (2010). Design principles of m-learning for ESL. Procedia Social and Behavioral 
Sciences, 2, 1884–1889. 
Li, J., Lee, H.-W., Lee, J.-Y., Karakaya, K., & Hegelheimer, V. (2011, October). The influence of using 
Criterion® on students’ error correction in writing. Paper presented at the Second Language Research 
Forum, Ames, IA. 
Long, M. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. Ritchie & 
T. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of Second Language Acquisition (pp. 413–468). San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press. 
Long, M., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research and practice. In C. Doughty & J. 
Williams (Eds.), Tasks and language learning: Integrating theory and practice (pp. 15-41). Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Lu, M. (2008). Effectiveness of vocabulary learning via mobile phone. Journal of Computer Assisted 
Learning, 24(6), 515–525. 
Mackey, A. (2006). Feedback, noticing and instructed second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 27, 
405–430. 
 
Zhi Li and Volker Hegelheimer Mobile-Assisted Grammar Exercises: Effects on Self-Editing in L2 Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  156 
Makino, T. (1993). Learner self-correction in EFL written compositions. English Language Teaching 
Journal, 47, 337–341. 
Manochehri, N.-N., Gromik, N. A., & Aw, S. L. (2012). The integration of portable technology to 
enhance lifelong learning skills. In J. L. Bailey (Ed.), Southwest Decision Sciences Forty-third Annual 
Meeting (pp. 1–9). Retrieved from 
http://www.swdsi.org/swdsi2012/proceedings_2012/papers/Papers/PA125.pdf  
Neuendorf, K. (2002). The content analysis guidebook. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc. 
Polio, C., Fleck, C., & Leder, N. (1998). “If I only had more time”: ESL learners’ changes in linguistic 
accuracy on essay revisions. Journal of Second Language Writing, 7, 43–68. 
Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 11(2), 
129–158. 
Schmidt, R. (1993). Awareness and second language acquisition. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 
13, 206–226. 
Sheen, Y. (2007). The effects of focused written corrective feedback and language aptitude on ESL 
learners’ acquisition of articles. TESOL Quarterly, 41(2), 255–283. 
Song, Y., & Fox, R. (2008). Uses of the PDA for undergraduate students’ incidental vocabulary learning 
of English. ReCALL, 20(3), 290–314. 
Stark, J. (2010). Building iPhone apps with HTML, CSS, and JavaScript: Making app store apps without 
Objective-C or Cocoa. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media. 
Stockwell, G. (2010). Using mobile phones for vocabulary activities: Examining the effect of the 
platform. Language Learning & Technology, 14(2), 95–110. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num2/stockwell.pdf 
Suzuki, M. (2008). Japanese learners’ self revisions and peer revisions of their written compositions in 
English. TESOL Quarterly, 42(2), 209–233. 
Swain, M. (1995). Three functions of output in second language learning. In G. Cook & B. Seidlhofer 
(Eds.), Principles and practice in applied linguistics (pp. 126–144). Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press. 
Truscott,  J. (1999).  The  case  for  “The  case  against  grammar  correction  in  L2  writing  classes”:  A 
response to Ferris. Journal of Second Language Writing 8(2), 111–122. 
Truscott, J. (2007). The effect of error correction on learners’ ability to write accurately. Journal of 
Second Language Writing, 16, 255–272. 
 
