Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2013/review2.pdf 
October 2013, Volume 17, Number 3 
pp. 47–51 
 
Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501  47 
REVIEW OF LANGUAGE AT PLAY: DIGITAL GAMES IN SECOND AND 
FOREIGN LANGUAGE TEACHING AND LEARNING 
Language at Play: Digital games in second and foreign 
language teaching and learning  
Julie Sykes and Jonathan Reinhardt 
2013 
ISBN 10: 0-205-00085-1 
US $33.33 
157 pp. 
Pearson 
New York, US 
 
 
Review by Steven L. Thorne, Portland State University and University of Groningen 
and Erin Watters, Portland State University 
The use of games as learning activities has likely existed for as long as have formal (or ‘serious’) 
approaches to teaching and learning. In the new millennium, it is difficult to avoid what would appear to 
be hyperbole in regard to digital gaming environments. The strong and growing interest in digital games, 
coupled with rapid technological advancements, have created what is unquestionably one of the most 
inventive, fast-moving, complex media enterprises currently in existence. Game designers draw upon 
academic research originating in psychology, computer science, and the learning sciences, and 
reciprocally, within the academy new degree programs such as game studies are emerging. While 
commercially produced recreational games benefit from the greatest influx of capital and expertise, 
approaches to structuring learning environments that leverage game mechanics and pedagogies are now 
routine in settings as diverse as the military, management training, museum kiosks, DNA research, social 
justice awareness, and increasingly, for the teaching and learning of otherwise conventionally defined 
academic content.  
Importantly, and in tandem with the factual accuracy of the above statements, gaming is also associated 
with many problems, not the least of which is the polarized public assessment of online games, the 
negative binary of which presumes that online games are violent (some are, many are not), addictive (an 
unresolved debate that continues), and that gaming is the passionate focus of primarily adolescent males 
(patently false, for discussions see Cornillie, Thorne, & Desmet, 2012; Thorne & Fischer, 2012). Stepping 
into the digital gaming fray and performing a tremendous service for second language educators and 
researchers alike, Julie Sykes and Jonathon Reinhardt have produced an ambitious book-length treatment, 
Language at play: Digital games in second and foreign language teaching and learning, that is admirably 
comprehensive in scope and which adeptly aligns second language acquisition (SLA) and pedagogy 
research with practical strategies for the use of games in foreign and second language (L2) instructional 
contexts. The book uses the acronym L2TL, standing for second language teaching and learning, and for 
purposes of economy, we will employ the same in this review. 
Before beginning the chapter-by-chapter review, it is relevant to note that this is a dialogically written text 
Steve L. Thorne and Erin Watters Review of Language at Play 
 
Language Learning & Technology  48 
that thoroughly engages the reader. Most chapters open with a ‘scenario’ that narrativizes a focal topic 
through the presentation of (presumably) fictive classroom situations, many of which include situated 
descriptions of teachers’ as well as learners’ viewpoints and experiences. Enhanced versions of the 
scenarios are revisited at the end of each chapter in order to situate specific L2TL theory and practice 
themes in instructed L2 contexts. While some of the scenarios feel more forced than others, classroom 
teachers, and those in training to be such, will find them to be useful anchors. Additionally, each chapter 
is interspersed with questions to the reader in sections labeled Your Reflections and Scenario Questions 
(often two or three of each per chapter), which request the reader to articulate and/or contrast their own 
circumstances or experiences with the content under discussion. This feature would be useful for teacher 
preparation, classroom use and practicing educators alike. Finally, game-related activities and suggestions 
that build upon core themes (e.g., interaction, feedback, context, motivation) conclude each chapter. 
Especially in view of a potentially diverse readership, we have found the text to be clearly and 
interactively designed. 
In the Preface, Sykes and Reinhardt provide an overview of how to use the volume and describe a 
number of their central aims: 
• To highlight how digital games can inform and potentially transform L2 pedagogy. They do 
this by arraying the following themes across five of the chapters: Chapter 2: Learning tasks 
and goal orientation; Chapter 3: Interaction; Chapter 4: Feedback; Chapter 5: Context; and 
Chapter 6: Motivation. 
• To describe the behaviors, practices, and cultures of games as sociologically significant 
contexts for learning. 
• To encourage interdisciplinary collaboration between SLA, game design, and learning 
specialists to develop effective L2 learning games. 
Chapter one attunes the reader to the terminology of games as learning environments, beginning with 
definitions of key terms such as language (e.g., Halliday’s (1978) notion of social-semiotic practice), play 
(e.g., distinctions between rule-bound and open-ended play), and game (typically rule-bound with internal 
reward systems; may include imaginative/creative experiences coupled with problem solving). These 
terms are explored in short but heavily referenced discussions of relevant research literatures, and 
appropriate caveats suggest that there is considerable variability in how these terms may be applied in 
specific circumstances. Also in the chapter, Sykes and Reinhardt turn to the question of how gameplay is 
related to learning, focusing primarily on game literacy as a kind of new media literacy practice (e.g., 
Gee, 2007) that may inculcate dispositions and abilities that are relevant to other learning and problem 
solving situations (e.g., Steinkuehler, 2007). A key distinction is made between game-enhanced L2TL – 
the use of vernacular and off-the-shelf commercial games which are not themselves designed for language 
learning per se—and game-based L2TL, which refers to game environments developed particularly for 
language learning purposes. This is a useful approach since, in addition to the obvious consideration of 
games designed specifically for L2 learning purposes, many language educators (and learners) may want 
to explore the use of an L2 in the often highly interactive, social and event-driven scenarios of online 
games. 
The second chapter interpolates digital games through the lenses of goal orientation and task-based 
language teaching (or TBLT, see Ellis, 2003; Van den Branden, Bygate, & Norris, 2009). The overview 
of TBLT, which describes both its pedagogical utility as well as criticisms of TBLT from within the SLA 
research literature (e.g., the differences between a ‘task’ and an ‘activity’), will be particularly useful for 
readers who are less familiar with L2 pedagogy or who wish to use TBLT to better understand the 
mechanics and pedagogical structuring of digital games (for the latter, see Fullerton, 2008). The chapter 
concludes with the presentation of a literacy-informed approach that focuses on L2 writing through ‘game 
journaling,’ essentially an awareness-raising activity that has students play games and record their 
observations by responding to written prompts (see activity 2B, p. 29). Additionally, there is an exercise 
Steve L. Thorne and Erin Watters Review of Language at Play 
 
Language Learning & Technology  49 
encouraging readers to design a game that focuses on goals specific to L2 learning. These activities 
highlight the expansive view of games that Sykes and Reinhardt seek to convey with this text – game play 
itself may be directly useful to language learning, but it can also serve as a catalyst for later L2 activity 
(i.e., ‘game journaling’, mentioned above) and as a way for educators, and potentially students, to reframe 
language learning goals and the processes that may contribute to reaching them (i.e., the game design 
activity). 
In chapter three, the focus is “interaction with, through, and about digital games” (p. 32). The framing of 
this chapter is far-reaching and addresses interaction viewed through the lens of systemic functional 
linguistics, focusing on ideational interactions with games, interpersonal interactions through and around 
games, and textual interaction about games (pp. 36-40), as well as discussion of the importance of social 
context as it relates to opportunities for the negotiation for meaning. The number of frameworks and 
dimensions that are included here may challenge some readers, but as with all chapters in the volume, the 
presence of classroom scenarios, guiding questions, and ‘summary and implication’ sections allow 
readers with varied interests and background with SLA and linguistic theory to read selectively. 
Importantly, Sykes and Reinhardt present compelling examples of how interaction in the classroom can 
be informed, and possibly enhanced, by attention to how games are structured, and additionally they make 
the point that revisiting game experiences in the classroom (‘wrap-around’ activities) can enhance 
opportunities for learning. A taxonomy of games types and genres, with suggestions for their use in L2TL 
contexts, is included in Appendix 2 for additional reference. 
Chapter four focuses on feedback, an essential element to both instructed L2 learning and game play 
experience. Drawing primarily on the sociocultural concepts of zone of proximal development and 
scaffolding, the authors explain that feedback is itself an important form of instruction. The chapter 
touches on challenges instructors may face in giving feedback, such as inadequate time to provide 
individualized and temporally immediate support, and then describe how commonly used game 
mechanics address these issues.  A quite comprehensive description of common feedback mechanisms 
used in online games is depicted in table format (p. 61), and additional examples of game-based, game-
enhanced and game-informed feedback-as-instruction are included at the end of the chapter.  
Chapters five and six explore the roles of context and motivation, respectively, as they relate to processes 
of language learning and online gaming environments. The context discussion revisits Hallidayan notions 
of context of situation to describe the importance of embedding discrete elements of the L2 in more 
complex realizations of culture and language. Sykes and Reinhardt make a useful two-part distinction 
between the given and often novelistic narrative of games and actual game play. The latter, termed the 
“context of play” (p. 73), forms the agentive space that is created through player actions and it is the 
interplay between a compelling event-driven narrative and player-generated actions that can result in 
optimal ‘flow activity’ of the sort described by Czikszentmihalyi (e.g., 1990, discussed in Chapter 6). The 
authors note that not all games possess high-quality narratives, but those that do can form productive 
language learning environments, especially when learning the L2 is understood as necessary for playing a 
desirable game. This dynamic of high motivation for a game stimulating (or even providing the core 
rationale for) L2 learning is perhaps one of the most compelling reasons for language educators (and 
students) to seriously explore the potential of commercial game environments and the often large and 
committed communities that develop around them (see also Thorne, Black, & Sykes, 2009). 
Chapter seven pulls the book together as the authors summarize key elements across the text, concluding 
that developmentally useful games for L2TL (and of course not all are) provide opportunities for high 
levels of learner agency and engagement, form complex, emergent, and integrated systems, and that 
successful games promote ‘learning to play’ rather than ‘playing to learn’ (Arnseth, 2006, is referenced 
here).  
Language at Play is a clearly written and tightly organized book. Throughout the volume, the authors 
Steve L. Thorne and Erin Watters Review of Language at Play 
 
Language Learning & Technology  50 
describe, as well as critique and apply to game-related contexts, well-chosen SLA research and 
pedagogical approaches, and by so doing create a framework that flows coherently across the seven 
chapters that comprise the volume. Appendixes include a glossary of terms, list of games, guide to game 
types and genres, and an L2TL-digital game evaluation guide. 
In terms of omissions and possible critiques, we note that at first glance, the book may appear to have an 
overly compartmentalized structure, with a table of contents which alone runs to six full pages. However, 
an obvious benefit to a highly modularized (and richly intertextually referenced) layout is that readers 
who are interested in, for example, implementation and pedagogy, can readily find these portions of the 
text across chapters, and reciprocally, SLA enthusiasts and researchers will have no difficulty locating 
discussion of relevant theory (here primarily systemic-functional, sociocultural, interactionist, and task-
based approaches). We had hoped to see a treatment of augmented reality or “place-based” game design 
(e.g, Holden & Sykes, 2011; Squire, 2009), which is an increasingly prevalent technique that utilizes 
GPS-enabled handsets to emplace players in goal-directed actions in the physical world (rather than 
primarily or only in front of a computer screen), but this was perhaps beyond the scope of the current 
volume. We had also been expecting a critical discussion of ‘gamification’ – the practice of applying 
game mechanics and techniques to non-game contexts and problems. In its negative form, gamification 
has been criticized as the practice of adding points or levels to otherwise pedagogically uninspired 
activity (e.g., Bogost, 2011) – in other words, a version of the lipstick-on-a-pig problem. Gamification has 
the potential, of course, to positively transform or even revolutionize some L2TL practices and 
paradigms, but it is also a seductive, increasingly overused, and often shallowly construed concept, and 
hence a discussion of this issue would have improved the criticality of volume. 
In summary, Sykes and Reinhardt, both of whom are established second language researchers and new 
media innovators, have brought together processes of language learning, pedagogy, and the use and 
design of digital games to produce a lucid, engaging, and highly useful volume. The text is rich with 
examples, provides a variety of exercises, questions, and project types for a diversity of audiences, and 
includes comprehensive suggestions for additional reading, investigation of existing games, and design 
ideas for experienced as well as would-be L2TL game developers. In short, the book is an invaluable 
resource for those engaged in language education, applied linguistics, and the considered use and design 
of games and related media as they come to inform 21st century trajectories of language development.  
ABOUT THE REVIEWERS 
Steven L. Thorne holds faculty appointments in the Department of World Languages & Literatures at 
Portland State University (USA) and the Department of Applied Linguistics at the University of 
Groningen (The Netherlands). His research interests include explorations of new media, intercultural 
communication, indigenous language revitalization, and work that draws upon cultural-historical activity 
theory, contextual traditions of language analysis, and usage-based and distributed approaches to 
language development.  
Email: steven.thorne@pdx.edu 
Erin Watters is an Adjunct Research Assistant for the Literacy, Language and Technology Research 
Group at Portland State University and an ESL instructor with Portland English Language Academy 
(USA).  Her research interests include the development of professional workshops for educators focusing 
on intercultural competencies in the classroom, heritage language instruction, and online language course 
development.  
Email: erinwatters@gmail.com 
Steve L. Thorne and Erin Watters Review of Language at Play 
 
Language Learning & Technology  51 
REFERENCES  
Arnseth, H. C. (2006). Learning to play or playing to learn: A critical account of the models of 
communication informing educational research on computer gameplay. Games Studies, 6(1). Retrieved 
from: http://www. gamestudies.org/0601/articles/arnseth 
Bogost, I. (2011). “Gamification is bullshit.” The Atlantic, August 9, 2011. Retrieved from: 
http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2011/08/gamification-is-bullshit/243338/ 
Cornillie, F., Thorne, S. L., & Desmet, P. (2012). Digital games for language learning: From hype to 
insight? ReCALL Journal, 24(3), 243–256. 
Czikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York, NY: Harper. 
Ellis, R. (2003). Task-based language learning and teaching. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Fullerton, T. (2008). Game design workshop: A playcentric approach to creating innovative games. 
Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier. 
Gee, J. (2007). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy (2nd ed.). New York, NY: 
Palgrave Macillan. 
Halliday, M. A. K. (1978). Language as social semiotic: The social interpretation of language and 
meaning. London, UK: Edward Arnold. 
Holden, C., & Sykes, J. (2011). Leveraging mobile games for place-based language learning. 
International Journal of Game-Based Learning, 1(2), 1–18. 
Squire, K. D. (2009). Mobile media learning: Multiplicities of place. Horizon, 17(1), 70–80. 
Steinkeuhler, C. (2007). Massively multiplayer online gaming as a constellation of literacy practices. 
eLearning, 4, 297-318. 
Thorne, S. L., Black, R. W., & Sykes, J. (2009). Second language use, socialization, and learning in 
Internet interest communities and online games. Modern Language Journal, 93, 802–821. 
Thorne, S. L., & Fischer, I. (2012). Online gaming as sociable media. ALSIC: Apprentissage des Langues 
et Systèmes d’Information et de Communication, 15(1). URL: http://alsic.revues.org/2450; DOI: 
10.4000/alsic.2450 
Van den Branden, K., Bygate, M., & Norris, J. (2009). Task-based language teaching: A reader. 
Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
