Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2013/news.pdf 
October 2013, Volume 17, Number 3 
pp. 39–42 
 
Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501 39 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
CALL FOR PROPOSALS: 4TH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON FILIPINO AS A 
GLOBAL LANGUAGE 
The NFLRC is pleased to co-sponsor the upcoming 4th International Conference on Filipino as a Global 
Language (August 1-3, 2014). The theme will be Kahusayan (Excellence): Filipino in All Fields and 
Disciplines. It includes (but is not limited to) the use of Filipino for specific purposes; Filipino as medium 
of instruction in various disciplines; challenging the current curriculum for higher education in the 
Philippines; the new secondary school curriculum for Filipino; status of Filipino as a second language; 
Filipino as a foreign language; Filipino in mass media, social media, and the internet; Filipino language 
and culture pedagogy; research in Filipino language and literature. Submissions can be research, case 
studies, teaching demos, and so forth. The deadline for submissions is November 14, 2013. For more 
information, visit http://www.lll.hawaii.edu/index.php/call-for-proposals-filipino-as-global-language/  
STAY IN TOUCH WITH SOCIAL MEDIA 
Did you know that the NFLRC has its own Facebook page with over 1,600 fans? It’s one of the best 
ways to hear about the latest news, publications, conferences, workshops, and resources we offer. Just 
click on the “Like” button to become a fan. For those who prefer getting up-to-the-minute “tweets,” you 
can follow us on our Twitter page. Finally, NFLRC has its own YouTube channel with a growing 
collection of free language learning and teaching videos for your perusal. Subscribe today! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology  40 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
The National Foreign Language Resource Center released three new titles in June: 
 
New perspectives on Japanese language learning, linguistics, and culture 
by Kimi Kondo-Brown, Yoshiko Saito-Abbott, Shingo Satsutani, Michio Tsutsui, 
& Ann Wehmeyer (Eds.)  
(2013)  
208pp 
Download/view table of contents 
This volume is a collection of selected refereed papers presented at the Association of Teachers of 
Japanese Annual Spring Conference held at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa in March of 2011. It not 
only covers several important topics on teaching and learning spoken and written Japanese and culture in 
and beyond classroom settings, but also includes research investigating certain linguistic items from new 
perspectives. 
 
Pragmatics and language learning, volume 13 
by Tim Greer, Donna Tatsuki, & Carsten Roever (Eds.)  
(2013)  
292pp 
Download/view table of contents 
 
Pragmatics & Language Learning Volume 13 examines the organization of second language and 
multilingual speakers’ talk and pragmatic knowledge across a range of naturalistic and experimental 
activities. Based on data collected among ESL and EFL learners from a variety of backgrounds, the 
contributions explore the nexus of pragmatic knowledge, interaction, and L2 learning outside and inside 
of educational settings 
 
Pragmatics of Vietnamese as native and target language 
by Carsten Roever & Hanh thi Nguyen (Eds.)  
(2013)  
282pp 
Download/view table of contents 
The volume offers a wealth of new information about the forms of several speech acts and their social 
distribution in Vietnamese as L1 and L2, complemented by a chapter on address forms and listener 
responses. As the first of its kind, the book makes a valuable contribution to the research literature on 
pragmatics, sociolinguistics, and language and social interaction in an under-researched and less 
commonly taught Asian language.  
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology  41 
Check out our many other publications. 
Save the trees! Check out our other two online journals: 
  
Language Documentation & Conservation is a 
refereed, open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC 
and published by University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to 
language documentation and conservation, as well 
as book reviews, hardware and software reviews, 
and notes from the field. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed 
international journal of issues in foreign language 
reading and literacy, published twice yearly on the 
World Wide Web and sponsored by NFLRC and 
the University of Hawai‘i College of Languages, 
Linguistics, and Literature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology  42 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language research. 
RICH INTERNET APPLICATIONS FOR LANGUAGE LEARNING 
One of CLEAR’s most successful projects is our suite of free online language learning and teaching tools 
called Rich Internet Applications (RIAs). We have been busily working on retooling the user interface for 
the RIAs and look forward to launching the new website this fall. New features will include improved 
documentation of all the RIAs, screen flow videos and demonstrations of each app, a gallery of sample 
RIA activities created by language teachers, and printable start-up guides for both teachers and students. 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We enjoyed seeing many of you in 
Hawai‘i at the CALICO conference hosted by our sister center, the University of Hawai‘i National 
Foreign Language Resource Center. We look forward to seeing you at MIWLA and ACTFL later this 
year, and the Central States Conference in the spring. 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
CLEAR hosted four well-attended professional development workshops in July and August 2013. 
Covering topics including writing in the foreign language classroom, the teaching of vocabulary, online 
tools for language learning, and assessing speaking skills, the workshops offered hands-on experience and 
lots of ideas for language educators. Watch our Web site in October for the announcement of topics and 
dates for summer 2014. 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/. 
