Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/news.pdf 
June 2013, Volume 17, Number 2 
pp. 23–25 
 
Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501 23 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
SURF’S UP! CALICO 2013 RETURNS TO PARADISE! 
The NFLRC and the Center for Language & Technology (formerly the Language Learning Center) at the 
University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa are pleased to have hosted for the second time the annual Computer 
Assisted Language Instruction Consortium (CALICO) Conference, May 21–25, 2013, marking 
CALICO’s 30th anniversary. The conference theme was “Navigating the Complexities of Language 
Learning in the Digital Age.” Conference highlights included two days of pre-conference workshops, the 
Courseware Showcase, and three days of conference presentations. We hope you were able to join us for 
this much anticipated event! Website: https://www.calico.org/page.php?id=492 
LANGUAGE FOR SPECIFIC PURPOSES SUMMER INSTITUTE 
On July 15–19, 2013, the NFLRC, in conjunction with the National Resource Center East Asia (NRCEA) 
at UH Mānoa, will host a local summer institute on Language for Specific Purposes. Participants will 
receive training and experience in developing LSP courses (including doing needs analysis, setting goals 
and objectives, assessing, developing materials, teaching, and evaluating LSP), in particular ones focusing 
on tourism, business, and healthcare, for their home institution. It is our hope that we can offer a similar 
summer institute on a national scale in summer 2014. 
STAY IN TOUCH WITH SOCIAL MEDIA 
Did you know that the NFLRC has its own Facebook page with over 1,500 fans? It’s one of the best 
ways to hear about the latest news, publications, conferences, workshops, and resources we offer. Just 
click on the “Like” button to become a fan. For those who prefer getting up-to-the-minute “tweets,” you 
can follow us on our Twitter page. Finally, NFLRC has its own YouTube channel with a growing 
collection of free language learning and teaching videos for your perusal. Subscribe today! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 24 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
Ideal Classmates and Reciprocal Idealizing, Tim Murphey 
Tim Murphey of Kanda University of International Studies recently returned to Hawai‘i for his tenth year, 
presenting on innovative classroom techniques. View his latest on YouTube or download it from 
ScholarSpace.  
Check out our many other publications. 
Save the trees! Check out our other two online journals: 
  
Language Documentation & Conservation is a refereed, 
open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC and published 
by University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to language 
documentation and conservation, as well as book 
reviews, hardware and software reviews, and notes from 
the field. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed 
international journal of issues in foreign language reading 
and literacy, published twice yearly on the World Wide 
Web and sponsored by NFLRC and the University of 
Hawai‘i College of Languages, Linguistics, and 
Literature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language research. 
PERSONNEL NEWS 
This spring CLEAR will bid farewell—with wishes for a happy retirement—to founding Co-Director 
Patricia Paulsell. Pat has been an integral part of CLEAR, overseeing many of our projects over the last 
five funding cycles, including all of our business language initiatives. She also suggested that all LRCs 
should join forces and create a Council of Directors to advocate for all LRCs and their goal of promoting 
language teaching and learning in the United States. It was her vision and energy that brought the Council 
to reality. She played a pivotal role in the Council, serving as the founding Chair and later Treasurer. 
Over the course of her nearly 34-year career at MSU, Pat has taught dozens of courses ranging from 
business German and German civilization and culture to The Theater of Bertolt Brecht and Female 
Utopian Ideas in German Literature. Her extensive committee work and service to the University and 
broader academic community gained her wide recognition. Her talents were recognized by the Dean of 
the College of Arts and Letters, who tapped Pat to serve as Associate Dean in the College from 1998–
2006. 
Pat will continue to be affiliated with CLEAR as Professor Emerita, so we are not irrevocably parting 
ways. For the time being, however, the entire CLEAR team wishes her the very best—and fun-filled days 
with friends and family—as she begins a new chapter in her life: retirement! 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope we saw you at the upcoming 
CALICO conference hosted by our sister center, the University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language 
Resource Center, and that we will see you at MIWLA and ACTFL later this year. 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
Four professional development workshops are slated for July and August 2013. Applications will be 
accepted as long as space remains, but the workshops are filling fast! 
• Writing in the Foreign Language Classroom 
• Revisiting the Learning and Teaching of Vocabulary 
• Rich Internet Applications for Language Learning: Introductory Techniques 
• Assessing Speaking: For Placement Testing, Classroom-based Assessment, and Midterm and 
End-of-term Proficiency Exams 
Detailed information on all workshops can be found on our Web site: 
http://clear.msu.edu/clear/professionaldev/summerworkshops.php. 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/. 
