Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/aydinyildiz.pdf 
February 2014, Volume 18, Number 1 
pp. 160–180 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 160 
USING WIKIS TO PROMOTE COLLABORATIVE EFL WRITING  
Zeliha Aydın, Özyeğin University 
Senem Yıldız, Boğaziçi University 
This study focuses on the use of wikis in collaborative writing projects in foreign language 
learning classrooms. A total of 34 intermediate level university students learning English 
as a foreign language (EFL) were asked to accomplish three different wiki-based 
collaborative writing tasks, (argumentative, informative and decision-making)  working in 
groups of four. Student wiki pages were then analyzed to investigate the role of task type 
in the number of self and peer-corrections as well as form-related and meaning-related 
changes. In addition, focus-group interviews and questionnaires were conducted to find 
out how students would describe their overall experience with the integration of a wiki-
based collaborative writing project in their foreign language learning process. The results 
revealed that the argumentative task promoted more peer-corrections than the informative 
and decision-making tasks. In addition, the informative task yielded more self-corrections 
than the argumentative and decision-making tasks. Furthermore, the use of wiki-based 
collaborative writing tasks led to the accurate use of grammatical structures 94% of the 
time. The results of the study also suggest that students paid more attention to meaning 
rather than form regardless of the task type. Finally, students had positive experiences 
using wikis in foreign language writing, and they believed that their writing performance 
had improved. 
Keywords: Online Teaching & Learning, Virtual Environments, Writing, Collaborative 
Learning, CALL, Learners’ Attitudes, Second Language Acquisition 
APA Citation: Aydin, Z., & Yildiz, S.  (2014). Using wikis to promote collaborative EFL 
writing. Language Learning & Technology 18(1), 160–180. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/aydinyildiz.pdf 
Received: January 31, 2012; Accepted: July 31, 2013; Published: February 1, 2014 
Copyright: © Zeliha Aydin and Senem Yildiz 
INTRODUCTION 
Writing instruction in foreign language classes is especially important since good writing requires the 
acquisition of a range of linguistic abilities, including grammatical accuracy, lexical knowledge, syntactic 
expression and a range of planning strategies such as organization, style and rhetoric. Writing instructors 
are not only responsible for emphasizing accuracy in formal language but they should also attend to the 
establishment of meaning by providing their learners with meaningful contexts and authentic purposes for 
writing. Although writing is an individual act, it is also a social and interactional process during which the 
writer tries to express a purpose through responding to other people and texts. As Hyland (2003) argues, 
including formal elements into writing instructions to achieve grammatical accuracy and ensuring that 
students use those structures appropriately for specific purposes in a variety of writing contexts can be a 
demanding task for second language writing teachers. Research shows that collaborative writing, both in 
the first language (L1) and second language (L2) during which time learners jointly produce a text, 
creates a sense of community among student writers and requires reflective thinking. The exchange of 
feedback among students during a joint project allows them to notice linguistic and organizational 
problems in their writing and would lead to error correction and grammatical accuracy (Donato, 1988; 
Storch, 2002, 2005; Swain and Lapkin, 1998).  
In the past few decades, the integration of technology in writing instructions, especially the development 
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 161 
of computer-supported social tools such as wikis and blogs, offer new ways of teaching by allowing 
authoring, information sharing, knowledge building and easier collaboration opportunities among 
learners. Previous studies that investigated the revision behaviors of learners during collaborative wiki 
projects reveal that students pay attention to both form and meaning in their writing when writing 
contexts based on carefully-designed collaborative writing assignments are employed (Kost, 2011; Lee, 
2010).  
The present study was conducted to contribute to the existing literature as regards of using wikis for 
collaborative writing purposes by systematically examining the role of three different meaning-focused 
tasks.  These encourage the negotiation of meaning by providing learners with an aim to convey a 
message to an audience, and on the interaction of learners and their revision behaviors in small groups 
from the perspective of form- versus meaning- focused changes and self- versus peer-corrections while 
jointly constructing texts. The research questions include: 
1. In a wiki-based collaborative writing project, what is the role of task type in the number of 
form-related changes and meaning-related changes? 
2. What is the role of task type in the number of self-corrections and peer-corrections? 
3. To what extent will the participants be accurate in making these self- and peer-corrections? 
4. What are students’ perceptions of using wikis in collaborative projects? 
Literature Review 
Collaboration 
There has been increasing attention in recent years towards a social cognitive perspective, which posits 
that meaningful social interaction is fundamental for language learning since learning a language is 
considered the outcome of a process of co-constructing one’s L2 knowledge with peers rather than as a 
result of an individual’s construction of knowledge (Benson, 2003; Donato, 2000; Hauck & Youngs, 
2008; Lee, 2002; Swain & Lapkin, 1998; van Lier, 1996). These ideas are grounded in Vygotsky’s (1978) 
sociocultural theories of learning of and specifically his notion of the Zone of Proximal Development. 
This theory describes learning as a social process, and emphasizes the fundamental role of social 
interaction among learners in which a more knowledgeable peer provides scaffolding to the less 
knowledgeable peer while completing a shared task. In L2 classrooms, collaborative tasks are expected to 
engage learners and to provide scaffolding on each others’ use of language (Storch, 2002; Swain & 
Lapkin, 1998). It is through this collaborative scaffolding that learners improve their linguistic and 
cognitive capacities. According to Swain (2000), when interlocutors are engaged in a collaborative 
activity, the language they use (whether spoken or written) mediates a process of joint constructive 
interaction. She calls this collaborative dialogue—a dialogue that constructs linguistic knowledge in 
which what learners contribute becomes an object for reflection, receives peer feedback, addresses 
linguistic problems and encourages modified output. However, writing is more than simply linguistic 
accuracy. Swain (2000) also argues that tasks that engage students in collaborative dialogue “might be 
particularly useful for learning strategic processes as well as grammatical aspects of language” (p.12). 
From this perspective, collaborative interaction helps L2 learners in writing, especially when they are 
asked to construct texts jointly and do peer-editing (Storch, 1999; Swain & Lapkin, 1998) by providing 
opportunities for learners to focus on various aspects of writing such as grammatical accuracy, lexis and 
discourse (Donato, 1994; Kim, 2008; Hirvela, 1999; Storch, 2002, 2009; Swain & Lapkin, 1998; 
Wigglesworth & Storch, 2009). While working on a single text by taking group responsibility, learners 
generate ideas, and pay attention to their language use and the organization of their ideas.  Furthermore, 
they become engaged in collaborative scaffolding by giving and receiving feedback, which promotes the 
consideration of alternative uses of language and elaboration of ideas. Therefore, collaborative writing is 
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 162 
a powerful method of writing that encourages cooperation, critical thinking, peer learning and active 
participation towards an end product (Hernandez, Hoeksema, Kelm, Jefferies, Lawrence, Lee & Miller, 
2008).  
Role of Tasks in Language Learning  
Nunan (1992) defines task as a “piece of classroom work which involves learners in comprehending, 
manipulating, producing or interacting in the target language while their attention is principally focused 
on meaning rather than on form” (p.10). It is widely accepted that the nature of both oral and written 
interaction is affected by the type of task (Cohen, 1994; Skehan, 1996). Pica, Kanagy, and Falodun (1993) 
present a typology for communicative tasks according to interactional activities and communication 
goals. According to their taxonomy, tasks which promote the greatest opportunities for learners to 
experience the comprehension of input, feedback on production, and interlanguage modification are those 
tasks which require each interactant to hold a different portion of the information to reach the task 
outcome, Both interactants request and supply this information through the same or convergent goal, and 
only one acceptable outcome. Other research shows that open-ended tasks in which learners co-construct 
a piece of discourse, such as essays or reports, tend to encourage an increased amount of lexical and 
morphosyntactic negotiations (Pellettieri, 2000; Storch, 2005; Storch & Wigglesworth, 2007). In 
particular, tasks that require learners to use vocabulary, ideas and concepts that are beyond their 
immediate knowledge are found to increase opportunities for interaction (Blake, 2000; Foster, 1998; 
Pellettieri, 2000; Peterson, 2008; Pica, Kanagy, & Falodun, 1993). A review of task-based research by 
Ellis (2003) reveals that those tasks which are non-familiar, require information exchange, and have two-
way information gap, closed outcome, human/ethical topic, no contextual support, and narrative discourse 
type promote the most meaning negotiation among learners. According to Skehan’s (1998) and Skehan 
and Foster’s (2001) limited attentional capacity model, learners need to prioritize whether to give their 
attention to meaning or form. If a task demands too much attention to its content due to its complexity, 
the learners’ attention will be allocated to its meaning; they will pay less attention to the language since 
humans have a limited capacity to process information. In other words, “tasks which are cognitively 
demanding in their content are likely to draw attentional resources away from language forms, 
encouraging learners to avoid more attention-demanding structures in favour of simpler language” 
(Skehan & Foster, 2001, p.189). In conclusion, the nature and type of task is expected to have an 
influence on the writers’ focus on form versus content, and the amount and type of interaction among 
writers during collaborative writing. This present study aims to further investigate this influence. 
Research on Wikis  
The development of new technologies offers new ways for language teachers to promote and enhance 
collaboration in foreign language education. With the advent of Web 2.0 tools, more potential for 
collaborative writing in the L2 classroom has emerged. Wiki is a web-based collaboration tool which can 
be easily created, viewed and modified using any web browser. The asynchronous online collaboration 
function offers language teachers new opportunities to combine all the essential parts of writing 
instruction such as grammatical accuracy, appropriate use of grammatical forms in different contexts, 
audience awareness, and multiple drafting and revising (Lund, 2008). 
Wikis were found to provide a rewarding experience for students (Arnold, Ducate, & Kost, 2009; Ducate, 
Anderson & Moreno, 2011; Kost, 2011; Lee, 2010; Lund, 2008; Mak & Coniam, 2008), supporting 
learner autonomy (Kessler, 2009; Kessler, Bikowski & Boggs, 2012; Lee, 2010), resulting with an 
aggregated output (Kost, 2011; Mak & Coniam, 2008) and providing more focus on structure and 
organization (Elola & Oskoz, 2010; Mak & Coniam, 2008). Yet, in some studies, the issues of text 
ownership and a reluctance to edit the contributions of peers were raised. The interview responses in 
Lund’s study (2008) revealed students’ concerns about inexpert editing and abuse, while in Kessler’s 
(2009) study, students were more willing to edit their peers’ work than their own. However, those peer 
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 163 
edits were found to be focused more on form rather than content as students felt they did not have the 
right to change the content of the contributions of others. Unequal contribution by group members to the 
collective product was another concern raised in Arnold, Ducate and Kost’s 2009 study.  
Several studies that have been conducted specifically investigated the types of revisions students made. In 
most of those studies, topic choice and task type were found to affect the degree to which students engage 
in collaborative writing as well as the degree of focus on form and the amount of writing production. 
Arnold et al. (2009) examined the revision behaviors of intermediate German students in three different 
classes using wikis collaboratively. One of the classes was “structured” and received instructions on how 
to edit their contributions, and revisions focused more on form than meaning. In contrast, in the 
“unstructured” class, revisions focused more on meaning than form. In all three classes, stylistic changes 
came third after form- and meaning-related changes. Kessler’s (2009) analysis of revision behaviors of 40 
non-native English speaking pre-service teachers in a Mexican university as they collaboratively-defined 
and revised the word “culture” using a wiki showed that they were willing to collaborate in this 
autonomous environment, and that they were more willing to edit their peers’ work than their own. The 
task was initiated by the teacher but was completely left to the students to develop: no feedback, revisions 
or elaborations were provided by the teacher. Students focused more on meaning during the production, 
worked on improving content and did not strive for perfect grammatical accuracy as long as errors did not 
impede meaning. These findings are in line with Kessler et al.’s (2012) study, which investigated the 
collaborative writing behaviors during the production of research reports of their own choice by 30 
highly-proficient non-native English speakers using Google Docs. Students focused more on meaning 
than form and the grammatical edits they made were more accurate than inaccurate. However, contrary to 
these findings, Kost (2011), who analyzed the number of formal changes versus meaning-preserving 
(stylistic) changes made by students in a German language class, found that formal changes were much 
more frequent than meaning-preserving (stylistic) changes (89% vs. 11%) and that students were very 
successful in repairing grammatical errors. Similarly, Spanish language learners in Lee’s (2010) study 
attended to language errors at the sentence or word level during meaning-driven activities as they worked 
together. The open-ended tasks and topics that were broad enough and gave freedom to students to 
incorporate their personal interests while at the same time requiring them to focus on form, motivated the 
learners and resulted in a high degree of collaborative exchange in her study. 
Although several studies have sought to address the effects of using tasks in writing instructions, few 
studies have examined the role of tasks on self-corrections and peer-corrections. The current study 
contributes to the literature by examining whether task type has an effect on the number of form-related 
and meaning-related changes, number of self- and peer-corrections, and by investigating the accuracy of 
self- and peer-corrections learners make during wiki-based collaborative writing tasks in an EFL context. 
It further seeks to understand learners’ perceptions towards the use of wikis. 
METHODOLOGY 
Participants 
Data for this study was collected from 16 female and 18 male non-native speakers of English from 
various educational backgrounds studying in a preparatory program at a private university in Istanbul. 
Participants had an average age of 19.2 years, and were studying in two different classes, each class 
consisted of 17 students. Two instructors taught each class. While one of the instructors was one of the 
researchers in both classes, the second instructor varied. All participants in this study shared the same 
native language, Turkish. They had already completed levels A1, A2 and B1 of the Common European 
Framework (CEF) before starting the B2-level module, and had 24 hours of English instruction each 
week. As such, they were considered independent users of the target language. In an interview prior to the 
study, all participants considered themselves to be competent users of Web 1.0 technology, including 
browsing the Internet and using email and text chat. However, none of the students had used a wiki before 
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 164 
the study. 
Tasks 
Learners participated in three different meaning-focused tasks (Table 1) that were selected to engage them 
in the collaboration and negotiation of both meaning and form as they produced texts in a wiki-based 
environment. Meaning-focused tasks can be defined as tasks in which students have an aim to convey a 
message to an audience thereby encouraging them to focus on the content of the text they produce. 
However, a form-focused task, such as drills or gap filling exercises, could be described as a task which 
encourages the learners to focus on the formal elements of the language. In line with the suggestions 
given in the literature, learners were immersed in open-ended and authentic tasks which were based on 
real life situations, including a communicative aim that intended to engage them in meaningful interaction 
and collective production through shared decision making, while at the same time allowing them to pay 
attention to form (Lee, 2010; Skehan, 1998; Swain, 2000).  
Table 1. Distribution of the number of MRCs in All Three Tasks 
Type of MRC Argumentative 
Task 
Informative 
Task 
Decision-making 
Task 
Total 
Clarification / Elaboration of 
Information  
89 36 46 171 
New Information 33 51 14 98 
Picture 22 48 9 79 
Deleted Information 22 7 12 41 
Synthesis of Information 9 1 7 17 
Reorganizing 2 1 2 5 
Video 0 3 0 3 
Link 1 0 0 1 
While all tasks required the use of higher-order thinking skills in line with Skehan’s (1998) suggestions, 
task topics were selected from among familiar and meaningful topics for students to balance their 
cognitive load. The learners in the current study had just completed the B1 level of the CEF and were 
competent in writing “simple connected text on topics which are familiar or of personal interest” and 
writing “personal letters describing experiences and impressions” (Teachers’ Guide to the Common 
European Framework, n.d., p.8). Considering Hess’ (2011) Cognitive Rigor Matrix for reading and 
writing, the argumentative and decision-making tasks were selected to be cognitively and linguistically 
more demanding than the informative task, since the first two required the learners to apply skills such as 
devising an approach among many alternatives, developing a logical argument, and articulating a new 
voice. The informative task, on the other hand, mainly required such skills as recalling or locating basic 
facts, details, definitions and events, and describing the features of a place. All tasks were designed to be 
convergent in terms of goal orientation and required the learners to try to reach a common goal out of 
multiple outcome options. See Appendix A for a description of the tasks used in this study. Participants 
were continuously encouraged to use their own words, and were reminded beforehand that their text 
production would be monitored by the instructor against any form of plagiarism, especially because Tasks 
1 and 2 seemed conducive to copying and pasting from various resources. The non-error-free nature of 
the texts co-constructed by participants in the wiki pages led researchers to assume that plagiarism had 
not been a concern for the results of the study. 
 
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 165 
Data Collection and Analysis 
Procedure 
The study took place during the second semester, which started in February 2010 and continued for seven 
weeks. At the beginning of this nine-week semester, the instructor/researcher set up a class wiki for each 
class and held a training session before learners started to work on their projects. Learners were provided 
with detailed criteria regarding the grading of their wikis, which included an assessment of both 
individual and collaborative working skills. The grade learners received from the project constituted 5% 
of their final course grade. Inıtially, learners worked on a non-graded task in which they collaboratively 
wrote definitions for specific concepts determined together in a class discussion whose aim was to assist 
the students in their familiarity with using the wiki. After the non-graded task, they were asked to 
complete three different tasks in a row. The first and second tasks took two weeks to complete, while the 
final task took one due to time restrictions of the nine-week academic semester.  
Prior to each task, learners were randomly assigned to groups of four prior to each task and therefore they 
worked in a different group for each task. This was done purposefully since in Arnold et al.’s (2009) 
study, some students complained about unequal participation and poor communication within their groups. 
The researchers wanted the learners in this study to have a different group dynamic for each task and have 
a chance to be able to interact with different peers in their class. After the completion of the tasks, the 
content created by the learners in all the wiki pages was analyzed. A questionnaire was given to the 
students and a focus group interview was conducted in the seventh week of the study.  
In order to examine the role of task type in the number of meaning-related and form-related changes, the 
history pages of all tasks were analyzed and the number of meaning-related and form-related changes was 
calculated separately for each task by the researchers. For the argumentative task, there were 31.75 
history pages on average. The average number of history pages for the second task was 17.5. The final 
task generated 13 history pages on average. In the present study, to identify form-related changes, all 
sentences including grammatical corrections were analyzed by using Kessler’s (2009) categorization as a 
starting point. However, only the incidents observed in the data became part of the categorization, and an 
analysis was based on the categories that emerged from the data as shown in Appendix B.  
To identify meaning-related changes, all sentences including at least one meaning-related change (MRC) 
were examined. Kessler and Bikowski (2010) define MRC as any meaning-related change a student 
makes such as changing a letter, word, sentence, paragraph or the entire wiki (p.45). Kessler and 
Bikowski’s (2010) coding category was adapted to examine meaning-related changes in the data. 
However, the change of a letter, for example, the change of a misspelled word such as ‘improvment’ to 
‘improvement’, was coded as a form-related change unless it led to a change in the meaning of a sentence. 
The last three categories in Appendix C were added by the researchers as they emerged in the data and 
includes a description of each category. In order to examine the role of task type in the number of self- 
and peer-corrections, all history pages of all tasks were analyzed and the number of self-corrections and 
peer-corrections was calculated separately for each task by one of the researchers and one native English 
speaking teacher (NES) who was also teaching with one of the researchers at the same institute. Both self- 
and peer-corrections were defined as any changes in the form of a grammatical structure and did not 
include any meaning-related changes. Peer-corrections were defined as the corrections made to one 
participant’s contribution by another member of the group that he/she worked with, while self-corrections 
referred to the corrections made to one’s own contributions to the wiki pages. The number of self- and 
peer-corrections was compared to explore which task yielded more self-correction or peer-correction. 
Corrections by the students were judged as “correct” or “incorrect” by the researchers and the 
aforementioned NES teacher. The number of correct and incorrect changes was calculated along with 
their percentages. All correct and incorrect edits were noted and counted separately for each task.  
 
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 166 
The Questionnaire.  
In the seventh week of the study, students were asked to fill out a questionnaire that included questions 
about their overall learning, motivation, group interaction and use of technology (see Appendix D). The 
aim of the questionnaire was to describe the learners’ overall experience with the use of wikis and to 
evaluate the effectiveness of the project. There were a total of 39 statements in the questionnaire: 35 
Likert-type statements and four open-ended questions. All of the statements were adapted from Lee 
(2010) and Hazari, North, and Moreland (2009). The response rate was 67.64% for the questionnaire and 
its reliability was calculated as α=.98. Descriptive statistics were used to analyze the results of the 
questionnaire. Open-ended questions were carefully read and recurring themes were grouped by the 
researchers. 
The interview.  
A face-to-face semi-structured focus-group interview was conducted with six randomly chosen 
participants in the seventh week of the study regarding their experiences in using wikis for collaborative 
writing tasks (see Appendix E). The interview was conducted at the institution of one of the researchers 
and was tape-recorded and transcribed. Common threads in the responses were identified and the results 
were used to triangulate the data obtained through the content analysis of the wiki entries and 
questionnaire results. The interview enabled the researchers to gain insight into the participants’ overall 
experience regarding this wiki project. 
RESULTS 
In this section, the results of the analysis of the wiki pages will be presented to answer the first three 
research questions, and the questionnaire and interview responses will be discussed in relation to the 
fourth research question in the study. 
The Effects of Task Type on Form-related vs. Meaning-related Changes 
The content analysis of the wiki pages revealed that there were more meaning-related changes than form-
related changes across all three tasks (Figure 1). In the argumentative task, 57% of all changes were 
meaning-related whereas 43% were form-related. In the informative task, the meaning-related changes 
constituted 77% of all changes while 23% were form-related; and in the decision-making task, 54% of the 
changes were meaning-related and 46% were form-related. A Chi-square test indicated that those 
relationships were statistically significant (X2=26.371, p<0.05).  
 
Figure 1. Distribution of changes in all three tasks. 
The distribution of the number of meaning-related and form-related changes in all three tasks was 
analyzed using descriptive statistics as summarized in Tables 1 and 2.  
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 167 
Table 2. Distribution of the number of FRCs in All Three Tasks 
Type of FRC Argumentative Task Informative Task Decision-making Task Total 
Word Choice 29 5 22 56 
Spelling 23 9 13 45 
Coordination 13 2 8 23 
Singular/Plural 12 4 3 19 
Articles 9 6 1 16 
Tense 5 3 8 16 
Capitalization 12 1 0 13 
Verb Form 8 1 3 12 
Part of Speech 6 2 1 9 
Subject/Verb Agreement 3 2 4 9 
Prepositions 2 4 2 8 
Unnecessary Word 4 0 4 8 
Word Order 4 1 3 8 
Punctuation 3 0 0  
Verb-Verb Agreement 2 0 1  
Relative Clauses 0 2 1  
Active/Passive 2 0 0  
Modals 0 1 1  
Superlatives 0 1 0  
Double negation 0 0 1  
The most common meaning-related change was the clarification/elaboration of information followed by 
adding new information and adding a picture to the text. Word choice was found to be the most common 
form-related change followed by spelling. The results revealed that students attended to meaning more 
than form across all three tasks. 
The Role of Task Type on Self- vs. Peer-Corrections 
The content analysis of the wiki pages revealed more peer-corrections (a total of 203) than self-
corrections (a total of 54) in total as illustrated in Figure 2; the argumentative task resulting in the largest 
number of corrections, followed by the decision-making and informative tasks. It was only in the 
informative task that self-corrections outnumbered peer-corrections. In the argumentative task, 89% of all 
the corrections were made by peers while 11% were self-corrections. In the informative task, 32% of all 
the corrections were peer-corrections whereas 68% were self-corrections. Finally, in the decision-making 
task, peer-corrections constituted 88% of the total number of corrections with the remaining 12% being 
self-corrections. The results of the Chi-square analysis in SPSS revealed that those differences are 
statistically significant (X2=71.197, p<0.05). 
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 168 
0
50
100
150
200
Form-related
Meaning-related
Form-related 137 44 76
Meaning-related 178 147 90
Task 1 
(Argumentative)
Task 2 (Informative) Task 3 (Decision-
making)
 
Figure 2. Distribution of corrections in all three tasks. 
The Extent of Accuracy of Self- and Peer-corrections 
A total of 203 peer-corrections in all three tasks were observed, and while 94.5% of them were correct, 
5.5% were incorrect. Table 3 illustrates the distribution of these corrections across all three tasks.  
Table 3. Number of Correct and Incorrect Corrections in Peer-correction in Each Task 
 Peer 
Corrections 
Correct Incorrect 
Task 1 (Argumentative) 122 116 (95%) 6 (5%) 
Task 2 (Informative) 14 10 (71%) 4 (29%) 
Task 3 (Decision-making) 67 66 (98.5%) 1 (1.5%) 
Total 203 192 (94.5%) 11 (5.5%) 
A total of 54 self-corrections in all three tasks were observed, 92.5% of which were correct and 7.5% 
were incorrect. Table 4 illustrates the distribution of these corrections across all three tasks.  
Table 4. Number of Correct and Incorrect Corrections in Self-correction in Each Task 
 Self-
Corrections 
Correct Incorrect 
Task 1 (Argumentative) 15 13 (86%) 2 (14%) 
Task 2 (Informative) 30 29 (96%) 1 (4%) 
Task 3 (Decision-making) 9 8 (89%) 1 (11%) 
Total 54 50 (92.5 %) 4 (7.5%) 
When the total number of corrections was examined, out of 242 corrections made by participants in the 
wiki pages, 94% were accurate. As Table 5 illustrates, the number of accurate corrections was higher than 
the number of inaccurate corrections in all three tasks. The highest level of accuracy was found in the 
decision-making task, as 97% of the corrections resulted in grammatical accuracy.  
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 169 
Table 5. Level of Accuracy in the Corrections 
 Correct Percentage Incorrect Percentage 
Task 1 (Argumentative) 129 94% 8 6% 
Task 2 (Informative) 39 89% 5 11% 
Task 3 (Decision-making) 74 97% 2 3% 
Total  242 94% 15 6% 
Students’ Perceptions Regarding Using Wikis in Collaborative Projects  
Appendix D illustrates the averages of all the items in the questionnaire. As can be seen, the statements 
with the highest mean average were “Use of wiki-based collaborative writing tasks helped to improve my 
foreign language writing skills” (M=3.9), “I liked the topics used in the tasks” (M=3.9), and “I started to 
view other English language learning methods more positively after using the wiki.” (M=3.9) while the 
statements with the lowest mean average were “Use of the wiki enhanced my interest in the course” 
(M=3) and “Doing the assignments through the wiki encouraged me to study more regularly” (M=3).  
All six students who participated in the interview stated that they had a positive experience using wikis 
for collaborative writing tasks. This finding was also supported by the questionnaire results; 52.2% of the 
respondents stated that they agreed or strongly agreed with the statement “Overall, I had a positive 
experience with the use of wiki-based collaborative writing tasks” (M=3.5). However, the questionnaire 
results showed that nearly 48% of the participants did not particularly enjoy these tasks. During the focus 
group interviews, those who did not enjoy the tasks explained that their discontent was mainly due to the 
compulsory nature of the project. They argued that they were not motivated because this project was a 
course requirement. Nevertheless, all interviewees concurred that the wiki provided a condusive 
environment for group work and was therefore useful. Moreover, 60.9% of the respondents agreed or 
strongly agreed with the statement “I liked working together with my friends while creating wiki pages” 
(M=3.7). Furthermore, students felt that their writing skills improved as stated by one interviewee: 
When you read your peers’ edits, you see different sentences used to express different 
ideas. This contributes to your existing knowledge of vocabulary. 
The feeling of improvement in the students’ foreign language writing skills is also reflected in the 
questionnaire as “Use of wiki-based collaborative writing tasks helped to improve my foreign language 
writing skills” was one of the most popular statements with 69.8% of the respondents who agreed or 
strongly agreed with it. The value of the collaboration was evident in the questionnaire as 39.1% of the 
respondents agreed or strongly agreed with the statement “I learned more because of my friends’ 
contributions to the wiki” (M=3.3). Similarly, the statement “I learned new things while reading and 
editing my peers’ contributions” had a mean average of 3.5 with 43.5% of the respondents agreed or 
strongly agreed with it. Finally, 73.9% of the respondents who agreed or strongly agreed with the 
statement “Doing assignments on the wiki helped me to learn from my own mistakes” (M=3.8). This 
result was pointed out in the interview as: 
If I had a weak or a simple sentence in the text the teacher would probably correct the 
grammatical mistakes in it. However, while we are working on the wiki my peers rewrite 
the whole sentence, change some words or add some words into it so that I can see how to 
make my sentences look more complex and ideas sound stronger. 
DISCUSSION 
Both quantitative and qualitative data provided multiple sources of information regarding the use of wikis 
in collaborative writing projects and the role of task type during this process. In this section, the results of 
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 170 
the study will be discussed in light of this data and in relation to theory and previous research.   
The Effects of Task Type on Form-related vs. Meaning-related Changes 
In this study, learners were engaged in three different meaning-focused tasks that encouraged them to 
attend to both content and form while collaboratively producing texts. An analysis of the learners’ 
contributions in the wiki pages showed instances of both form-related and meaning-related changes in 
their writing. However, learners paid more attention to meaning than form, regardless of the task type in 
these wiki-based collaborative writing tasks. This result may be attributed to the design of the tasks; that 
is, in line with the suggestions in the literature (Ellis, 2003; Pica, Kanagy & Falodun, 1993), all tasks 
were designed requiring interactants to request and supply information in order to achieve the same or 
convergent goal such as defending an idea, introducing a city, or offering a solution to a problem. For the 
completion of the tasks, negotiation of meaning was crucial while learners tried to convey a message to 
the readers. This finding supports the findings of Kessler (2009), Arnold et al. (2009), and Kessler, 
Bikowski and Boggs (2012) which revealed that students paid more attention to meaning than form in 
unstructured wiki-based and web-based collaborative writing tasks that encourage students to focus on 
content with an aim of conveying a message rather than focusing on the grammatical structures of the 
target language. In line with Kessler’s (2009) findings, the meaning focus of the tasks may have led 
students to overlook the grammatical errors as long as they did not interfere with the comprehension of 
the intended message. Yet, the presence of a high number of form-related changes, especially in the 
argumentative and decision-making tasks, showed us that attention to form was also considered important 
during these meaning-based activities. This finding is consistent with Lee’s (2010) study in which 
students collectively attended to grammatical inaccuracies.  
The most frequent forms of MRCs were found to be the clarification/elaboration of old information and 
new information. In Kessler’s and Bikowski’s (2010) study, the most frequent forms of MRCs were new 
information and deleted information. Similar to Kessler and Bikowski’s (2010) findings, participants in 
this study did not engage in MRCs which required higher order critical thinking skills such as 
synthesizing and reorganizing in their wiki changes. As Kessler and Bikowski (2010) argue “without the 
extensive use of synthesis, it is difficult to succeed at collaborative writing in a wiki setting” (p. 52), and 
what was found is this study,, participants preferred to expand on a currently introduced topic or add 
completely new information rather than synthesizing pieces of information that existed in the wiki. This 
finding is also in line with Lee’s (2010) study in which participants showed reluctance to editing their 
peers’ postings and showed more willingness to adding text rather than to editing existing writing. 
Adding a picture to the text was another frequent MRC and this finding is also consistent with Lee’s 
(2010) study during which it was observed that students embedded multimedia sources extensively to 
support the content of their postings. The distribution of FRCs in the current study is parallel to the 
distribution of FRCs in Kessler’s (2009) study as word choice and spelling were the most frequent types 
of FRCs he found in his study.  
As mentioned earlier, the argumentative and decision-making tasks were selected to be cognitively and 
linguistically more demanding for the participants than the informative task. Skehan (1998) argues that 
when a task demands too much attention to its content due to its complexity, learners will pay more 
attention to its meaning and less attention to its language. This did not necessarily apply here. The 
participants in this study allocated their attentional resources to form during the more challenging tasks 
and paid more attention to meaning during a task which they felt more familiar with. However, as can be 
seen in Table 4, the majority of the MRCs in the informative task was in the form of adding new 
information, a picture and the clarification/elaboration of information. In addition, only one instance of 
synthesizing was observed whereas the argumentative and decision-making tasks promoted more use of 
this skill. It should also be noted that the informative task included the least number of peer corrections 
among the three tasks. 68% of all changes made in the informative task were self-corrections made by the 
participants: therefore most of these MRCs were actually done by participants on their own postings.  
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 171 
The Role of Task Type on Self- vs. Peer-Corrections 
When all changes made by the learners were analyzed, more peer-corrections than self-corrections were 
observed in the wiki pages. Task type was also found to have a significant effect on the number of 
corrections. While the argumentative task promoted the largest number of peer-corrections, both the 
argumentative and decision-making tasks promoted more peer-corrections than the informative task. This 
meaningful difference may be attributed to the fact that when students deal with cognitively and 
linguistically related rigorous tasks, and when they try to convey their own ideas, they tend to be more 
engaged in collaborative dialogue which Swain (2000) describes as “joint problem solving and 
knowledge building” (p.102). During the informative task, learners were more familiar with the content as 
they had done some research on the cities they had chosen prior to preparing a visitor’s guide. They had 
organized and presented information from memory and written sources in their own words: thus, the 
informative task lacked the mutual problem-solving orientation found in the other two tasks. Furthermore, 
during the interview, some learners stated that they preferred to divide the work for the informative task 
because the nature of the task suited a division of responsibilities since there were different parts in the 
visitor’s guide. In contrast, during the argumentative and decision-making tasks, all members in the 
groups tried to either defend their own ideas against an opposite idea to convince the reader or expressed 
their own opinions in how to solve a problem. As a result, the participants of the study did not feel that 
they needed to correct one another’s contributions in the informative task, which resulted with less 
engagement in collaborative dialogue. One of the learners mentioned this during the interview: 
… in the informative task, I felt I did not have the right to change what my peers had 
written since the information presented was an obvious fact known by everyone. 
This study supports previous research (Lee, 2010) which shows that open-ended tasks offering 
opportunities for learners to mutually engage in problem solving results in learners paying more attention 
to each others’ contributions, and thus increases collaboration.   
The Extent of Accuracy of Self- and Peer-corrections 
The findings of the present study suggest that although there is no statistically significant relationship 
between correction type and grammatical accuracy, wiki-based collaborative writing tasks lead to the 
accurate use of grammatical structures most of the time (94%), as has been observed in previous studies 
(Arnold et al., 2009; Kessler et al., 2012; Kost, 2011). This finding is also consistent with Elola and 
Oskoz (2010) and Lee (2010) who conclude that wiki-based collaborative writing activities foster 
grammatical accuracy.  An important feature of using wikis for collaborative writing tasks, as shown in 
this study, is that it allows opportunities for learners to notice their linguistic gaps by drawing attention to 
form for the improvement of linguistic accuracy. Learners had the opportunity to revise and improve their 
writing through feedback from their peers, an opportunity that they may not have had in the absence of 
wiki technology.  
Students’ Perceptions as regards Using Wikis in Collaborative Projects  
The results of the focus-group interview and the questionnaire suggest that the learners had a positive 
experience and enjoyed working collaboratively on the wiki-pages; most felt that their writing skills 
improved as a result of the project. This finding is in line with the findings of recent studies (Arnold, 
Ducate, & Kost, 2009; Lee, 2010). Furthermore, the interview responses show that the use of wikis 
promoted collaborative work by allowing the participants to contribute to the projects without any time or 
space restrictions. This was also argued by other researchers (i.e., Engstrom & Jewett, 2005; Keith, 2006; 
Lamb & Johnson, 2007). Moreover, wikis offer an alternative way to extend collaboration outside the 
classroom and provide learners with opportunities to do extra writing practice, which is also supported by 
earlier research (Farabaugh, 2007; Lamb, 2004).  
However, the participants’ feelings of inhibition to edit each other’s postings, similar to the ones observed 
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 172 
in previous studies by Lund (2008), Kessler (2009) and Lee (2010), were also revealed during the focus-
group interviews. Apparently, the self-confidence of students in their language skills got in the way of 
their correcting grammatical mistakes in the wiki pages, as is evident in the following quote during the 
focus group interview: 
Since we are not completely proficient in English, it was difficult for us to notice all the 
grammatical mistakes in our peers’ work. Even if we thought something needed to be 
expressed in a different way, we had to search from other sources and be sure that our 
edits were accurate. 
The interview responses also showed that participants felt more comfortable to comment on and edit each 
other’s contributions more during open-ended tasks which required them to exchange opinions, rather 
than fact, and engaged them in mutual problem-solving activities. 
Limitations and Suggestions for Further Research 
Although the present study has revealed important insight for collaborative writing in foreign language 
teaching and learning, some limitations need to be acknowledged. First of all, the study was conducted in 
seven weeks, which is a short duration for such a study. Although all the participants were computer 
literate, it was the first time they had used wikis as a component of their foreign language learning 
courses. Therefore, the novelty effect of the tool may have affected student participation in the wiki-based 
tasks. Hence, the study could be replicated within a longer time span by allowing the participants to get 
fully accustomed to the technical features of the tool and also to acquire full appreciation of how to 
collaborate using wikis. Another limitation was that new groups were formed for each task in this study. 
This was done purposefully to prevent the familiarity effect on the students’ performance and to enable a 
fair evaluation of their performance as some unresponsive group members may have affected the 
performance of others in the tasks. Needless to say, working in a new group for each task may have 
affected the performance of some students. Therefore, the study could be replicated without changing the 
groups throughout the tasks in order to eliminate the possible negative effect of group dynamics on 
student performance in the project. Task types were another limitation to the study. An argumentative, an 
informative and a decision-making task were designed to examine the role of the task type. The study 
could be replicated using other types of tasks to explore the role of different task types in wiki-based 
collaborative writing projects.  
Unfortunately, during this study, researchers did not have access to the interactions learners had outside 
of the wiki environment. All evidence of collaboration and cooperation in this study was based on the 
history pages and groups’ final products on the class wiki. Having access to their written or oral 
discussions and interactions regarding the tasks could have provided valuable insight concerning their 
collaboration process. 
CONCLUSION 
It is evident that collaborative writing environments foster an opportunity for L2 learners to co-construct 
knowledge and become engaged in collaborative dialogue with their peers through scaffolding on each 
other’s language use as well as to improve their linguistic capacity. It is especially important to provide 
EFL students with collaborative learning environments outside the classroom, as there are fewer 
opportunities to practice the target language in social contexts in an EFL setting. Learners in this study 
showed a willingness to learn from each other through scaffolding and feedback. Therefore, this study 
showed that the affordances of wikis offer an alternative way to extend collaborative interaction and 
scaffolding beyond the classroom through carefully chosen collaborative tasks, to allow learners 
opportunities to notice linguistic gaps and organizational problems in their writing, and to have great 
potential in providing an enjoyable foreign language learning experience.  
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 173 
However, the characteristics of the tasks chosen and types of activities learners engage in clearly bear 
great importance in constructing the amount of collaborative dialogue and scaffolding among learners: 
therefore, they should be chosen carefully. Our research indicates that open-ended and meaning-focused 
tasks encouraged learners to attend to meaning more than form, and tasks that were designed to be 
cognitively more demanding resulted in more peer-corrections which finds support in relevant literature 
(Ellis, 2003; Pica, Kanagy, & Falodun, 1993).  
Although, participants seemed to attend to meaning more during the informative task, which was selected 
as a less rigorous task, a significant number of the meaning-related changes were in the form of simply 
adding more information to existing information, which is not necessarily an indicator of collaboration 
among learners. One important reason for this was found to be that the informative task was based on 
more factual information and students could have a division of labor. On the contrary, tasks that do not 
have clear-cut divisions of responsibilities and that require interactants to request and supply opinions and 
information in order to mutually solve a problem or reach a goal, promote the greatest opportunities for 
giving and receiving feedback, and produce a text collectively and collaboratively.  
Evidently, task based instruction is very important in fostering interaction and collaboration among 
learners and the type of task affects the way learners interact with each other. As was mentioned in 
previous research, in a wiki environment, it is the task that promotes collaborative interaction among the 
learners and not the technology itself (Lee, 2010; Lund, 2008). Future research that explores more 
structured wiki environments for peer feedback and the role of language teachers during collaborative 
writing tasks will certainly contribute to the interpretation of the results of this study.  
APPENDIX A. Tasks Designed for the Study  
Task 0: Writing 
Definitions 
Choose 5 concepts and write definitions for them. Explain what they mean to you. 
Task 1: Argumentative 
Task 
Choose one of the prompts below and write an argumentative essay with your 
partners.  
a) Restrictions should be placed on the use of mobile phones in public areas 
like restaurants and theaters. 
b) Censorship is necessary. 
c) Traditional male role has changed in Turkey over the last 20 years. 
d) Advertising means manipulation. 
e) The mass media, including TV, radio, newspapers have a great influence 
on people and especially on the younger generation. It plays an important 
role in shaping the opinions and positions of the younger generation. 
f) Global climate change is man-made. 
g) Parents should let teenagers make their own decisions. 
h) Age does not matter in relationships. 
 
Task 2: Informative 
Task  
(Visitor’s 
Guide) 
Choose one of the cities in Turkey and prepare a visitor’s guide for people who 
want to visit that city. The guide should include general information on the city, 
accommodation, food, places to see, and things to do, etc. in that city. You may add 
photos or videos in it. You may get ideas from the websites below:  
        http://www.visitorsguide.is/ 
        http://www.seattlepi.com/visitorsguide/ 
Task 3: Decison-
making Task 
(Dear Abby) 
You are working for a website called 'Dear Abby' on which people write about 
their problems and ask for advice. Read the posting and try to help the person by 
offering advice on how to solve his/her problem. 
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 174 
APPENDIX B. Coding Categories and Descriptions of Form-Related Changes 
Coding category Description of Category Data Sample 
Word Choice Student changes a word another 
student has used. 
People should learn how to make true correct 
decisions 
Coordination Student changes/adds a coordinating 
conjunction to a sentence. 
Finally, I want to mention that your mother... 
Spelling Student changes the spelling of a 
word. 
The most crucial alteration is that a lot of men exhance 
enhance and change their perspectives on life. 
Part of Speech Student changes the form of a word. These days, life conditional living conditions are 
becoming more and more difficult. 
Singular/Plural Student changes the singularity or 
plurality of a noun. 
Woman Women should work. 
Articles Student adds/changes the article of a 
noun. 
Living conditions are becoming more and more 
difficult due to the economic crisis. 
Prepositions Student adds/changes a preposition to 
a sentence. 
It is assumed that men are superior from to women... 
Subject/Verb 
Agreement 
Student changes the subject or the 
verb of the sentence to maintain 
subject-verb agreement. 
On the other hand the father were was more 
comfortable... 
Unnecessary 
Word 
Student deletes an unnecessary word 
from a sentence. 
...because also women generally do the housework... 
Tense Student changes the tense of a 
sentence. 
...because also women generally do did the housework 
and take took care of children... 
Punctuation Student adds/changes a punctuation 
mark to a sentence. 
Thus, unlike woman, men start to accept 
responsibility.... 
Word Order Student changes the word order of a 
sentence. 
Is the second largest port after Istanbul Izmir Port. 
izmir port is the second largest port after Istanbul Port. 
Capitalization Student changes the caption of a 
letter. 
...I belive that traditional male role has changed in 
turkey Turkey over the last 20 years 
Verb Form Student chages the form of a verb. ...now women start share to share different 
responsibilities... 
Active/Passive Student changes an active sentence 
into passive or a passive sentence into 
active voice. 
...before saying things which are hurt your mother... 
Superlatives Student adds/corrects a superlative 
structure. 
Becoming a teenager is very the most dangerous 
period of life. 
 
Relative Clauses Student adds/corrects a relative 
clause to a sentence. 
Individual's occupational self-selection which means a 
particular work environment... 
Negation Student corrects a double negation in 
a sentence. 
...nobody is not the same... 
Modals Student adds/changes a modal to a 
sentence. 
...and you should offer to study together again. 
Note. Cross out words show the data deleted from the text. Bold words show the data inserted i 
 
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 175 
APPENDIX C. Coding Categories and Descriptions of Meaning-Related Changes 
Coding 
Category 
Description of 
Category 
Data Sample Explanations 
New 
information 
Student writes 
about a sub-
topic not 
previously 
discussed 
İstanbul is the most populated and vivacious city in Turkey. 
It is located at the northwest of Turkey and costs of the sea 
of Marmara and Blacksea. İstanbul is a perfect choice who 
want to go a place which is in the heart of history, art, 
natural beauties and technology. İstanbul consists of two 
sides which are connected with each other by two bridges. 
HISTORICAL PLACES OF ISTANBUL 
You can see almost everywhere in İstanbul traces of old 
civilizations such as Ottoman Empire and Byzantine Empire. 
Every avenue, building even paving stones carry a historical 
and magical atmosphere especially districts like Eminönü, 
Üsküdar, Beyoğlu,  etc.” 
The title 
“Historical 
Places of 
Istanbul” was 
added as a new 
piece of 
information to 
the existing body 
of the text.  
 
Deleted 
information 
Student deletes 
information, 
ranging from 
one word or 
piece of 
punctuation to 
the entire body 
of the wiki 
There is no point brooding over it, you sould talk to your 
friend face to face and explain your feelings and concerns 
about your friendship and her attitude towards you, so you 
can feel comfortable. 
The crossed out 
part was deleted 
from the text. 
Clarification 
/ elaboration 
of informa- 
tion 
Student adds to 
a sub-topic that 
had already 
been introduced 
You can see almost everywhere in İstanbul traces of old 
civilizations such as Ottoman Empire and Byzantine Empire. 
Every avenue, building even paving stones carry a historical 
and magical atmosphere especially districts like Eminönü, 
Üsküdar, Beyoğlu etc. Moreover, if you want to learn more 
aboıt İstanbul and its past, you should visit Topkapı palace, 
Blue Mosque, Hagia Sophia etc. Topkapı Palace is a very 
rich museum where the important objects belonging to 
Ottoman Empire mostly are kept. Blue Mosque and Hagia 
Sophia also are of interest to a wide range of visitors. 
The underlined 
part was added 
to the paragraph 
to clarify / 
elaborate on the 
existing 
information. 
Synthesis of 
information 
Student writes a 
sentence or 
paragraph that 
ties together 
previously 
written 
information 
In retrospect, the traditional male role has undergone 
massive changes in terms of social, domestic and business 
life. The traditional notion of male and female roles has been 
redefined in our country. In the light of the aforementioned 
ideas, we can say that men's perspective and the point of 
view of the society to men's role have improved with the aid 
of getting educated and disposing of gender bias. There is no 
question that the man has gradually given up his patriarchal 
authority. Therefore, the traditional position of women in the 
society has considerably changed over the last 20 years and 
as a result of this, one of men has too. 
In this paragraph 
student wrote a 
conclusion to the 
argumentative 
essay that ties 
together what 
had already been 
written. 
Link Student adds a 
link. 
If you want to have information this issue, they can should 
look link 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interpersonal_relationship 
 
 
Re- 
organization 
Student changes 
the place of a 
sentence or a 
whole 
Official statistics indicate that women now represent almost 
fifty percent of the workforce. These days, living conditions 
are becoming more and more difficult due to the economic 
crisis. When this effect is taken into consideration, women 
The crossed out 
sentence shows 
the previous 
location of the 
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 176 
paragraph. should work. This condition affects the authority of man 
because earning money is his sole power on woman in some 
period of male life so, when the woman learn how to stand 
on her own legs, traditional male role disappear easily. These 
days, living conditions are becoming more and more difficult 
due to the economic crisis. When this effect is taken into 
consideration, women should work. 
part which was 
reorganized by 
the student. 
Student deleted 
the sentence 
from its original 
location and 
pasted it to a 
different location 
in the text 
without making 
any other 
editions. 
Picture Student adds a 
picture. 
  
Video Student adds a 
video. 
  
Note. Adapted from “Developing collaborative autonomous learning abilities in computer mediated language learning: Attention 
to meaning among students in wiki space”, by G. Kessler & D. Bikowski, 2010, Computer Assisted Language Learning, 23(1), 
41-58.  
APPENDIX D. Questionnaire & Mean Results 
This questionnaire was designed to examine students’ opinions on the use of wikis in English language teaching. 
Please circle the best option which states how much you agree with the following statements. This questionnaire is 
not going to affect your grade in the course. 
Mean  Questions 
3.8 1. The wiki interface and features were overall easy to understand. 
3.6 2. I liked seeing other students’ interaction with material I posted in the wiki. 
3.3 3. I would prefer classes that use wikis over other classes that do not use wikis. 
3.7 4. Editing information in the wiki was easy. 
3.9 5. Use of wiki-based collaborative writing tasks helped to improve my foreign language writing 
skills. 
3.3 6. I stayed on task more because of using the wiki. 
3.1 7. I would like to see wikis used in other courses when I go to my faculty. 
3.4 8. Benefit of using the wiki is worth the extra effort and time required to learn it. 
3.7 9. I participated in the assignment more because of using the wiki. 
3.5 10. Benefits of using the wiki outweighed any technical challenges of its use. 
3.4 11. Use of the wiki for the assignment helped me interact more with students. 
3.5 12. Technical features in the wiki helped me improve my writing skills in English. 
3.3 13. Because of using the wiki, my group was able to come to a consensus faster. 
3.5 14. I will retain more material as a result of using the wiki. 
3.8 15. I would recommend classes that use wikis to other students. 
3.7 16. Compared to other discussion boards and forums, the wiki was easier to use. 
3.7 17. Use of the wiki promoted collaborative learning.  
3.3 18. I learned more because of my friends’ contributions to the wiki. 
3.0 19. Use of the wiki enhanced my interest in the course. 
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 177 
3.5 20. Wiki projects should be used more often in education. 
3.8 21. Wiki tasks were completely related to the course objectives. 
3.9 22. I liked the topics used in the wiki tasks. 
3.7 23. I liked working together with my friends while creating wiki pages. 
3.4 24. I often used the History page to see the previous changes before I edit something on the wiki. 
3.1 25. I found the Discussion page useful to communicate with my friends and share my comments. 
3.5 26. I learned new things while reading and editing my peers’ contributions. 
3.7 27. I felt comfortable while editing my peers’ work. 
3.6 28. I would rather write on the wiki to traditional essay writing. 
3.4 29. Contributing to the wiki tasks helped me write better essays in the classroom. 
3.5 30. Overall, I had a positive experience with the use of wiki-based collaborative writing tasks. 
3.0 31. Doing the assignments through the wiki encouraged me to study more regularly. 
3.3 32. Doing assignments on the wiki enabled me to evaluate my own performance. 
3.8 33. Doing assignments on the wiki helped me to learn from my own mistakes. 
3.8 34. Working on the wiki projects improved my research skills. 
3.9 35. I started to view other English language learning methods more positively after using the wiki.  
 36. What did you like most about the wiki assignments? 
 37. What did you find the most challenging about the wiki assignments? 
 38. 
39. 
What would you recommend to improve the use of wikis in the future? 
If there is anything else you would like to mention, please write it below.  
Note. The items were scored on a scale of 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 points (5 = Completely agree,             4 = Agree, 3 = Not sure, 2 = 
Disagree, 1 = Completely disagree). 
APPENDIX E. Focus Group Interview Questions 
1. Could you please explain your overall experience with the wiki tasks?  
2. What do you think about the topics in the tasks? Which task did you like the most and the least? Why? 
3. What was the most important and interesting aspect of working on a wiki? Why? 
4. What was the most challenging aspect of working on a wiki? Why? 
5. What is the contribution of the wiki to the group work? 
6. Was it easy for you to change/edit your peers’ writings? Did you feel comfortable while editing your peers’ 
work? 
7. How did the use of wikis affect your overall opinion on foreign language writing?  
8. What would you suggest to make the use of wikis more effective? 
 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Zeliha Aydın works as an instructor of English at Özyeğin University and holds an MA degree in Foreign 
Language Education. Her research interests include collaborative learning, task-based learning, and use of 
technology in language teaching.  
E-mail: zelihaydin@gmail.com 
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 178 
Senem Yıldız is an Assistant Professor at Boğaziçi University, Foreign Language Education Department. 
Her research interests focus around the use of new technologies in language teaching materials design and 
development, and classroom practice. 
E-mail: senem.yildiz@boun.edu.tr 
 
REFERENCES 
Arnold, N., Ducate, L., Kost, C. (2009). Collaborative writing in wikis: Insights from culture projects in 
intermediate German classes. In L. Lomicka & G. Lord (Eds.), The next generation: Social networking 
and online collaboration in language learning, (pp.115–144). San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Benson, P. (2003). Learner autonomy in the classroom. In D. Nunan (Ed.), Practical English language 
teaching (pp. 289–308). New York, NY: McGraw Hill. 
Blake, R. (2000) Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language 
Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120–136. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/blake/default.html 
Cohen, E. G. (1994). Restructuring the classroom: Conditions for productive small groups. Review of 
Educational Research, 64, 1–35.  
Donato, R. (1994). Collective scaffolding in second language learning. In J.P Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.) 
Vygotskian approaches to second language research. (pp. 33–56). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Donato, R. (1988). Beyond group: A psycholinguistic rationale for collective activity in second-language 
learning. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Newark, DE: University of Delaware. 
Donato, R. (2000). Sociocultural contributions to understanding the foreign and second language 
Classroom. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 27–50). Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press. 
Ducate, L., Anderson, L., & Moreno, N. (2011). Wading through the world of wikis: An analysis of three 
wiki projects. Foreign Language Annals, 44(3), 495–524. 
Ellis, R. (2003). Task-based language learning and teaching. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
Elola, I. & Oskoz, A. (2010). Collaborative writing: Fostering foreign language and writing conventions 
development.  Language Learning & Technology, 14(3), 51–71. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2010/elolaoskoz.pdf 
Engstrom, M. E. & Jewett, D. (2005). Collaborative learning the wiki way. TechTrends: Linking 
Research & Practice to Improve Learning, 49(6), 12–16. 
Farabaugh, R. (2007). The isle is full of noises: Using wiki software to establish a discourse community 
in a Shakespeare classroom. Language Awareness, 16(1), 41–56. 
Foster, P. (1998). A classroom perspective on the negotiation of meaning. Applied Linguistics, 19(1),  
1–23. 
Hauck, M., & Youngs, B. (2008). Telecollaboration in multimodal environments: The impact of task 
design and learner interaction. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(2), 87–124. 
Hazari, S., North, A., & Moreland, D. (2009). Investigating pedagogical value of wiki technology. 
Journal of Education Systems Education, 20(2), 187–198.  
Hernandez, N., Hoeksema, A., Kelm, H., Jefferies, J., Lawrence, K., Lee, S., Miller, P. (2008). 
Collaborative writing in the classroom: A method to practice quality work. Retrieved from 
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 179 
http://www.edb.utexas.edu/cscl/2008/topicpapers/s2paper.pdf 
Hess, K. K (2011). Local assessment toolkit: Exploring cognitive rigor. The National Center for the 
Improvement of Educational Assessment. Retrieved from 
http://www.nciea.org/publication_PDFs/CRM_ELA_KH11.pdf 
Hirvela, A. (1999). Collaborative writing: Instruction and communities of readers and writers. TESOL 
Journal, 8(2), 7–12. 
Hyland, K. (2003). Second language writing. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Keith, M. (2006). Wikis and student writing. Teacher Librarian, 34(2), 70–72. 
Kessler, G. (2009). Student-initiated attention to form in wiki-based collaborative writing. Language 
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 79–95.  
Kessler, G. & Bikowski, D. (2010). Developing collaborative autonomous learning abilities in computer 
mediated language learning: Attention to meaning among students in wiki space. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 23(1), 41–58. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/kessler.pdf 
Kessler, G., Bikowski, D., Boggs J. (2012). Collaborative writing among second language learners in 
academic web-based projects. Language Learning & Technology, 16(1), 91–109. 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/kesslerbikowskiboggs.pdf 
Kim, Y. (2008). The contribution of collaborative and individual tasks to the acquisition of L2 
vocabulary. The Modern Language Journal, 92, 114–130. 
Kost, C. R. (2011). Investigating writing strategies and revision behavior in collaborative wiki projects. 
CALICO Journal 28(3), 606–620. 
Lamb, A. & Johnson, L. (2007). An information skills workout: Wikis and collaborative writing. Teacher 
Librarian, 34(5), 57–59. 
Lamb, B. (2004). Wide open spaces: Wikis, ready or not. EDUCAUSE Review, 39(5), 36–48. 
Lee, L. (2002). Enhancing learners’ communication skills through synchronous electronic interaction and 
task-based instruction. Foreign Language Annals, 35(1), 16–23. 
Lee, L. (2010). Exploring wiki-mediated collaborative writing: A case-study in an elementary Spanish 
course. CALICO Journal, 27(2), 260–276. 
Lund, A. (2008). Wikis: A collective approach to language production. ReCall, 20(1), 35–54. 
Mak, B. & Coniam, D. (2008). Using wikis to enhance and develop writing skills among secondary 
school students in Hong Kong. System, 36, 437–455. 
Nunan, D. (1992) Collaborative language learning and teaching. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical 
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and 
practice (pp. 59–86). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Peterson, M. (2008). Non-native speaker interaction management strategies in a network-based virtual 
environment. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 19(1), 91–117. 
Pica, T., Kanagy, R., & Falodun, J. (1993) Choosing and using communicative tasks for second language 
instruction. In G. Crookes & S. Gass (Eds), Tasks and language learning: Integrating theory and 
practice. Vol 1 (pp. 9–34). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.  
Zeliha Aydın and Senem Yıldız Using Wikis to Promote Collaborative EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 180 
Skehan, P. (1998). A cognitive approach to language learning. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Skehan, P., Foster, P. (2001). Cognition and tasks. In P. Robinson (Ed.) Cognition and second language 
instruction (pp. 183–205). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Storch, N. (2002). Patterns of interaction in ESL pair work. Language Learning, 52, 119–158. 
Storch, N. (2005). Collaborative writing: Product, process, and students’ reflections. Journal of Second 
Language Writing, 14, 153–173. 
Storch, N. (2009). The nature of pair interaction. Learners’ interaction in an ESL class: Its nature and 
impact on grammatical development. Saarbrücken, Germany: VDM Verlag.  
Storch, N., & Wigglesworth, G. (2007). Writing tasks: Comparing individual and collaborative writing. In 
M. del Pilar García_Mayo (Ed.) Investigating tasks in formal language learning, (pp. 157–177). London, 
UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond: Mediating acquisition through collaborative 
dialogue. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 97–114). Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1998). Interaction and second language learning: Two adolescent French 
immersion students working together. Modern Language Journal, 82(3), 320–337. 
Teachers’ Guide to the Common European Framework (n.d). Retrieved from 
http://www.pearsonlongman.com/ae/cef/cefguide.pdf 
Van Lier, L. (1996). Interaction in the language curriculum: Awareness, autonomy, and authenticity. 
London, UK: Longman. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Wigglesworth, G., & Storch, N. (2009). Pair versus individual writing: Effects on fluency, complexity 
and accuracy. Language Testing, 26, 445–466. 
