Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/action.pdf 
October 2014, Volume 18, Number 3 
pp. 16–34 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 16 
FACEBOOK-PHOTOVOICE INTERFACE: EMPOWERING  
NON-NATIVE PRE-SERVICE ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEACHERS  
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico, UCSI University 
Fatimah Hashim, University of Malaya 
Engaging non-native pre-service English teachers who are still learning the language 
themselves requires two tasks: facilitating their language teaching skills and scaffolding 
their language learning. This action research interfaced Facebook and Photovoice 
technologies in order to empower participants to be proactive in their language learning 
and teaching skills. Using pedagogy of empowerment and collaboration, the researchers 
tracked the participants’ impressions regarding the interface’s role in strategizing their 
language learning and teaching skills enhancement. Data for this study are the 
participants’ mid- and post-semester feedback, reflection papers, and engagement matrix 
from the class Facebook page. Results suggest that the instructional design of blending 
technology (i.e., Facebook and Photovoice), pedagogy of empowerment, and collaboration 
was effective in empowering participants to take responsibility for their own learning, 
thereby improving their language learning and teaching skills. 
Keywords: Collaborative Learning, Language Learning Strategies, Teaching 
Methodology, Social Networking 
APA Citation: Rubrico, J. G. U., & Hashim, F. (2014). Facebook-photovoice interface: 
Empowering non-native pre-service English language teachers. Language Learning & 
Technology, 18(3), 16–34. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/action.pdf  
Received: April 21, 2013; Accepted: March 10, 2014; Published: October 1, 2014 
Copyright: © Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim 
INTRODUCTION 
Non-native pre-service English teachers (NNPET), who still have to acquire communicative competence 
in English, may lack the confidence to interact with their (NNPET’s) peers. They are often beleaguered 
with the anxiety of using English and further stressed by perceptions of inadequacy regarding their own 
language skills (Gan, 2013; Mousavi, 2007; Siew-Lian Wong, 2012; Yoon, 2012). They therefore need a 
pedagogy that can empower them (Bernat, 2008; Hayati, 2010).  
Pedagogy of empowerment, according to Brantmeier (n. d.), is a co-learning relationship between 
students and their teacher in an environment where power is shared when constructing collective and 
individual knowledge in authentic engagements. In this relationship, students are the knowledge explorers 
while the teacher is the facilitator of knowledge, scaffolding-builder, and critical reflection enhancer 
(Brantmeier, n. d.). This environment can promote students’ responsibility for their learning (Panitz 
& Panitz, 2004) and effectively shifts the responsibility of learning from teachers to the learners, 
resulting in learners being involved, informed, and heard (Jones & Duckett, 2007). Empowering learners 
enables them to develop the knowledge, skills, and abilities necessary to exert some control over their 
learning (Harvey, 2004; Shrader, 2003). 
This action research has adopted the pedagogy of empowerment to address the issue of passivity or non-
engagement by NNPET students who lack communicative competence in English. Getting the NNPET 
participants actively involved in their learning started with a negotiation about the manner in which class 
sessions would proceed. The participants agreed to collaboratively explore authentic tasks in the 
classroom and online through Facebook, and also through a Photovoice project towards the semester’s 
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim  Facebook-Photovoice Interface 
 
Language Learning & Technology  17 
end. Thus, Facebook and Photovoice technologies were interfaced in order to empower the NNPET 
participants to be proactive in their language learning and improvement of their teaching skills and, 
consequently, to explore the participants’ perspective on this collaborative and technology-driven 
instructional design.  
Facebook Technology: A Learning Interface  
Facebook is a social network cited for its academic engagement potential, a likely environment for 
students’ involvement in constructive learning (de Villiers, 2010; Petrović, Petrović, Jeremić, Milenković, 
& Ćirović, 2012; Roblyer, McDaniel, Webb, Herman & Witty, 2010; Susilo, 2008). Notwithstanding 
concerns over invasion of privacy and self-disclosure issues, thereby arguing against using Facebook as 
an academic tool (Grossecka, Branb, & Tiruc, 2011; Madge, Meek, Wellens, & Hooley, 2009; Rubrico 
2011), this academic engagement potential has been explored by educators who find Facebook a 
convenient interface facilitating interactive exchanges which lead to deeper conceptual understanding 
(Godwin-Jones, 2008; Harwood & Blackstone, 2012; Hurt et al., 2012; Pellizzari, 2012; Rice, 2010;).  
Language learners and teachers have discovered a new learning platform in Facebook, and, in its 
applications, innovative ways and resources which can hone language learning skills, (Blattner & 
Lomicka, 2012; Kabilan, Ahmad, & Abidin, 2010), provide cognitive scaffolding (Rambe, 2012), 
promote socio-pragmatic competence (Blattner & Fiori, 2009), and sharpen critical thinking, grammar, 
and writing skills of students (Hatane & Wijaya, 2010; Rubrico, 2012). Hence, Davies (2012) considers 
what individuals do on Facebook to be social literacy and language praxes. Furthermore, Facebook is 
regarded by some as the “new classroom commons” where people stay connected (Schwartz, 2009, p. 1); 
and as a community model which fosters learner engagement, interactions, and collaborations (Hurt et al. 
2012; Muñoz & Towner, 2009; Riley, Domizi, & Camus, 2012). 
As an online community then, can Facebook empower learners? Bryer and Seigler (2012) suggest that 
teachers design courses to empower students using technology and propose a conceptual framework for 
empowering students using social and Web-based technologies via synchronous, asynchronous, and 
automated pre-scripted communication tools with a six-point student- and instructor-based rationale for 
empowerment: development of (a) “ethical reasoning judgment in complex contexts,” (b) “leadership and 
management skills in complex contexts,” (c) “ownership in the learning process;” (d) providing space for 
“teachers to show passion and engage that passion with students;” (e) ensuring “buy-in to course 
objectives,” and (f) “buy-in to course content delivery methods” (p. 429). This conceptual framework is 
relevant to this action research in three ways.  First, the core argument of this framework is empowering 
students through social technologies, furthermore, the thrust is teacher-student collaboration toward 
students’ skills development; and finally, the avenue to this development is the teacher-student 
partnership in achieving learning outcomes through participatory modes of content delivery. All these are 
interwoven in this action research. 
Photovoice technology: A medium for meaning making  
“Photovoice is a participatory action research strategy” (Wang, 1999, p. 185), “by which people can 
identify, represent, and enhance their community” through photography (Wang & Burris, 1997, p. 369). 
Photovoice empowers people by giving them cameras to document images that express their perspectives 
on personal experiences as stakeholders in a community. Each self-generated photograph that is 
contextualized and shared with the community serves as a catalyst for personal, community, and 
institutional change (Wang & Burris, 1994). 
 Photovoice empowers people whose plight in need of transformation, like the women of Wang’s study,  
“to control the photographic process in order to express, reflect and communicate their everyday lives” 
(Wang, 1999, p. 185). These photographs undergo phases (Wang & Burris, 1997) corresponding to an 
action research cycle (Reil, 2010), which includes elements such as orientation (studying and planning), 
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim  Facebook-Photovoice Interface 
 
Language Learning & Technology  18 
taking pictures (taking action), group discussion and analysis (collecting and analyzing evidence), 
reflection and dialogue (reflecting), and documenting stories (sharing action research results). Photovoice 
is action research that moves toward “real and material changes in: what people do; how they interact 
with the world and with others; what they mean and what they value; the discourses in which they 
understand and interpret their world” (Atweh, Kemmis, & Weeks, 1998, p. 25). Photovoice  represents a 
distinctive feature of participatory action research: “those affected by planned changes have the primary 
responsibility for deciding on courses of critically informed action which seem likely to lead to 
improvement and for evaluating the results of strategies tried out in practice” (McTaggart, 1997, p. 28). 
Widely used in community development (Bell, 2008; Hergenrather, Rhodes, & Bardhoshi, 2010; Wang, 
Cash, & Powers, 2000) and in public health promotion and education (Baker & Wang, 2006; Catalani & 
Minkler, 2010; Snow, 2007), Photovoice has also been adopted by educators as a research methodology 
for teaching and learning (Nelson & Christensen, 2009; Nimmon & Begoray, 2008). Studies depicted 
Photovoice as a research tool fostering critical thinking among students, “a new medium to create 
knowledge” (Schell, Ferguson, Hamoline, Shea, & Thomas-Maclean, 2009, p. 340), a classroom 
dialogues trigger, and a tool that “empowers and gives voice to students and teachers in classrooms and 
schools” (Meyer & Kroeger, 2005, p. 186).  As a pedagogical tool, Photovoice was likewise found 
effective in engaging students in the classroom (Cosgrove, 2004; Graziano, 2011; Whitfield, 2005) and 
online (Edwards, Perry, Janzen, & Menzies, 2012; Perry & Edwards, 2012;). 
This study has adopted Photovoice for three reasons: it promotes learner engagement in ethnically diverse 
classrooms (Chio & Fandt, 2007); it empowers and motivates learners to actively participate in their 
learning process (Cook & Buck, 2010); and it is effective in connecting teachers and students (Whitfield 
& Meyer, 2005).  Similarly, Facebook, to which all participants were subscribed prior to this study, was 
interfaced “to enrich students’ educational experiences, to increase the relevance of the content, and to 
encourage students to collaborate effectively with their peers” (Phillips, Baird & Fogg, 2011, p. 13).  
Can the Facebook-Photovoice interface empower NNPET participants to be proactive in their language 
learning and improvement of their teaching skills? How do NNPET participants view this interface as a 
strategy for improving their language learning teaching skills? These are the questions that motivated this 
research. 
Conceptual Framework  
Constructivism is the view that language learning is at the interplay of linguistic, psychological, and 
sociological paradigms in knowledge construction (Brown, 2007, p. 12). Constructivists emphasize the 
learner’s active role in making meaning of linguistic information as well as the role of social interaction 
in crafting a new linguistic structure (Brown, 2007, p. 13). Underpinning the Facebook interface is 
Vygotsky’s (1978) theory of social constructivism, which posits that language learning is mediated by 
social interaction (i.e., Social Development Theory, SDT), brought to the next level through scaffolding 
by a More Knowledgeable Other (MKO), who helps learners cross the distance between what they can do 
and that which they can potentially do. According to Vygotsky, this distance is the Zone of Proximal 
Development (ZPD): the zone of learning. 
Proposed MKOs for this study are the course facilitator, the more knowledgeable peers, and technology 
such as Internet resources and the Facebook interface, which serves as a collaborative ZPD and classroom 
learning zone.  The class was divided into 13 groups of NNPET participants who were each assigned to 
peer teach on theories of second language acquisition of their choice and then present the application of 
these theories through microteaching. Group presentations were peer reviewed based on flexible 
evaluation rubrics agreed upon by the class (please refer to Appendix A). Presenters also evaluated their 
own presentations. Peer reviews and self-evaluations were posted on the class Facebook page. Through 
these constructive and candid evaluations, participants were empowered to collaborate toward their 
learning and skills development. This framework assumes that transparent evaluation breeds a culture of 
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim  Facebook-Photovoice Interface 
 
Language Learning & Technology  19 
responsibility, maturity, and collaboration where students regard each other as co-constructors of the 
competencies and the skills they are working towards acquiring.  
Furthermore, Facebook connected participants to each other through group chat, status updates, and wall 
postings; this allowed for immediate resolution of issues and questions. The Facebook page is, therefore, 
conceptualized as a zone of proximal development where participants collaborated toward their learning 
in a non-threatening environment. 
Photovoice was modified (PTV Mod) and adopted as the second element of this social network-
documentary photography empowerment interface. Firstly, modification consisted in the photographs 
being more of their choice rather than something taken to improve the plight of the participants.  Some 
researchers have modified Photovoice in this manner for classroom research (Graziano, 2011; Schell et 
al,2009; Whitfield & Meyer, 2005; ). Secondly, in this modified version of Photovoice, participants 
grouped themselves by fours, agreed on themes for their documentary photography, and were each given 
a disposable camera. Photographs undergo a three-stage analysis process: selecting, choosing the photos 
most relevant to the theme; contextualizing, making meaning of the photos from the photographers’ 
perspective; and codifying, identifying emerging issues, theme or theories (Wang, & Burris, 1997). After 
analysis, members share their picture narratives and reflections with the class.   
The outcome of the interface is learner empowerment, which this study argues is the key to NNPET 
participants’ active involvement in their knowledge construction and meaning making of the course 
content. Figure 1 visually maps out this conceptual framework.  
 
Figure 1. The Conceptual Framework. 
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim  Facebook-Photovoice Interface 
 
Language Learning & Technology  20 
METHODOLOGY 
The interface was put in place during the second week of a 14-week core course for NNPETs enrolled in 
the Teaching of English as Second Language (TESL) program at a state university in Malaysia. The 
course introduces participants to the key concepts and theories of language learning and language use and 
their application to classroom practice while also honing in on participants’ communicative competence, 
teamwork, and research skills.  
Participants  
Fifty-nine NNPETs (48 female; 11 male) of different nationalities registered for the course: 33 
Malaysians (21 Malays, 8 Tamils, and 4 Chinese) and 26 international students (22 from mainland China, 
2 from Nigeria, and 1 each from Poland and Brunei). Falling within 19 to 27 years of age, most of them 
were undergraduate sophomores in the Bachelor of Education in TESL Program. Twenty-five participants 
were of intermediate English proficiency level, while 34 were beginners. The proficiency levels were 
assessed using the Transparent Language English Proficiency Test administered during the second session 
of the course. This online instrument tested NNPET participants’ English grammatical knowledge, ability 
to identify errors in phrases, as well as vocabulary, and reading comprehension. Notwithstanding their 
proficiency level on this test, all participants had previously passed the Test of English as a Foreign 
Language (TOEFL) or the International English Language Testing System (IELTS) for university 
admission. 
Procedure and Timeline of the study 
Reil’s (2010) action research cycle of “study and plan - take action - collect and analyze evidence-reflect” 
was used in this study. Phases of the Photovoice project were adapted from Wang & Burris (1997): 
Orientation, taking pictures, facilitating group discussion, analysis, reflection and dialogue, and 
documenting the stories; while the four-week time frame was modelled after The Innovation Center’s 
Keeping Healthy: Strategies for reflection and learning (The Innovation Center, n.d.). The timetable of 
activities related to the interface is displayed in Table 1. 
Table 1. Timeline of the Study 
Phase 1 Weeks Activities and Tasks 
 Study and plan 1 Course orientation, introduction, and strategic session 
planning  
 Take action 2 to 8 Activities: interactive lectures, peer teaching, 
presentations, peer reviews, self-evaluations 
 Collect and analyze evidence  Collaborative tasks: peer reviews, self-evaluations, 
reflections  
 Reflect 9 Discussion and reflection on Facebook Interface as a 
tool of empowerment  
Phase 2 10 to 12 The Photovoice Project 
 Study and Re-plan 
 
 Orientation: the PV project, time frame, regrouping, 
group planning and discussion; giving out cameras to 
participants 
 Take action: Data collection  Taking pictures: theme-driven picture taking; 
developing films (disposable cameras), downloading 
images (digital cameras) 
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim  Facebook-Photovoice Interface 
 
Language Learning & Technology  21 
   Facilitating group discussions: selection of pictures 
relevant to the group narrative’s theme 
 Analysis 13 Selecting, contextualizing, codifying 
 Reflection  
 
 Reflection and dialogue: submission of running 
commentaries, impressions, reflections  
   Documenting the stories: photo-narratives 
 Class exhibit 14 Sharing of photo-narratives, impressions, reflections; 
discussion on participants perception on the PV project 
Data collection and analysis 
Data for this study were the participants’ reflection journals and responses to the anonymously submitted 
mid- and post-semester feedback questionnaires., Although the mid- and post-semester feedback 
questionnaires were in English, participants did not have difficulty answering them because, hewing 
closely to the pedagogy of empowerment, all questions were discussed in class and formatting the 
questionnaires was a collaborative effort.)  Some observational data of engagement were also sourced 
from the usage frequency of the class Facebook page, the quantity of group postings, and the type of 
postings covering the three-month period of the interface agenda.  
Data analysis was done using constant comparison analysis (Glaser & Strauss, 1967), coding repeating 
reply items (Gay, Mills, & Airasian, 2009) and grouping them into categories descriptive of the core 
themes emerging from participants’ feedback and reflections. Adopting Strauss and Corbin’s framework 
of analysis (1990), data from reflection journals and from the mid- and post-semester feedback were 
examined, compared, conceptualized, and categorized (p. 61). Connections between categories were 
established by “utilizing a coding paradigm involving conditions, context, action/interactional strategies 
and consequences" (p. 96); the core categories were then defined. Conversely, data from the class 
Facebook page were arrayed and coded for frequency according to the types of posting over the three-
month period in order to establish measures of participants’ engagement. 
Instruments 
The Mid-Semester (Phase 1) Feedback Questionnaire 
1. Has the Facebook Interface empowered you to be proactive in your language learning and 
teaching skills improvement? How?   
2. Reflection: What were the things you would have wanted changed in class?  
The Post-Semester Feedback Questionnaire 
3. Has the Photovoice Interface empowered you to be proactive in your language learning and 
teaching skills improvement? How?  
4. Write your impressions on the approach of this class to strategizing your language learning and 
teaching skills.  
RESULTS 
All 13 groups in the class answered that both the Facebook Interface (Question 1) and the Photovoice 
Interface (Question 3) empowered them to be proactive in their language learning and improvement of 
their teaching skills. Four categories emerged from replies to Question 1: Facebook offered (a) an 
innovative, fun and non-threatening learning engagement venue; (b) an ideal platform for discussion and 
learning engagement; (c) a convenient and wider learning space unbounded by time; and (d) an efficient 
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim  Facebook-Photovoice Interface 
 
Language Learning & Technology  22 
medium of communication and bonding (see categorized feedback in Appendix B). The Phase 1 
Reflection Trigger (Question 2) explored what components of the interface needed modification from the 
perspective of the participants. Table 2 displays the categorized replies. 
Table 2. Categorized Replies to Reflection Trigger  
Categories  n % Participants’ Feedback 
The workload 5 8.5% “Learners need time to internalize concepts discussed and more 
time for tasks completion.” 
Peer evaluation 6 10.0% “Some groups are not fair in evaluating and some disagree with the 
evaluations.” 
Lecture 
frequency 
5 8.5% “We understood the lessons better through the lecturer’s simple 
explanation.” 
Class grouping 
method 
7 12.0% “Random grouping so international students could work with local 
students.” 
No change 36 61.0% “We don’t want to change anything; we all learn from lectures to 
tasks. We hope it can be carried on to the next batch.” 
Replies to Question 3 yielded two major categories: Photovoice (a) ushered in an alternative approach to 
learning, and (b) triggered creativity. A third category highlighted the participants’ disappointment over 
the inadequate time allotted for the project; time constraints cancelled the much-awaited photo-narratives 
class exhibit (see categorized feedback in Appendix C). 
Participants’ answers to Question 4 yielded five categories: (a) students’ responsibility for learning 
strategy was engaging; (b) the freedom to choose strategies for task completion was liberating; (c) 
creativity, cooperation and teamwork propelled by the innovation were motivating; (d) co-learning 
through discussion and skills improvement was empowering; and (e) the lectures and handouts were 
inadequate (see categorized feedback in Appendix D). 
Furthermore, additional data reflecting engagement sourced from the class Facebook page yielded a 
moderately high degree of participation. Over the three-month period, the following were observed:  
a) Frequency of usage (on a per-group. per-week basis) consisted of 337 postings (not counting the 
ensuing discussion threads). Thirteen groups posted tasks when they were due, at least twice a 
week. Although participants were given the option to submit hard copies of group assignments 
and tasks, all of them opted to post their tasks and assignments on Facebook, because (as one 
student stated) “it gave us more time.”  
b) Quantity of postings: 479 (counting only initial entries) broken down into evaluation entries, 
peer/self evaluations (309); group reflections (52); issues: linguistic determinism (17); 
mathematics & science instruction medium shift from English to Bahasa Malaysia (13); 
language being a theory of competence or performance (13); and the ability of machines to learn 
language (13). 
c) Group comprehension feedback, a one-page summary of what each group’s participants learned 
during the first half of the course (13).  
d) Sharing information and links of mutual interest, such as project reminders, due dates of group 
tasks, videos, links, and notes on tasks/lessons at hand (13). 
e) Facilitator’s postings, not counting the ensuing exchanges (31).  
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim  Facebook-Photovoice Interface 
 
Language Learning & Technology  23 
f) Extra-class activities, such as invitations to forums and birthday greetings (15). 
The engagement arising from the interaction was observed to have intrinsically motivated students toward 
improving their language production skills. For instance, students with proficiency lower than the 
intermediate level,  learned the correct usage of some expressions and grammar rules from their more 
proficient peers’ postings on the class Facebook page, both in class and via online interactions. A case in 
point is Group XY. 
Group XY was composed of four international students from the same country. All of them beginners in 
their proficiency level    as shown by their group postings below, taken from the class Facebook page 
during the first month of the semester: 
Today group 1 has given us very big surprised. They have enough confident to present. They 
using the color card attracts us let the entire active unusual interest and let students have interest 
to participate the group work. . . we are quite enjoy it. We really like to thanks our classmates. 
An improvement was consequently noted on the post-semester course feedback submitted by each 
member of the group. Below are excerpts from their journals:  
Group Member A: “This is very good communication platform, also very good learning platform; 
there are many study space, and many students put links to the video we study. Here the teacher 
and students are like good friends.” 
Group Member B: “Facebook is very useful and convenient way to improve our learning. Our 
classmates discuss there, and share their knowledge with us. . . Finally, photography group 
project is great way to enhance our learning. We understand how to make students learn second 
language their own way.”  
Group Member C: “Each group has one presentation using a teaching method. This is very 
interesting activity, we have different ideas and all of us enjoy the class. After that we get gifts. 
Not only we become teachers but we also improve our teaching and learning skills.”  
Group Member D: “Language learning and language use teach us many things. For example: how 
to discuss with your group members. In our country we never talk with our classmates in class 
because our lecturer needs us to finish assignment or homework by ourselves. . . The photography 
group project is the most interesting way of learning among all our tasks; it increase our interest 
in the language when we describe our photographs.”  
The reflection excerpts, demonstrate an improvement in the communication skills of Group XY members.  
DISCUSSION 
This action research has explored how the interfacing of two technologies, Facebook and Photovoice, 
while simultaneously employing a pedagogy of empowerment can engage NNPET students in their 
language learning and improvement of their teaching skills. Results suggest that the interface empowered 
the majority of the participants to be proactive in their learning. The participants found Facebook to be (a) 
an innovative, fun, and non-threatening venue for engagement, (b) a convenient and broader learning 
space unbounded by time, and (c) an efficient medium of communication and bonding. These findings are 
consistent with those of earlier studies, which considered Facebook a convenient interface for student 
engagement, facilitating interactive exchanges that bring about conceptual understanding and intellectual 
discourse (Godwin-Jones, 2008; Harwood & Blackstone, 2012; Hurt et al., 2012); thus fostering an 
enhancement in the learning process as a sense of classroom community is fostered (Blattner & Fiori, 
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim  Facebook-Photovoice Interface 
 
Language Learning & Technology  24 
2009; Riley et al., 2012). These findings also bring forward the assertion of Facebook’s potential as a 
valuable resource for academic communications and collaborations (Roblyer et al., 2010).  
We have also posited that Facebook is a collaborative ZPD, acting as scaffolding for learners. By 
engaging with this interface and its applications, participants have acknowledged it as a collaborative 
learning zone. Facebook acted as (a) a collaborative learning zone, “effectively engaged us through 
knowledge sharing, peer reviews, ideas exchange,” said Amira; (b) a scaffolding mechanism, “provided 
access to instant answers from peers and lecturer. When I have problems and questions, I could ask for 
help through our Facebook Page,” quipped Cassandra; and (c) communication access, “made available all 
class information and updates which made learning easier,” remarked Fahmi (all names are pseudonyms). 
Moreover, some participants stated that they tried their best to come up with high quality postings 
because “we knew our peers would be reading them;” while one group’s reflection chronicled a co-
construction of learning: “we wanted to contribute to our peers’ learning as much as they have contributed 
to ours.”   
The generally positive reflections and feedback from participants regarding the Facebook interface were 
supported by their active engagement on the class Facebook page. The quantity of postings totaled 494 
initial entries (e.g., status or wall postings) without counting ensuing exchanges. The dynamic interaction 
on Facebook became a stepping-stone to active engagement, which, in the case of Group XY, led to an 
improvement of language skills.  
This study strengthens Rambe’s (2012) claim that Facebook and its applications are potential scaffolding 
that can lead to learners’ meaningful learning and engagement. It also substantiates the Bryer and Seigler 
(2012) conceptual framework for empowering students using social and Web-based technologies. In sum, 
Facebook scaffolds and empowers. 
The participants, likewise, acknowledged the value of the Photovoice Interface for English language 
learning and teaching. Photovoice ushered in an alternative approach to teaching and learning, which 
triggered the students’ sense of ownership, autonomy, and creativity as they saw themselves in their 
photo-narratives. Using self-generated photographs to tell their stories motivated participants to learn the 
language even more. The international students, for instance, portrayed their moments of anxiety, 
desperation, and challenges in learning and using the English language. 
This result supports previous findings that students become more engaged in “shaping what and how they 
were learning” (Meyer & Kroeger, 2005, p. 192) when their own experiences are integrated into the 
instructional design (Cosgrove, 2004; Graziano, 2011; Whitfield, 2005). Photovoice empowers students 
to transform their world (Cook & Buck, 2010), even as it has transformed teaching practice (Meyer, 
Hamilton, Kroeger, Stewart, & Brydon-Miller, 2004; Meyer & Kroeger, 2005; Whitfield & Meyer, 2005).  
These findings also uphold the scaffolding role of collaboration. Besides technology, collaboration drove 
the interface used in this study. Participants saw the value of group tasks, which was expressed in their 
reflections: “doing tasks collaboratively is a strategy that marked the evolution of our learning process; as 
we discussed, we managed at the end of the task to ‘fix’ our weakness and enhance the quality of our 
work.” Others cited that group tasks (a) fostered exchanges of ideas, knowledge and experiences, and (b) 
encouraged interactions and teamwork (see categorized reflections in Appendix E).  
Collaboration values the contributions of group members toward task completion and builds a sense of 
autonomy, responsibility, and ownership of their output, paving the way to learning (Kessler, 2009; 
Kessler, Bikowski, & Boggs, 2012; Panitz & Panitz, 2004). As group members interact through assigned 
tasks, they scaffold each other’s learning; scaffolding then transcends the group level and moves towards 
whole-class scaffolding (Foley, 1994).   
The mid-semester reflections revealed (a) the 61% (n=36) overall approval rating for Phase 1 of the study, 
and (b) the dissatisfaction of a few participants over some components of the interface, such as task 
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim  Facebook-Photovoice Interface 
 
Language Learning & Technology  25 
overload, peer evaluation, and peer teaching (indicating a preference for more lectures). An unexpected 
issue was raised when international students called for a mixed local-international grouping for English 
language interactions. This could have been possible had the facilitator decided to group participants 
randomly or deliberately but then it would have defeated the participants’ freedom to choose their group. 
This dissatisfaction toward the interface implies that (a) some students need more time to accept this 
innovation and, (b) the interface needs a review. 
These mid-semester reflections guided the re-planning of the next research cycle. After discussion, the 
class agreed to drop peer evaluation for more interactive lectures and discussions while the participants 
were busy with the Photovoice project. These changes effectively lessened the next cycle’s workload.  
Moving on to the final item of the questionnaire, participants expressed that the interface empowered 
them to take an active role in their language learning and improvement of their teaching skills. The 
majority of the participants perceived the interface to be engaging, liberating, motivating, and 
empowering. There were a few students (n=5), however, who preferred more traditional instruction to 
collaborative knowledge construction and meaning making.  
Dukes (2005) and DelliCarpini (2012) view technology as integral to achieving learning goals while 
simultaneously fulfilling best practices and standards in the teaching of English to speakers of other 
languages. Learning trends in the 21st century are empowering students to access borderless learning 
environments through technology. Technology engages, scaffolds, and empowers language learners 
(Baralt, Pennestri, & Selvandin, 2011; Langer de Ramirez, 2010; Peterson & Showalter, 2006; Yang & 
Chen, 2007).  
Limitations  
A limitation of the study was the compulsory participation of students registered in the course. Initially 
three students had initial reservations regarding the instructional design. However, all the students agreed 
to participate after discussions on the merits of the instructional design. Another limitation was the 
Photovoice project time frame. The four-week time frame was too short for the NNPET participants, with 
some groups not finishing their photo-documentary in time for the exhibit. This was a big disappointment 
for the participants who looked forward to sharing their stories during the exhibit. Two more weeks 
would have given the participants adequate time to weave to their satisfaction the stories they wanted to 
share through their photographs. Thirdly, student acceptance of Facebook as an academic tool of 
engagement may not succeed in other classroom contexts, because some students might consider their 
lecturers’ access to their Facebook pages as an invasion of their privacy. Conversely, some lecturers are 
reluctant to share their Facebook pages with students, lest they be restricted too much by self-disclosure 
concerns. Lecturers and students, however, can create a professional Facebook page for this exercise in 
order to avoid this self-disclosure issue. 
Further studies exploring the academic use of Facebook using a larger sample size, or interfacing 
Facebook with other technologies , such as Instagram, iPods  or Photoscape, should be pursued in order to 
corroborate or bring forward results of this action research.  
CONCLUSION AND LESSONS LEARNED 
This study proposes that empowerment is the key to student engagement. By exploring technology and 
collaboration as tools of learner engagement, scaffolding, and empowerment, this interface has paved the 
way for the participants’ proactive engagement in their language learning and improvement of their 
teaching skills. In addition, Brantmeier’s (n.d.) pedagogy of empowerment enabled the participants to 
become strategists, negotiators, teachers, peer reviewers, course design evaluators, and weavers of 
innovative and creative photo-narratives. With a 61% approval rate as shown in Table 2, this approach 
may be considered relatively successful in scaffolding participants’ language learning and in facilitating 
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim  Facebook-Photovoice Interface 
 
Language Learning & Technology  26 
their language teaching skills. For the majority of the participants, the approach was a learning 
experience, especially due to the excitement of playing teacher, photographer, and, as indicated by some, 
journalists.  
For the facilitator, the experience has been a learning adventure into vulnerability, flexibility, and 
diplomacy. Vulnerability existed because students were empowered to assess the facilitator’s approach to 
their learning. When students are critical, the need “of decentering myself and learning to be other to the 
other” (McNiff, 2008, p. 14) helps in inquiring into one’s practice. Vulnerability is intimidating, yet 
valuable in sparking the change that improves practice.   
Flexibility and diplomacy are key players in dealing with the issues and concerns that students raise. 
Flexibility oftentimes connotes yielding to students’ demands, while diplomacy denotes tactfully defining 
conflicting positions, especially when the facilitator seeks to push a course agenda while also relating 
with the students’ challenges. Yet, yielding takes on a collaborative stance, as co-learners acknowledge 
the interdependency of teacher, students, and issues (Greenwood, 1999, p. 10) in achieving learning 
outcomes. Correspondingly, the diplomacy when addressing exigencies demonstrates that “crafting 
solutions to these dynamic and ever changing classroom issues can be an exciting undertaking, especially 
when one acknowledges that newer and better answers are evolving all the time” (Sagor, 2000, p. 23).  
Vulnerability, flexibility, and diplomacy are valuable companions to a pedagogy that empowers and to 
action researchers who incessantly pursue new avenues to deeper understanding of their practice in an 
attempt to transform it for the better. 
 
APPENDIX A.  Microteaching  Evaluation Rubrics   
 
1. How has the microteaching enhanced your knowledge on the topic? 
2. Which part of the microteaching has the strongest impact on you? 
3.  How can the microteaching be improved to further enhance you learning? 
4. In a range of 5-10, where 5 is the lowest and 10 the highest, what mark do you give the 
group? Why? 
 
APPENDIX B. Categorized feedback, Question 1 How has the Facebook interface empowered you to 
be proactive in your language learning and teaching skills development?  
Categories  Participants’ Comments (Representative) 
a) Facebook provided an 
innovative, non-threatening, 
and fun way to engagement  
“Using Facebook was innovative, more informal, and fun; there 
was no pressure as we expressed and exchanged our views; we 
were just friends discussing our learning.” 
b) Facebook served as ideal 
platform for discussion and 
learning engagement  
“As a multiracial class, our opinions on issues differ according to 
our culture; we get new ideas and understand the topics under 
discussion very well through discussion on Facebook.” 
 “Facebook effectively engaged us through knowledge sharing, peer 
reviews, activity updates which were important elements in our 
learning strategy. Reading what others say on assigned topics also 
helped our learning process.”  
c) Facebook was convenient 
and time-saving interface  
“Facebook made our life easier; an interesting tool for us to finish 
more tasks in shorter time; a convenient, practical, and economical 
way to submit our assigned tasks.”  
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim  Facebook-Photovoice Interface 
 
Language Learning & Technology  27 
d) Facebook was an efficient 
medium of communication 
and bonding  
“An efficient communication and bonding media among the 
participants; all information and updates were accessible and this 
made learning easier. When I had problems and questions, I could 
ask for help through this website”  
e) A perfect blend of life 
inside and outside the 
classroom 
“Perfect! 90% of our time is spent on Facebook so we can study 
while updating on our social life outside the classroom and it really 
helps.”  
 “People like me, who have lots of extra curricular activities, could 
get class updates and information anytime, anywhere on 
Facebook.” 
 “Facebook made it easier to share points after class; afforded us 
more learning space.”  
 
APPENDIX C. Categorized feedback, Question 3: How has the Photovoice interface empowered you 
to be proactive in your language learning and teaching skills development?  
Categories  Participants’ Comments (Representative) 
a) Photovoice ushered in 
an alternative 
approach to learning 
for the participants  
“I discovered how pictures speak through the stories woven around 
them; how words come alive with stories behind them” 
 “It taught me the skill to use pictures in language learning and teaching.” 
 “I have never connected language learning and teaching to photography, 
especially to my own photographs as expression of choice of learning 
language my way and sharing it with my group and with the class 
through our photo-narratives. It is empowering.”  
 “While I was shooting, I realized English is everywhere –in posters, 
advertisements, books, food, drinks, streets and so forth; we’re actually 
learning and making use of languages every day, seeing this perspective 
through the lens of a camera is a wonderful experience.” 
 “Language learning through our own pictures encouraged us to speak in 
the target language.”  
b) Photovoice triggered 
creativity  
“This project required us to be creative from choosing our group’s theme 
to presenting the narratives; definitely enjoyable and not stressful.” 
  “The feeling of owning a camera and the freedom of taking pictures to 
tell our stories motivated us to do our best since it was a rare opportunity 
for us to express our creativity innovatively.”  
  “This task gave us a chance to be creative in expressing our ideas in the 
English language and in conveying meaningful messages through 
pictures.”  
c) The Challenge: Time 
constraint  
“Photography enhanced language learning, my only disappointment was 
that we did not have enough time to share it with the whole class.”   
 
 
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim  Facebook-Photovoice Interface 
 
Language Learning & Technology  28 
APPENDIX D. Categorized feedback, Question 4: Write your impression on the approach of this 
class to strategizing your language learning teaching skills.  
Categories  Participants’ Comments (Representative) 
a) Responsibility for learning 
strategy was engaging  
“I felt that the initiative for learning shifted to the students as we learn 
from our experiences–microteaching, completing tasks, listening and 
evaluating other groups’ presentations; a good strategy to overcome 
students’ passivity in the classroom.”  
  “I like this teaching strategy: students learned by themselves, shared 
what they have learned with their peers, and enhanced their 
knowledge through interactive lectures where misconceptions and 
misunderstandings on target concepts were straightened out. I liked 
this approach better than being spoon-fed.”  
b) Freedom to choose 
strategies for tasks 
completion was liberating 
“The facilitator provided students with opportunities to express their 
views in class and online and to generate ideas on how to accomplish 
their tasks their way.”   
 Innovation encouraged 
creativity, cooperation and 
teamwork  
“Using technology, the Internet, Facebook, videos, camera, 
multimedia presentations made this class interesting; student 
experienced something new that triggered our creativity, spirit of 
cooperation, sharing, and teamwork.”  
 Co-learning through 
discussion and skills 
improvement was 
empowering  
“This class taught us how to communicate and exchange ideas with 
our peers and we improved; each time we presented in class 
empowered us and built up our confidence.”  
  “The technique involved student’s participation, tasks that honed our 
teaching skills and class discussions which made students understand 
the subject well.” 
e) More lectures  “All activities have been a big help to me; but lectures helped me the 
most. Lecturer should play more active role in imparting the 
knowledge, like really drill us on the knowledge. It would have been 
even better if students were given notes or handouts for reference.”   
 
APPENDIX E. Categorized reflections, Collaboration: Doing group tasks is a good strategy in 
language learning and teaching.  
Categories  Participants’ Comments (Representative) 
a) Group work 
fostered exchanges 
of ideas, 
knowledge and 
experiences which 
are vital to learning  
“Group discussions: Different inputs were analyzed, argued, & understood 
resulting in brilliant output enriching our learning, deepening our knowledge 
of the topic, and improving our skills together.”  
 “This strategy marked our learning process evolution; as we discussed, we 
managed at the end of the task to ‘fix’ our weakness, enhancing the quality 
of our work.” 
 
b) Group tasks 
promoted 
interaction  
“I prefer group work because individual work does not require interactions 
among peers; student working in groups can work and better communicate 
and study with each other.”  
 
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim  Facebook-Photovoice Interface 
 
Language Learning & Technology  29 
 “Students from different culture, speaking different languages, interacting in 
the English language learn a lot from each other in improving speaking 
skills.” 
 
c) Collaboration 
encouraged 
teamwork and 
confidence building  
“Developed teamwork as each member listened to each other’s ideas and 
upon reaching an agreement, cooperated toward achieving the group’s goal.”  
 “Effective because even though most of our tasks were group work, 
everyone did their equal share of work.” 
 “Collaboration provided chances for leadership training and responsibility.” 
 “Some students were shy in class but working with their groups encouraged 
and empowered them; they did very well in the group.”  
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to thank the students of Language Learning and Language Use whose 
cooperation made this research possible. This research was supported by the University of Malaya 
Flagship Research Grant FL006-2012. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico is affiliated with the School of Education, UCSI University, Kuala Lumpur. A 
linguist by profession, she teaches linguistics for language teachers and research modules for TESOL. She 
has been conducting classroom action research since 2009.  
E-mail: drrubrico@gmail.com 
Fatimah Hashim specialises in Second Language Education and Curriculum Development. She teaches 
TESL and action research courses at the Faculty of Education, University of Malaya and does 
consultation in curriculum development and holistic education.  
E-mail: fatim3377@yahoo.com 
 
REFERENCES 
Atweh, B., Kemmis, S., & Weeks, P. (1998). Action research in practice: Partnership for social justice. 
London, UK: Routledge. 
Baker, T., & Wang, C. (2006). Photovoice: Use of a participatory action research method to explore the 
chronic pain experience in older adults. Qualitative Health Research, 16(10), 1405–1413.  
Baralt, M., Pennestri, S., & Selvandin, M. (2011). Using wordles to teach foreign language writing. 
Language Learning & Technology, 15(2), 12–22. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/actionresearch.pdf 
Bell, S. E. (2008). Photovoice as a strategy for community organizing in the central Appalachian 
coalfields. Journal of Appalachian Studies, 14(1, 2), 34–48.  
Bernat, E. (2008). Towards a pedagogy of empowerment: The case of ‘imposter syndrome’ among pre-
service non-native speaker teachers in TESOL. English Language Teacher Education and Development, 
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim  Facebook-Photovoice Interface 
 
Language Learning & Technology  30 
11, 1–8. Retrieved from http://www.elted.net/issues/volume-11/1%20Bernat.pdf 
Blattner, G., & Fiori, M. (2009). Facebook in the language classroom: Promises and possibilities. 
International Journal of Instructional Technology & Distance Learning, 6(1), 17–28. Retrieved from 
http://www.itdl.org/journal/jan_09/Jan_09.pdf 
Blattner, G., & Lomicka, L. (2012). Facebook-ing and the social generation: A new era of language 
learning. Social media and language learning: (r)evolution?, 15(1). Retrieved from 
http://alsic.revues.org/2413 
Brantmeier, E.J. (n.d.). Empowerment pedagogy: Co-learning and teaching. Retrieved from 
http://www.indiana.edu/~leeehman/Brantmeier.pdf 
Brown, H. D. (2007). Principles of language learning and teaching (5th ed). New York, NY: Pearson 
Education. 
Bryer, T. A., & Seigler, D. (2012). Theoretical and instrumental rationales of student empowerment 
through social and Web-based technologies. Journal of Public Affairs Education,18(3), 429–448. Retrieved 
from http://www.naspaa.org/jpaemessenger/Article/VOL18-3/03_BryerSeigler.pdf 
Catalani, C., & Minkler, M. (2010). Photovoice: A review of the literature in health and public health. 
Health Education and Behavior, 37(3), 424–451.  
Chio, V. C. M, & Fandt, P. M. (2007). Photovoice in the diversity classroom: Engagement, voice, and the 
“Eye/I” of the camera. Journal of Management Education, 31(4), 484–504. 
Cook, K., & Buck, G. (2010). Photovoice: A community-based socioscientific pedagogical tool. Science 
Scope, 33(7), 35–39. 
Cosgrove, D. M. (2004). Language and cultural learning through student generated photography 
(Master’s thesis). AYMAT Individual Thesis/SMAT IPP Collection. Paper 155. Retrieved from 
http://www.kansai-u.ac.jp/fl/publication/pdf_forum/10/1_david.pdf 
Davies, J. (2012). Facework on Facebook as a new literacy practice, Computers & Education, 59(1) 19–
29. 
de Villiers, M. R. (2010). Academic use of a group on Facebook: Initial findings and perceptions. 
Proceedings of Informing Science & IT Education Conference (InSITE). Cassino, Italy. Retrieved from 
http://proceedings.informingscience.org/InSITE2010/InSITE10p173-190Villiers742.pdf 
DelliCarpini, M. (2012). Building computer technology skills in TESOL teacher education. Language 
Learning & Technology, 16(2), 14–23. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2012/action.pdf 
Dukes, C. (2005). Best practices for integrating technology into English language instruction. English 
Language Learners and Technology, SEIR-TEC News Wire, 7(1), 3–6. Retrieved from 
https://schoolweb.dysart.org/EdTech/uploads/initiatives/ELD/Vol7_1.pdf 
Edwards, M., Perry, B., Janzen, K., & Menzies, C. (2012). Using the artistic pedagogical technology of 
photovoice to promote interaction in the online post-secondary classroom: The students’ perspective. The 
Electronic Journal of e-Learning, 10(1), 32–43. Retrieved from http://www.ejel.org 
Foley, J. (1994). Scaffolding. Key concepts in ELT, 48(1), 101–102. Retrieved from 
http://eltj.oxfordjournals.org/content/48/1/101.full.pdf 
Gan, Z. (2013). Learning to teach English language in the practicum: What challenges do non-native ESL 
student teachers face? Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 38(3), 92–108. .  
Gay, L. R., Mills, G. E., & Airasian, P. W. (2009). Educational research: Competencies for analysis and 
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim  Facebook-Photovoice Interface 
 
Language Learning & Technology  31 
applications. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.  
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative 
research. Chicago, IL: Aldine.  
Godwin-Jones, R. (2008). Mobile computing technologies: Lighter, faster, smarter. Language Learning & 
Technology, 12(3), 3−9. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/emerging.pdf 
Graziano, K. J. (2011). Working with English language learners: Preservice teachers and photovoice. 
International Journal of Multicultural Education, 13(1), 1–19. 
Greenwood, D. (Ed.). (1999). Action Research. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins. 
Grossecka, G., Branb, R., & Tiruc, L. (2011). Dear teacher, what should I write on my wall? A case study 
on academic uses of Facebook. Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences 15, 1425–1430. 
Harvey, L. (2013). Empowerment. Analytic quality glossary. Quality Research Iinternational. Retrieved 
from http://www.qualityresearchinternational.com/glossary/empowerment.htm 
Harwood, C., & Blackstone, B. (2012). Using Facebook to extend learning into students’ digital lives. 
ELTWorldOnline.com, 4. Retrieved from http://blog.nus.edu.sg/eltwo/2012/03/03/using-facebook-
toextend-learning-intostudents%E2%80%99-digital-lives/ 
Hatane, M. Y. & Wijaya, H. P. S. (2010). The impacts and efficacy of social networks as part of e-
learning in English Department, Petra Christian University [Special issue]. International Journal of the 
Computer, the Internet and Management, 18(SP1), 64.1–64.5. 
Hayati, N. (2010). Empowering non-native English speaking teachers through critical pedagogy. TEFLIN 
Journal, 21(1), 78–89. 
Hergenrather, K. D., Rhodes, S. G., & Bardhoshi, G. (2010) Photovoice as community-based 
participatory research: A qualitative review. American Journal of Health Behavior, 33(6), 686–698. 
Hurt, N. E., Moss, G. S., Bradley, C. L., Larson, L. R., Lovelace, M. D., Prevost, L. B., & Camus, M. S. 
(2012). The ‘Facebook’ effect: College students’ perceptions of online discussions in the age of social 
networking. International Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 6(2) Article 10. 
Retrieved from http://digitalcommons.georgiasouthern.edu/ij-sotl/vol6/iss2/10 
Jones, C. A., & Duckett, I. (2007). Personalised learning and learner empowerment. Retrieved from 
http://www.drcheryljones.com/publications/Personalised Learning - Learner Empowerment.pdf 
Kabilan, M. K., Ahmad, N. & Abidin, M. J. Z. (2010).  Facebook: An online environment for learning of 
English in institutions of higher education? Internet and Higher Education, 13, 179–187. 
Kessler, G. (2009). Student initiated attention to form in autonomous wiki based collaborative writing. 
Language Learning & Technology, 13(1), 79–95. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/kessler.pdf 
Kessler, G., Bikowski, D., & Boggs, J. (2012). Collaborative writing among second language learners in 
academic Web-based projects. Language Learning & Technology, 16(1), 91–109. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/kesslerbikowskiboggs.pdf 
Langer de Ramírez, L. (2010). Empower English language learners with tools from the Web. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.  
Madge, C., Meek, J., Wellens, J., & Hooley, T. (2009): Facebook, social integration and informal learning 
at university: “It is more for socialising and talking to friends about work than for actually doing work”. 
Learning, Media and Technology, 34(2), 141–155. 
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim  Facebook-Photovoice Interface 
 
Language Learning & Technology  32 
McNiff, J. (2008). The significance of 'I' in educational research and the responsibility of intellectuals. 
South African Journal of Education (EASA), 28(3), 351–364. 
McNiff, J. (2012). Travels around identity: Transforming cultures of learned colonisation. Educational 
Action Research, 20(1), 129–146.  
McTaggart. R. (Ed). (1997). Participatory action research: International contexts and consequences. New 
York, NY: SUNY Press. 
Meyer, H., Hamilton, B., Kroeger, S., Stewart, S., & Brydon-Miller, M. (2004). The unexpected journey: 
Renewing our commitment to students through educational action research. Educational Action Research, 
12(4), 557–574. 
Meyer, H., & Kroeger, S. (2005). Photovoice as an educational action research tool. Qualitative Research 
Journal, 5(2), 185–194.  
Mousavi, E. S. (2007). Exploring ‘teacher stress’ in non-native and native teachers of EFL. ELTED, 10, 
33–41. Retrieved from http://www.elted.net/issues/volume-10/Mousavi.pdf 
Muñoz, C. L., & Towner, T. L. (2009, December). Opening Facebook: How to use Facebook in the 
college classroom.  Paper presented at the 2009 Society for Information Technology and Teacher 
Education Conference, Charleston, South Carolina. Retrieved from 
http://www46.homepage.villanova.edu/john.immerwahr/TP101/Facebook.pdf 
Nelson, E., & Christensen, K. (2009). Photovoice in the middle: How our students experience learning at 
school and beyond. New Zealand Journal of Teachers’ Work, 6(1), 35–46.  
Nimmon, L, & Begoray, D. (2008). Creating participatory photonovels: A classroom guide. Adult Basic 
Education and Literacy Journal, 2(3), 174–178. 
Panitz, T., & Panitz, P. (2004). Encouraging the use of collaborative learning in higher education. 
Retrieved from http://home.capecod.net/~tpanitz/tedsarticles/encouragingcl.htm 
Pellizzari, P. (2012, February 1). Facebook as an academic learning platform: A case study in 
Mathematics. University Ca Foscari of Venice, Department of Economics. Research Paper Series No. 
01/WP/2012. Retrieved from http://ssrn.com/abstract=2016139 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2016139 
Perry, B., & Edwards, M. (2012).  Creating an “Invitational Classroom” in the online educational milieu. 
American Journal of Health Sciences, 3(1), 7–16. 
Peterson, P., & Showalter, S. (2006). Empowering English language learners through technology and 
constructivist methods. In C. Crawford et al. (Eds.), Proceedings of Society for Information Technology 
& Teacher Education International Conference 2006 (pp. 3920–3933). Chesapeake, VA: AACE. 
Retrieved from http://www.editlib.org/p/22715. 
Petrović, N., Petrović, D., Jeremić, V., Milenković, N., & Ćirović, M. (2012). Possible educational use of 
Facebook in higher environmental education. ICICTE 2012 Proceedings, 355–362.  
Phillips, F. L., Baird, D., & Fogg, B. B. (2011). Facebook for educators. Retrieved from 
http://facebookforeducators.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/Facebook-for Educators.May-15.pdf 
Rambe, P. (2012). Activity theory and technology mediated interaction: Cognitive scaffolding using 
question-based consultation on Facebook. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 28(8), 1333–
1361. 
Rice, D. (2010). Facebook in the classroom: Social media enters classroom as a resource for 
communication. Retrieved from http://bgnews.com/campus/facebook-in-the-classroom/ 
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim  Facebook-Photovoice Interface 
 
Language Learning & Technology  33 
Riel, M. (2010). Understanding action research. Center For Collaborative Action Research. Pepperdine 
University. Retrieved from http://cadres.pepperdine.edu/ccar/define.html 
Riley, N., Domizi, D., & Camus, M. S. (2012). The ‘Facebook’ effect: College students’ perceptions of 
online discussions in the age of social networking. International Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching 
and Learning, 6(2) Article 10. Retrieved from http://academics.georgiasouthern.edu/ijsotl/v6n2.html 
Roblyer, M. D., McDaniel, M., Webb, M., Herman, J., & Witty, J. V.  (2010). Findings on Facebook in 
higher education: A comparison of college faculty and student uses and perceptions of social networking 
sites. Internet and Higher Education, 13, 134–140. 
Rubrico, J. G. U. (2011). Learning in a multiple-modality classroom. Journal of Interdisciplinary 
Research in Education, 1(1), 5–19. 
Rubrico, J. G. U. (2012). Computer-aided learning and task-based learning: Engaging learners in 
contextualizing grammar. In Blessinger, P., & Wankel, L. (Eds.). Increasing student engagement and 
retention using social technologies (Cutting-edge technologies in higher education, Volume 6). Emerald 
Group Publishing Limited, 179–209.  
Sagor, R. (2000). Guiding school improvement with action research. Alexandria, VA: Association for 
Supervision & Curriculum Development.   
Schell, K., Ferguson, A., Hamoline, R., Shea, J., & Thomas-Maclean, R. (2009). Photovoice as a teaching 
tool: Learning by doing with visual methods. International Journal of Teaching and Learning in Higher 
Education, 21(3), 340–352. 
Schwartz, H. (2009). Facebook: The new classroom commons? The Chronicle of Higher Education, 
56(6), B12–B13. Retrieved from http://chronicle.com/article/Facebook-The-New-Classroom/48575 
Shrader, S. R. (2003). Learner empowerment: A perspective. The Internet TESL Journal, 9(11). Retrieved 
from http://iteslj.org/Articles/Shrader-Empowerment.html 
Siew-Lian Wong, M. (2012, July). Language anxiety coping strategies of pre–service teachers. Paper 
presented at the 7th Malaysia International Conference on Languages, Literatures, and Cultures, 
Malaysia. Retrieved from www.fbmk.upm.edu.my/micollac/proceedings 
Snow, M. M. (2007). Improving morale through photovoice technology. Nursing Management, 33(10), 
50–52.  
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and 
techniques. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
Susilo, A. (2008). Use of Facebook for academic network learning in Universitas Terbuka-Indonesia. 
Asian Association of Open Universities Journal, 3(2), 99–114. 
The Innovation Center (n.d.). Activity : Photovoices. Keeping healthy strategies for reflection and 
learning, 164 -170. Retrieved from http://www.theinnovationcenter.org/files/doc/D5/CLW pp 164 
Photovoices.pdf 
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in Society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.  
Wang, C. C. (1999). Photovoice: A participatory action research strategy applied to women’s health. 
Journal of Women’s Health, 8(2), 185–192. 
Wang, C. C., & Burris, M. A. (1994). Empowerment through photo novella: Portraits of participation. 
Health Education Quarterly, 21(2), 171–186. 
Jessie Grace U. Rubrico & Fatimah Hashim  Facebook-Photovoice Interface 
 
Language Learning & Technology  34 
Wang, C. C., & Burris, M. A. (1997). Photovoice: Concept, methodology, and use for participatory needs 
assessment. Health Education & Behavior, 24(3), 369–387. 
Wang, C. C., Burris, M. A., & Xiang, Y. P. (1996). Chinese village women as visual anthropologists: A 
participatory approach to reaching policymakers. Social Science and Medicine, 42(10), 1391–1400. 
Wang, C. C., Cash, J. L., & Powers, L. S. (2000). Who knows the streets as well as the homeless? 
Promoting personal and community action through photovoice. Health Promotion Practice, 1, 81–89. 
Whitfield, D. (2005, April). Using students’ ideas to guide new teaching practices. Paper presented at the 
Annual Conference of the American Educational Research Association, Montreal, Canada. 
Whitfield, D. & Meyer, H. (2005). Learning from our students: Photovoice and classroom action 
research. Science Education Review, 4(4), 97–103. 
Yang, S. C., & Chen, Y. J. (2007). Technology-enhanced language learning: A case study. Computers in 
Human Behavior, 23, 860–879. Retrieved from 
http://www.u.arizona.edu/~piskula/TechEnhanceLangLearning.pdf 
Yoon, T. (2012). Teaching English though English: Exploring anxiety in non-native pre-service 
ESLTeachers.  Theory and Practice in Language Studies, 2(6), 1099–1107. 
