Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/action1.pdf 
June 2014, Volume 18, Number 2 
pp. 20–35 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 20 
DEVELOPING AUTONOMOUS LEARNING FOR ORAL PROFICIENCY 
USING DIGITAL STORYTELLING 
SoHee Kim, Korea University 
Since online educational technology can support a ubiquitous language learning 
environment, there are many ways to develop English learners’ autonomy through self-
access learning. This study investigates whether English as a second language (ESL) 
learners can improve their oral proficiency through independent study by using online 
self-study resources, online recording program and speech-text-program (STP), and 
feedback in an autonomous learning environment. This experimental study is designed to 
provide opportunities for recording stories on weekly topics outside the classroom for five 
ESL learners who were in the advanced and high intermediated level at City College of 
San Francisco. In order to assess participants’ autonomy for oral proficiency improvement, 
this research employed both qualitative and quantitative approaches. Four assessments 
were used to check participants’ developing speaking improvement in storytelling about 
silent movie clips onto VoiceThread and three questionnaires to assess their attitudes 
toward this autonomous learning. Results revealed that using self-study resources enables 
learners to develop speaking skills and build considerable self-confidence. Participants 
also indicated that learning through storytelling can be learner-centered to increase 
autonomy in oral proficiency. Furthermore, this research shows that the instructor’s 
feedback and role are also important during the development of learners’ learning 
autonomy based on their engagement.  
Keywords: Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Learner Autonomy, Language 
Teaching Methodology, Multimedia 
APA Citation: Kim, S. H. (2014). Developing autonomous learning for oral proficiency 
using digital storytelling. Language Learning & Technology 18(2), 20–35. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/action1.pdf 
Received: October 5, 2013; Accepted: February 18, 2014; Published: June 1, 2014 
Copyright: © SoHee Kim 
INTRODUCTION 
Online educational technology, which introduces unprecedented options for English teaching and 
learning, provides opportunities for self-access learning as an adjunct to conventional classes by enabling 
learners to use resources for learning on their own. Providing opportunities for self-study helps to increase 
ownership of responsibility for learning English by encouraging learners to organize self-access learning 
resources and search for appropriate materials to develop their own progress. Self-access or learner-
centered learning refers to the change in focus in the classroom from the teacher to the learners. This shift 
makes it so students ultimately direct their learning through self-access facilities for autonomous learning 
(Sheerin, 1989). This is based on a constructivist theory of learning whereby learners construct their own 
understanding using their previous knowledge and current learning experiences (Kember, 1997). There 
are many ways to facilitate self-access language learning using technology (Castellano, Mynard, & 
Rubesch, 2011). In particular, having easy access to recording tools can support the unlimited 
communicative practice that assists language learners in building knowledge for communicative 
competence. These tools are also able to support an alternative assessment method so as to provide an 
autonomous learning environment in which learners can practice speaking and check performance data to 
monitor their learning progress. Thus, using online communication technology allows for a higher degree 
SoHee Kim Developing Autonomous Learning Using Digital Storytelling 
 
Language Learning & Technology 21 
of learner independence in the teaching and learning of a second language (Stacke, 2007) since learners 
can maximize opportunities to practice. Moreover, second language learners need opportunities to 
produce target language output, notice errors in their own output, and correct their linguistic output 
(Chapelle, 1998). Through self-evaluation, English learners can reflect on and critically evaluate their 
own learning processes and performance; it encourages autonomy, increases motivation, promotes 
positive attitudes toward learning, and implies a new perspective regarding teachers’ and learners’ roles 
(Gonzalez & Louis, 2007, Hansen, 1998; O’Malley & Valdez Piere, 1996; Sinclair, 2000). Considering 
that the instructor can assess the learners’ oral performance and their completion of tasks within a specific 
time period by analyzing collected data (Gonzalez & Louis, 2007; Jones, 2007), the instructor’s feedback 
facilitates learners’ progress towards attaining their own goals. 
This research explores how ESL learners’ oral proficiency changed through online recording tools and 
receiving periodic feedback from their instructor outside the classroom over a 14-week period. There are 
five ESL participants engaged in once-a-week recording, practicing, and listening to their recordings of 
individualized storytelling. They used an online recording program, Vocaroo, and a Text-to-Speech (TTS) 
program, vozMe, for the recordings; in order to receive feedback, they emailed the recordings to their 
instructor each week during the entire research period. To examine participants’ attitudes toward self-
centered learning using self-study resources for their oral proficiency development, three questionnaires 
were conducted via online programs. Participants were prompted to recount stories after viewing four 
Charlie Chaplin silent movie clips, uploaded onto VoiceThread, an interactive and multimedia online 
slide show program used to conduct assessments of their improvement in oral proficiency.  
This research aims to identify how their own independent learning, assessments, and feedback can help 
foster learners’ autonomy. It also attempts to address how ESL learners can develop their self-assessment 
skills and how the teacher’s role can shift to facilitator or guide when self-study resources are used in 
autonomous learning. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Developing Autonomy Through Self-Assessment Using Self-Study Resources 
Significant development of software and hardware has greatly expanded the range of speech technologies 
available to students to improve their speaking abilities (Godwin-Jones, 2009). The technology can serve 
as a reporting medium for self-assessment through regular entries in self-evaluation of oral performance 
via recording tools (Healey, 2007). Learners’ self-evaluation of their own linguistic competence can 
increase active involvement in learning and become self-critical because self-monitoring strategies allow 
learners to identify their own difficulties (Dam, 2000; Wenden, 1999). Thus, recording programs may 
build learners’ linguistic competence through their self-assessment. Through self-monitoring the use of 
voice e-mail can enhance learners’ pronunciation, grammar, and verbal expression for oral proficiency 
development as well as foster significant improvement in speaking relative to articulation and accuracy 
(Volle, 2005). VoiceThread can promote collaborative development of knowledge by giving learners the 
opportunity to share their voices (Brunvand & Byrd, 2011) with their peers and the instructor, making it 
so learners are able to monitor and assess not only their own learning progress but also their peers’ 
performance. Video recording tools can also provide a valuable source of information for learners to 
notice and analyze characteristics of their own speech (Lynch, 2007) to reflect on their learning progress 
because the learners can evaluate the full spectrum of their communicative performance (Oscarson, 1989). 
Autonomy depends on learners’ ability to self-direct for practice, critical reflection, and independent 
action (Andrade, 2012; Little, 1991). From this perspective, awareness through self-assessment of 
learners’ speaking performance and understanding their learning progress with self-study resources can 
develop metacognitive skills to achieve their own learning goals, and ultimately this recursive process can 
enhance learners’ autonomy. However, learners may need guidelines to find appropriate resources to 
SoHee Kim Developing Autonomous Learning Using Digital Storytelling 
 
Language Learning & Technology 22 
achieve their learning goals (Murray, 2005). In this research, participants used self-study resources 
provided by the instructor, Vocaroo and vozMe, and then tried to pursue their own goals. 
In light of the role of self-assessment, using recording programs can be positively affecting specific 
learning objectives for oral performance. However, researchers still need to define the optimal use of 
autonomous learning for language learners’ speaking skills when using self-study resources. 
Digital Storytelling for Oral Proficiency Development and Assessment 
Learners’ autonomy can be measured by their metacognitive awareness, ability to use resources 
appropriately, and assessing self-reflection of their development (Sinclair, 1999; Reinders & Lázaro, 
2007). In order to measure participants’ autonomy for oral proficiency development, this research used 
digital storytelling with four silent movie clips uploaded onto VoiceThread to assess their independent 
study ability with self-assessment. 
Digital storytelling has been widely used to help learners communicate their own stories effectively since 
it can be a learner-centered activity when the topic is related to their daily life and personal subject matter. 
It can also have an impact on improving learners’ speaking in the narration process (Nelson, 2006), 
linguistic structure, vocabulary, sound patterns, and prosody of the foreign language (Verdugo & 
Belmonte, 2007). Learners can thus develop linguistic competence while describing context-rich visual 
situations after repeating self-directed learning. In addition, using a silent movie clip helps to build the 
metacognitive knowledge involved in communication. Kasper and Singer (2001) claimed that since silent 
films do not offer preauthorized dialogue, learners are not only allowed, but also authorized to create their 
own conversational texts, using English creatively to develop their own performance. Therefore, 
storytelling with a silent movie clip can be a good communicative competence task to measure English 
learners’ oral proficiency in terms of functional and pragmatic knowledge from recorded files while the 
participants describe captured events and surrounding context (Kim & Choi, 2013; Kim, 2014).  
Along with the many studies that have examined the usefulness of digital storytelling in oral production, 
this research focuses on investigating how a learner can step forward in developing a new technique for 
assessing autonomy in oral proficiency using storytelling. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
Based on a literature review and the underlying assumption that using self-study resources can greatly 
benefit the development of English learners’ oral proficiency, the hypothesis of this study is that 
participants’ oral proficiency can improve when using self-study resources and storytelling in an 
autonomous learning environment. This research was guided by the following questions:  
1) Does independent learning using Vocaroo, vozMe, and VoiceThread help to improve ESL 
learners’ oral proficiency? 
2) Does using digital storytelling encourage ESL learners’ motivation and self-assessment of their 
speaking? 
METHODOLOGY 
Participants  
The five participants (Table 1) attended a video ESL class at City College of San Francisco (CCSF). Four 
of them were immigrants who had moved to the US within the previous three to 12 months, and one was 
an international student who had been in the United States for a year and a half. 
Although they were high-level students and had studied English for at least five years in their native 
countries, they felt that they needed more speaking practice to improve their oral proficiency. All 
SoHee Kim Developing Autonomous Learning Using Digital Storytelling 
 
Language Learning & Technology 23 
participants had a computer with a microphone to record their stories at home as well as a positive attitude 
toward learning English using self-study resources. Four participants used a computer every day, and one 
student used a computer two or three times a week. 
Table 1. Participants Profiles. 
Participants Nationality Age Months living 
in US 
Years studying 
English 
ESL 
Level* 
Tran Vietnamese 20 6  5 8 
Li Chinese 32 36  12 8 
Luc Vietnamese 22 8  9 8 
Yu Chinese 26 18  7 7 
Hwang Taiwanese  27 12 10 8 
*Note. ESL level 8 (advanced level) and ESL level 7 (high-intermediate level) at CCSF 
Procedures 
This study used a learner-centered task—storytelling—to elicit participants’ oral production and increase 
their engagement with self-motivation to speak personally when given a specific topic through self-
assessment opportunities. Nine different weekly topics were assigned pertaining to daily personal life or 
preferences as a guideline to encourage practice and recording using the Vocaroo and vozMe programs. 
Since this research was designed for ESL learners to engage in activities outside the classroom, the 
participants recorded, practiced, or listened to their performance on their own time, accessing Vocaroo, 
vozMe, and their VoiceThread accounts (Figure 1). In order to determine how much time they spent on 
these tasks as an indicator of progress, all participants listed the time for their recording, practice, and 
listening when using two self-study resources, Vocaroo (http://www.vocaroo.com) and vozMe 
(http://vozMe.com/), on a Google Spreadsheet each week (Appendix A). Their documented record of time 
spent on independent study shows how much effort through time the participants spent on their own 
learning autonomously. 
 The participants voluntarily emailed their recorded links once or twice a week using Vocaroo to the 
instructor to receive feedback. Through these exchanges, the instructor was able to assess participants’ 
learning progress, and participants were able to keep track of their learning history during the research 
period. The instructor did not require that they submit their individual work, but instead encouraged them 
to engage in self-study and mediated the process of using self-study resources via email exchanged.  
  
Figure 1. Online self-study resources, Vocaroo, vozMe, and VoiceThread with a silent movie clip. 
In order to assess participants’ oral proficiency improvement, this research used storytelling task about 
SoHee Kim Developing Autonomous Learning Using Digital Storytelling 
 
Language Learning & Technology 24 
silent movie clips in weeks 1, 5, 10 and 14. The instructor uploaded the four movie clips onto her 
VoiceThread account (http://www.voicethread.com) and then invited all participants to watch them three 
days before they were asked to create stories.  
All content in the four silent movie clips (Appendix B) from Charlie Chaplin’s movies (“Coffee 
Drinking,” “Hotel Evergreen,” “The Kid,” and “City Lights”) was culturally non-controversial. Receiving 
these movie clips via emails, the participants accessed their VoiceThread accounts and then recorded their 
own stories about each movie clip. Each participant’s recording was shared with all participants as well as 
the instructor; this meant that whenever participants recorded their stories onto VoiceThread, everyone 
received e-mails of those recordings. During this process, participants were able to monitor not only their 
own but also their peers’ performance. Before recording their stories, the participants practiced speaking 
using Vocaroo and vozMe, but they did not receive feedback for this assessment.  
Although the focus of this study was to examine ESL learners’ autonomous learning, it is important to 
note that they were guided by their instructor on how to monitor their own speech and how to tell stories 
effectively at the weekly meeting during the research period. The written feedback was given holistically, 
but the students also received feedback in each of four categories: discourse, pronunciation, vocabulary, 
and sentence complexity. The instructor also provided learning materials such as sentence combining 
worksheets and vocabulary learning Web sites in order to prompt them to find appropriate answers when 
needed. 
The participants’ attitudes toward oral proficiency development for this learning method were also 
investigated using three questionnaires (Appendix C) conducted during weeks 1, 8, and 14. The 
participants were asked to speak when responding to the first and the second questionnaires, which were 
uploaded onto the instructor’s VoiceThread account. The first questionnaire documented the participants’ 
language profile, computer skills, feelings about using a computer to study English speaking, and self-
confidence in their speaking. In the second questionnaire, participants expressed which speaking skills 
they wanted to improve as well as how their speaking confidence had changed using the self-study 
resources–VoiceThread, Vocaroo, and vozMe. The final online survey asked participants to respond to 
questions about motivation and self-assessment when using storytelling with silent movie clips, whether 
or not the instructor’s role and feedback were helpful in their learning progress, if they thought using 
Vocaroo and vozMe could produce positive effects when they were assessed on VoiceThread, and finally 
which aspects of speaking they thought improved during this project. 
Data Analysis  
The recorded stories were assessed holistically and analytically. The holistic rubric (Appendix D) was 
adapted from Brown’s (2001) oral proficiency scoring categories, divided into five stages: (1) beginning 
speaking, (2) developing speaking, (3) competence speaking, (4) accomplished speaking, and (5) 
advanced speaking. To analyze their improvement in each element of speaking skills, the recorded files 
were also analyzed in five categories (Appendix E) adapted from a scoring key created by Choi (2005), 
based on the communicative language ability (CLA) model offered in Bachman and Palmer (1996). The 
five categories are: pronunciation, discourse, vocabulary, grammar, and sentence complexity. Each 
category has scores from 1 to 5.  
Two trained raters assessed the recorded data (Appendix F) using the rubrics. The inter-rater reliability of 
two raters was Cohen’s Kappa .88 and the reliability among the four assessments presents a high level of 
consistency, Cronbach’s Alpha 0.83. 
RESULTS 
Oral Proficiency Improvement Using Self-Study Resources 
Data analysis of the four assessments revealed significant improvement in all participants’ overall 
SoHee Kim Developing Autonomous Learning Using Digital Storytelling 
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
proficiency in terms of vocabulary, sentence complexity, and pronunciation, but there was no significant 
improvement in discourse and grammar (Table 2).  
Table 2. Oral Proficiency Improvement for All Participants. 
  95% Confidence Interval    
 SD Lower Upper  t Significant 
Overall speaking .447 .200 -.645 -6.000 .004 
Pronunciation  .707 -1.878 -.122 -3.162 .034 
Discourse .837 -1.839 .239 -2.138 .099 
Vocabulary  .447 -1.755 -.645 -6.000 .004 
Sentence complexity  .548 -2.080 -.720 -5.715 .005 
Note. Grammar cannot be computed because SE is 0, Significant at the 0.05 level 
Underlying these results was recording stories using online recording and a TTS program can improve 
ESL learners’ oral proficiency. In addition, storytelling seems to support the use of rich vocabulary words 
to describe the given topics or contextualized situations appropriately and develops sentence complexity 
through their own speech monitoring and feedback. However, most participants had organized story lines 
to offer enough information about what they have seen from the movie clips for each assessment since 
they had practiced how to create organized stories on each weekly recording. Considering that no 
feedback on grammar was given on the holistic rubric, participants’ grammar scores may have been 
affected by feedback. This finding suggests that instructor feedback is important in improving their 
speaking skills, even in autonomous learning. In addition, participants’ overall oral proficiency was 
gradually enhanced during the four assessments: their speaking significantly improved when comparing 
the first and fourth assessment over 13 weeks (Table 3). This result may also confirm that using self-study 
resources can develop ESL learners’ speaking. 
Table 3. Paired t-Test for Oral Proficiency Improvement on each Assessment. 
   95% Confidence  Interval    
Test # / Pair differences Mean SD Lower Upper t Significant 
1. 1st vs. 2nd 2.80 .548 -1.080 .280 -1.633 .178 
2. 2nd vs. 3rd 3.20 .447 -.755 .355 -1.000 .374 
3. 3rd vs. 4th 3.40 .548 -1.280 .080 -2.499 .070 
4. 1st vs. 4th 4.00 .447 -1.755 -.645 -6.000 .004 
Note. Grammar cannot be computed because SE is 0, Significant at the 0.05 level 
Participants also had positive attitudes toward using Vocaroo and VozMe to make progress in their 
speaking. Tran, who had practiced and recorded using these programs, had the most improvement in 
speaking during the 14 weeks. In his first assessment he lacked confidence and repeated the same 
vocabulary, used simple sentences without many embedded clauses, and mispronounced words making 
his speaking unclear. However, his speaking improved significantly in sentence complexity, vocabulary, 
grammar, discourse, and pronunciation. Although Li’s overall speaking also advanced in sentence 
complexity, grammar, vocabulary, and discourse, he showed no progress in his pronunciation in terms of 
word stress and intonation. He often used Vocaroo to record his speaking, but he only used vozMe four 
SoHee Kim Developing Autonomous Learning Using Digital Storytelling 
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
times since he felt it was not helpful. In the case of Luc, his overall speaking improved, but grammar and 
discourse scores remained the same. Yu’s overall oral proficiency also developed slightly. Hwang, despite 
using the computer less than the others and logging in the least amount of times, showed growth in her 
speaking. Interestingly, all participants began to speak more confidently by using various expressions and 
making longer sentences after using self-study resources and felt using these could produce a positive 
learning effect for increasing their self-confidence as highlighted in their answers to the questionnaire.  
In the three questionnaires, Tran and Li responded that they could increase their working vocabulary by 
recording stories. Yu thought recording programs helped her pronunciation. Luc replied that he used more 
complex sentences and that this learning technique could help vocabulary and pronunciation through self-
assessment. Hwang reported that she felt recording programs were good pronunciation practice tools. 
These results, reported on the second questionnaire, almost align with the speaking skills that they sought 
to develop through this learning: Tran, Li, and Luc hoped to improve their vocabulary ability, Hwang 
aimed to use more complex sentences, and Yu wanted to develop her pronunciation. 
Participants were also satisfied with this self-learning method because they could check and assess their 
speaking after listening to their own recordings. Li responded that using self-study resources motivated 
him to practice because it helped build confidence due to the self-reflective learning process. Yu 
answered that this autonomous learning was very flexible and convenient since she could record her 
speaking many times as well as monitor it, thus helping to improve her speaking. However, Li and Luc 
had negative attitudes about using the vozMe program since they thought that it could not produce clear 
and natural sounds like a real person, which made them have difficulty mimicking pronunciation. Luc and 
Tran also suggested that this learning could have produced more positive effects if they could have had a 
conversation with a real person such as a native speaker while using this self-learning method. For 
example, in the case of one participant, Hwang, whose husband’s first language is English, thought this 
learning method gave her a good opportunity to strengthen her oral proficiency. Luc also preferred 
speaking with a native speaker because he was able to improve his listening skills as well as he receiving 
immediate feedback. Tran responded that this learning style is good but felt more comfortable when 
having a conversation with a person. Hwang and Yu did not express any negative feelings about this type 
of learning.  
Digital Storytelling for Motivation and Self-Assessment  
This research used storytelling to encourage ESL learners’ involvement in recording their speaking. Since 
storytelling can serve to create natural discourse as a narrative task when language learners produce their 
own ideas or events, as a learning method, it enables good self-assessment as well as building self-
confidence. Most participants responded that creating stories encourages self-reflection and increases 
their motivation to practice speaking about their preferences or daily lives. Through storytelling, 
participants felt that they were able to enhance their speaking ability because it required improving 
summarizing as it related to the narration process, learning more vocabulary, making longer sentences, 
and improving pronunciation. During this process, they were also able to build self-confidence as reported 
in their questionnaires.  
Regarding the use of multimedia materials, the participants also mentioned that the silent movie clips 
were helpful as a prompt to practice their speaking. Participants reported in the questionnaire that using 
silent movie clips for storytelling encouraged them to create their own stories and to clarify their chosen 
words as they described the movie clip. Although these assessments were used to check participants’ oral 
proficiency, they responded that it was a learner-centered learning since participants recorded stories and 
monitored their progress using self-study resources for their own purposes during the four assessments 
periods. In the same vein, they also felt that these assessments were not only an extension of their ongoing 
independent study but also provided opportunities for receiving feedback from the instructor in order to 
achieve their mutually agreed upon learning goals for oral proficiency development. Moreover, they 
SoHee Kim Developing Autonomous Learning Using Digital Storytelling 
 
Language Learning & Technology 27 
reported that using VoiceThread for storytelling supported collaborative work in that they could monitor 
their peers’ performance as well as self-monitor their speaking progress on their own accounts during the 
four assessments. 
DISCUSSION  
This empirical study took into account how ESL learners were able to develop personal speech-
monitoring skills and learn speech-improvement strategies by using self-study resources with storytelling 
and feedback in an autonomous environment. Among the study results, one important finding asserts that 
self-assessment, motivation, and feedback play significant roles when using self-study resources to 
develop their oral proficiency. Self-assessment allows learners to monitor their level of success of specific 
tasks through a reflective process. In line with this, Tholin (2007) argued that self-assessment is a natural 
element of self-directed learning and learners need to be conscious to make choices that contribute to 
developing their language abilities. Through this self-monitoring process, learners can gradually speak 
more fluently after reflecting on their errors, and then can apply this kind of self-reflection to their classes 
or in their real lives. Using VoiceThread to record one’s own story also allows for self-evaluation, which 
encourages students’ autonomy through active engagement. This study also shows that a TTS program, 
vozMe, may help ESL learners’ oral production in terms of vocabulary, sentence complexity, and 
pronunciation.  
Kolb’s cyclical reflective model (Figure 2) explains participants’ self-reflection process to increase their 
oral proficiency development.   
 
Figure 2. Kolb’s cyclical reflective model 
In the first concrete experience stage, participants were motivated to increase their speaking practice and 
recording with weekly topics using self-study resources, Vocaroo and vozMe, through the instructor’s 
encouragement and guidance in developing speaking skills. In the second reflective observation stage, 
they monitored and corrected their performance through the instructor’s feedback and repeated practice, 
recording, and listening. In the third abstract conceptualisation stage, participants were excited about 
practicing and monitoring themselves to improve their speaking with feedback and learning resources 
through their self-assessment. In the final stage of testing in new situations, participants tried out what 
they had learned through an assessment for storytelling with a silent movie clip. During this process, 
participants were able to build metacognitive skills to achieve their learning goals. In this stage, the 
participants also could evaluate their own speaking as well as that of their peers. Throughout one 
reflective cycle, which includes four stages, participants’ oral proficiency has the potential to gradually 
develop by repeating this learning process while going through each of the four assessments. 
SoHee Kim Developing Autonomous Learning Using Digital Storytelling 
 
Language Learning & Technology 28 
CONCLUSION  
This research set out to discover whether autonomous learning to support an infinite learning opportunity 
without time and space constraints can help to improve English oral proficiency by using online self-
study programs for high-intermediate and advanced ESL learners. Although this is an ESL context in 
which the participants may have had many speaking opportunities other than simply practicing their 
speaking using self-study resources, I found that all participants developed their oral proficiency and 
gained self-confidence through self-assessment by recording their stories. This indicates that using a 
combination of communication tools—namely, Vocaroo, vozMe, and VoiceThread—gives ESL learners 
a positive learning experience which promotes self-confidence and autonomously develops their language 
skills. Since recording their speaking on the Web-based programs Vocaroo and VoiceThread is primarily 
a self-learning and self-reflective process, the instructor’s feedback, role, and materials were also 
essential. In this study the instructor not only facilitated participants’ engagement via emails, as an e-
moderator who helps learners monitor their own progress, but also supported their weaknesses by 
providing feedback to develop their speaking skills. Thus, it shows the instructor’s role and feedback 
were also important on autonomous learning.  
Notwithstanding these new and interesting findings, the scope of this research does not include several 
important issues. Although participants’ speaking developed during the fourteen weeks, the results may 
not be excluded from other possible factors enhancing participants’ oral proficiency since participants 
have attended other ESL programs and have lived in an English-speaking context. Thus, these extraneous 
factors may influence each participant’s individual improvement in oral proficiency. In addition, this 
research did not examine the participants’ progress in self-evaluation, which was very difficult to measure 
because their learning practice took place outside the classroom rather than in a controlled classroom 
environment. Future studies might use similar procedures in a classroom setting with a much larger group 
of students, where specific teaching objectives for improving oral proficiency could be included. The 
instructor could also provide an activity, such as drawing a “mind map,” through which learners may 
illustrate their self-assessment of their speaking progress to examine the development of their autonomy. 
Using this model for self-recording learning procedure can be applied to various teaching contexts such as 
collaborations. Furthermore, a longitudinal study could be conducted to draw conclusions about how to 
foster successful learning through self-assessment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SoHee Kim Developing Autonomous Learning Using Digital Storytelling 
 
Language Learning & Technology 29 
APPENDIX A. List of Practice, Recording, and Listening Using Self-study Resources   
Week Topic*/Assessment 
Questionnaire 
P R L P R L P R L P R L P R L 
Name  Li Yu Hwang Tran Luc 
1 First assessment & 
First questionnaire 
 1 1  1 1  1 1  1 1  1 1 
2 Chinese New Year  1 1 1 1 1    1 1 1    
3 Valentine Day 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 1 1 1 
4 My favorite book 1 2 1 2 2 2    1 1 1 1 1 1 
5 Second assessment  1 1 1 1 1    2 1 1 1 1 1 
6 Today is  1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
7 My favorite 
appliance 
2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 
8 Second 
questionnaire 
         1 1 1 1 1 1 
9 My favorite movie 
or TV show 
 1 1  1 1  1  1 2 2 1 1 1 
10 Third assessment    1 2 1    2 2 1  2 1 
11 My hobby is  1 1  2 1    2 1 1 1 1 1 
12 My favorite music  1 1     1 1 1 1 1  2 1 
13 My favorite place in 
the world 
 1 1 1 2 1  1 1 1 1 1  1 1 
14 Fourth assessment & 
Third Questionnaire 
 1 1 1 2 2  1 1 1 1 1  1 1 
*Note. P stands for using vozMe for practice; R stands for using Vocaroo for recording; L stands for listening to their speaking    
APPENDIX B. Four Charlie Chaplin Silent Movie Clips  
Test # Silent movie clip  
1 Coffee drinking funny  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1mYtNMDFyXQ 
2 Breakfast at hotel evergreen  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iFZVxFTeSN4 
3 The kid  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qNseEVlaCl4 
4 City lights  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C_vqnySNhQ0 
 
 
 
 
 
SoHee Kim Developing Autonomous Learning Using Digital Storytelling 
 
Language Learning & Technology 30 
APPENDIX C. Three Questionnaires  
First Questionnaire  
1. How long have you studied English in your native country and in the USA? 
2. Which ESL classes have you taken at CCSF? 
3. What is your main purpose for learning English? 
4. How often do you use a computer?  Do you have a computer and a microphone in your home? 
5. How do you feel about learning English using a computer? 
6. What was your first feeling when talking with a native speaker in the United States? 
Second Questionnaire  
1. How often do you practice your speaking using Vocaroo or vozMe programs? 
2. How you do you feel about speaking practice using Vocaroo, vozMe, and VoiceThread? 
3. Which parts of your speaking skills do you want to improve most? 
4. When you compare your answers in your first questionnaire, do you feel more confident in your 
speaking after using online programs? 
5. What is your current feeling about talking with native speakers in the United States? 
Third Questionnaire  
1. How do you feel about using storytelling for your speaking? 
2. How do you feel about using silent movie clips to create your storytelling? 
3. Which parts of your speaking skills do you think you have improved through this project? 
4. Do you think using Vocaroo leads to positive learning experiences when you record your 
storytelling on VoiceThread? 
 1 2 3 4 5 
 It is not very helpful.                                                                                              It is very helpful. 
5. Do you think using vozMe leads to positive learning experiences when you record your storytelling 
on VoiceThread? 
 1 2 3 4 5 
 It is not very helpful.                                                                                               It is very helpful. 
6. Do you think the teacher’s role and feedback are more important than your own involvement? 
 1 2 3 4 5 
It is not very important.                                                                                          It is very important.   
7. How do you feel about this method of learning? Do you think this learning method involving self-
recording for self-assessment can help improve your oral proficiency? 
 
 
SoHee Kim Developing Autonomous Learning Using Digital Storytelling 
 
Language Learning & Technology 31 
APPENDIX D. Holistic Rubric  
Score Level  Criteria   
5 Advanced 
speaking 
Speech is well organized in a story; information is plausible and precise and is 
presented logically and with appropriate transitions. 
Vocabulary is fully including idioms, colloquialisms, and pertinent cultural 
references. 
Good fluency and accurate pronunciation of individual sounds  
Most sentences have embedded more than 12 words. 
4 Accomplished 
speaking 
Speech is generally organized in a story; information is somewhat plausible 
and precise and is presented logically.    
Vocabulary is varied including idiomatic expressions and has high degree 
precision.  
Occasional non-native pronunciation errors, but the speaker is always 
intelligible. 
Each sentence has embedded clauses or phrases and contains at least 12 words. 
3 Competent 
speaking 
Speech is somewhat organized story; information maybe imprecise or 
implausible.  
Vocabulary in general is varied, including some use of idiomatic expressions.  
Some problems with speech rate and intonation but these do not cause serious 
problems with intelligibility. 
Each sentence has embedded clauses or phrases and contains at least 8 words. 
2 Developing 
speaking 
Speech may be insufficient and is poorly organized with basic ideas; 
information maybe imprecise or implausible. 
Numerous vocabulary words are repeated rather than using a variety of words.  
Numerous phonemic errors and foreign stress that cause the speaker to be 
occasionally unintelligible. 
A few sentences have embedded clauses or phrases and contain at least 5 
words. 
1 Beginning 
speaking 
Limited ability to respond to the story; information is irrelevant or inaccurate 
Very few vocabulary words are used; single words are used rather than 
complete thoughts. 
Very significant phonemic errors and foreign stress that causes the speaker to 
be unintelligible 
Each sentence has no embedded clauses or phrases and contains less than 5 
words. 
 
 
 
 
 
SoHee Kim Developing Autonomous Learning Using Digital Storytelling 
 
Language Learning & Technology 32 
APPENDIX E. Analytic Rubric  
Category Score  Description 
Pronunciation 1 Very significant phonemic errors and foreign stress and intonation patterns so the 
speaker is unintelligible. 
2  Frequent phonemic errors and foreign stress and intonation patterns so speaker is a 
fairly intelligible. 
3  Some consistent phonemic errors and foreign stress and intonation patterns, but 
the speaker is intelligible. 
4 Occasional pronunciation errors, but the speaker is always intelligible. 
5 Few nonnative pronunciation errors with nonnative accent 
Discourse 1 Limited ability to respond to the story; information may be irrelevant or 
inaccurate. 
2  Speech may be insufficient and is poorly organized with basic ideas; information 
is imprecise or inaccurate. 
3 Speech is somewhat insufficient and is poorly organized; information maybe 
imprecise or inaccurate. 
4 Speech is generally organized in a story; information is plausible and precise and 
is presented logically.  
5  Speech is well organized in a story; information is plausible and precise and is 
presented logically and with appropriate transitions. 
Vocabulary 
 
1 Very few vocabulary words are used; single words are used rather than complete 
thoughts. 
2 Numerous vocabulary words are repeated rather than using a variety of words. 
3 Vocabulary in general is varied, including some use of idiomatic expressions. 
4 Vocabulary is varied, including idiomatic expressions. 
5 Vocabulary is fully including idioms, colloquialisms, and pertinent cultural 
references. 
Grammar 1 Virtually no grammatical or syntactical control except in simple stock phrases.  
2 Some control of basic grammatical construction but with major and/or repeated 
errors that interfere with intelligibility. 
3 Generally good control in all construction with grammatical errors that do not 
interfere with overall intelligibility. 
4 Sporadic minor grammatical errors that could be made inadvertently by native 
speakers. 
5 Few grammatical errors that could be made inadvertently by native speakers. 
Sentence 
complexity 
1 Each sentence has no embedded clauses or phrases and contains less than 5 words.  
2 A few sentences have embedded clauses or phrases and contain at least 5 words. 
3 Each sentence has embedded clauses or phrases and contains at least 8 words. 
4 Each sentence has embedded clauses or phrases and contains at least 12 words. 
5 Most sentences have embedded more than 12 words. 
 
SoHee Kim Developing Autonomous Learning Using Digital Storytelling 
 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
APPENDIX F. Speaking Scores  
N Name Overall Pronunciation Discourse Vocabulary Grammar Sentence  
complexity 
  R1 R2 R1 R2 R1 R2 R1 R2 R1 R2 R1 R2 
1  
 
 
 
 
 
Tran  3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 
Li 3 3 3 3 4 4 2 2 3 3 3 2 
Luc 3 3 3 3 4 4 3 3 3 3 2 2 
Hwang 3 3 3 3 4 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 
Yu  2 2 2 2 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 
2 Tran  3 3 3 3 4 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 
Li 4 4 3 3 4 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 
Luc 3 3 3 4 4 4 3 3 4 4 3 3 
Hwang 3 3 4 4 4 3 3 3 3 4 3 3 
Yu  3 2 3 3 4 4 2 2 3 3 2 2 
3 Tran  4 4 4 4 4 4 3 3 3 3 4 4 
Li 4 4 3 3 5 5 4 4 4 4 4 4 
Luc 3 3 3 3 4 4 3 3 3 3 4 4 
Hwang 4 3 4 4 4 4 3 3 3 3 4 4 
Yu  3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 3 4 4 4 
4 Tran  5 5 5 5 5 5 4 4 4 4 4 4 
Li 4 4 3 3 4 5 4 4 4 4 4 4 
Luc 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 3 3 4 4 
Hwang 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 
Yu  3 3 2 3 4 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 
Note. R1 and R2 stand for Rater 1(instructor) and Rater 2 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank the participants of this study. I am also grateful to the editors and anonymous 
reviewers for their valuable comments on the earlier version of this article.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
SoHee Kim is currently a PhD student in the Department of English Language Education at Korea 
University and a lecturer of academic English at Gachon University. Her research interests include 
computer assisted language learning, the effects of media and technology on language education, and 
digital literacy in learning and teaching English.  
E-mail: grinplus@gmail.com  
SoHee Kim Developing Autonomous Learning Using Digital Storytelling 
 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
REFERENCES 
Andrade, M. S. (2012). Self-regulated learning activities: Supporting success in online courses. In J. S. 
Moore & A. D. Benson (Eds.), International perspectives of distance learning in higher education 
(pp.111–132). Rijeka, Croatia: InTech. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/33745 
Brunvand, S., & Byrd, S. (2011). Using VoiceThread to promote learning engagement and success for all 
students. Teaching Exceptional Children, 43(4), 28–37. 
Bachman, L. F., & Palmer, A. S. (1996). Language testing in practice. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press.  
Castellano, J., Mynard, J., & Rubesch, T. (2011). Student technology use in a self-access center. 
Language Learning & Technology, 15(3), 12–27. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/actionresearch.pdf  
Choi, I.C. (2005). Measurability of oral fluency through ASR-based COPI. Multimedia-Assisted 
Language Learning, 8(2), 240–261. 
Chapelle, C. (1998). Multimedia CALL: Lessons to be learned from research on instructed SLA. 
Language Learning and Technology, 2(1), 22–34. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num1/article1/ 
Dam, L. (2000). Evaluating autonomous learning. In B. Sinclair, I. McGrath, & T. Lamp (Eds.), Learner 
autonomy, teacher autonomy: Future directions (pp.48–59). Harlow, UK: Longman. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2009). Emerging technologies speech tools and technologies. Language Learning & 
Technology, 13(3), 4–11. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num3/emerging.pdf 
Gonzalez, D., & Louis, R. (2007). The use of Web 2.0 tools to promote learner autonomy. Retrieved from 
http://peoplelearn.homestead.com/MEdHOME2/Technology/WebToos.2.0.autonomy.pdf  
Hansen, J. (1998). When learners evaluate. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.  
Reinders, H., & Lázaro, N. (2007). Current approaches to assessment in self-access language learning. 
The Electronic Journal for English as a Second Language, 11(3). Retrieved from http://www.tesl-
ej.org/wordpress/issues/volume11/ej43/ej43a2/   
Healey, D. (2007). Theory and research: Autonomy and language learning. In J. Egbert, & E. Hanson-
Smith (Eds.), CALL environments: Research, practice, and critical issues (pp.377–388). Alexandria, VA: 
TESOL.   
Jones, L. (2007). The student centered classroom. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Kasper, L., & Singer, R. (2001). Unspoken content: Silent film in the ESL classroom. Teaching English in 
the Two-Year College, 29(1), 16–31. 
Kember, D. (1997). A reconceptualisation of the research into university academics conceptions of 
teaching. Learning and Instruction, 7(3), 255–275. Kilb, D. A. (1984). Experiential learning: Experience 
as the source of learning and development. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.  
Kim, S. H., & Choi, I. C. (2013, September). Developing a communicative task for Korean English 
language learners using two different types of visual modes on computer-based tests. Paper presented at 
e-Learning Korea conference, Seoul, South Korea. Retrieved from 
http://www.elearningkorea.org/kor/conference/speaker.asp# 
Kim, S. H. (2014). The effects of using storytelling with a Charlie Chaplin silent movie clip on oral 
proficiency development. STEM Journal, 15(1), 1-20. 
Little, D. (1991). Learner autonomy 1: Definitions, issues and problems. Dublin, Ireland: Authentik. 
SoHee Kim Developing Autonomous Learning Using Digital Storytelling 
 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
Lynch, T. (2007). Learning from the transcripts of an oral communication task. ELT Journal, 61(4), 311–
320. 
Nelson, M. (2006). Mode, meaning, and synaesthesia in multimedia L2 writing. Language Learning & 
Technology, 10(2), 56–76. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num2/pdf/nelson.pdf  
Murray, D. E. (2005). Technologies for second language literacy. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 
25, 188–201. 
O’Malley, J. M., & Valdez Piere, L. (1996). Authentic assessment for English language learners: 
Practical approaches for teachers. New York, NY: Addison-Wesley.  
Oscarson, M. (1989). Self-assessment of language proficiency: Rationale and applications. Language 
Testing, 6(1), 1–13. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/026553228900600103 
Sinclair, B. (2000). Learner autonomy: The next phase? In B. Sinclair & I. McGrath & T. Lam (Eds.), 
Learner autonomy, teacher autonomy: Future directions (pp.15–22). Harlow, UK: Longman. 
Stacke, E. (2007). Spotlight on blended language learning: A frontier beyond learner autonomy and 
computer assisted language learning. In Proceedings of the Independent Learning Association 2007 
Japan conference: Exploring theory, enhancing practice: Autonomy across the disciplines. Chiba, Japan: 
Kanda University of International Studies.  
Sheerin, S. (1989). Self-access. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Sinclair, B. (1999). More than an act of faith? Evaluating learner autonomy. In C. Kennedy (Ed.), 
Innovation and best practice in British ELT (pp. 96–107). Harlow, UK: Addison Wesley Longman. 
Tholin, J. (2007). Learner autonomy, self-directed learning and assessment: Lessons from Swedish 
experience. Retrieved from 
http://bada.hb.se/bitstream/2320/3572/1/Tholin%20190508%20learner%20autonomy.pdf 
Verdugo, D., & Belmonte, I. (2007). Using digital stories to improve listening comprehension with 
Spanish young learners of English. Language Learning & Technology, 11(1), 87–101. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num1/ramirez/default.html 
Wenden, A. L. (1999). An introduction to metacognitive knowledge and beliefs in language learning: 
Beyond the basics. System, 27(4), 435–41. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0346-
251X(99)00043-3  
 
OTHER MEDIA 
http://www.vocaroo.com 
http://www.voicethread.com  
http://www.vozMe.com 
