Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june 2014/reinderswattana.pdf 
June 2014, Volume 18, Number 2 
pp. 101–123 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094–3501 101 
CAN I SAY SOMETHING? THE EFFECTS OF DIGITAL GAME PLAY 
ON WILLINGNESS TO COMMUNICATE 
Hayo Reinders, Unitec Institute of Technology 
Sorada Wattana, Dhurakij Pundit University 
This paper reports on a study into the effects of digital game play on learners’ Willingness 
to Communicate (WTC), or individuals’ “readiness to enter into discourse at a particular 
time with a specific person or persons, using a L2” (MacIntyre, Dörnyei, Clément, & 
Noels, 1998, p. 547). Thirty Thai learners of English as a foreign language enrolled in a 
University language course completed six 90–minute lessons playing Ragnarok Online, a 
popular online role–playing game. The game had been installed on a private server and 
was thus only available to participants in the study. We modified the game to include 
special instructions, or quests (missions that players are assigned to accomplish in order to 
get items and progress throughout the game), designed to encourage collaboration and 
communication. To gauge participants’ WTC, a series of questionnaires was designed, 
adapted from MacIntyre et al’s (2001) WTC scale and previous studies on language and 
communication anxiety (Horwitz, Horwitz, & Cope, 1986; McCroskey & Richmond, 
1982) and perceived competence (Compton, 2004; MacIntyre & Charos, 1996). These 
asked respondents about their (own perceptions of their) willingness to use English, as 
well as their confidence, anxiety, and perceived communicative competence in 
communicating in English. The questionnaires were administered at the start of the course, 
and again after six gaming sessions. Results on the first set of questionnaires showed that 
students had low confidence, high anxiety, low perceived competence, and low WTC. The 
second set of results showed a marked and significant improvement, with participants 
feeling more confident, less anxious, more competent, and more willing to communicate. 
We argue that the careful construction of tasks that draw on the affordances of games can 
have a positive effect on the language learning process. 
Keywords: Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Language Play, Second Language 
Acquisition 
APA Citation: Reinders, H., & Wattana, S. (2014). Can I say something? The effects of 
digital game play on willingness to communicate.  Language Learning & Technology, 
18(2), 101–123. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/reinderswattana.pdf 
Received: March 5, 2013; Accepted: February 19, 2014; Published: June 1, 2014 
Copyright: © Hayo Reinders & Sorada Wattana 
INTRODUCTION 
Producing the target language is an important contributing factor to eventual success in language 
acquisition (Swain, 1985; Swain & Lapkin, 1995). Many language professionals around the world, 
however, have experienced the challenges of encouraging learners to produce the target language, to feel 
at ease and not to worry about making mistakes. Many have also experienced the genuine anxiety that 
students feel about performing in front of others, and many classrooms do not, as a result, offer students 
much in the way of communicative practice as would be desirable. Digital games offer engaging 
environments that have recently started to be explored for their educational potential (Gee, 2007; 
Reinders, 2012). In particular, many games encourage, and even require a significant amount of 
interaction between players. Complex forms of sharing and collaboration are examples. The potential for 
such environments to encourage language learners to use the target language while enjoying the 
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  102 
experience of sharing and collaborating is only now starting to be investigated. In this study, we looked at 
the effects of digital game play on the willingness of L2 learners in Thailand to communicate in English.  
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Willingness to Communicate 
Second language (L2) learners may feel more or less willing to communicate for a variety of reasons. In 
particular anxiety and self-perceived communicative competence have been examined as important 
affective factors for a number of years and have been shown to play a significant role in generating or 
reducing individuals’ tendency to communicate in the L2 (Baker & MacIntyre, 2000; Clément, Baker, & 
MacIntyre, 2003; MacIntyre et al., 2001; MacIntyre & Charos, 1996; MacIntyre & Gardner, 1994; 
Yashima, 2002). Anxiety associated with learning and using the L2 has been shown to contribute to low 
levels of WTC (Chu, 2008; MacIntyre, Babin, & Clément, 1999; McCroskey, 1991). In other words, 
learners who experience high levels of anxiety about L2 communication are likely to choose to remain 
silent and are less willing to participate in it.  
Individuals’ perceptions of competence might be more important than individuals’ actual competence in 
deciding whether or not to communicate; therefore, perceived communicative competence is believed to 
directly determine his/her WTC level (Baker & MacIntyre, 2000). That is, learners who perceive 
themselves as competent in communicating are likely to be more confident when interacting with others 
using the L2, and thus more willing to initiate or engage in L2 communication (MacIntyre, 1994). A 
positive correlation between self-perceived communicative competence and L2 WTC has been found in 
empirical studies (e.g., Lu & Hsu, 2008; Peng, 2007), indicating that learners are more willing to 
communicate in the L2 when they perceive themselves competent to do so. Many studies have 
investigated the relationship between L2 WTC and communication anxiety and perceived communicative 
competence. In general, the combination of a low level of anxiety about L2 communication and a 
sufficient level of perceived communicative competence (defined as self-confidence) have been found to 
be strong predictors of WTC in the L2 (Clément et al., 2003; Compton, 2004; Hashimoto, 2002; 
MacIntyre, 1994; MacIntyre, Baker, Clément, & Donovan, 2003; MacIntyre & Charos, 1996; Peng & 
Woodrow, 2010; Yashima, 2002). These consistent findings indicate that learners who experience a lower 
level of communication anxiety and who have a higher perception of their communicative competence, 
tend to be more willing to enter into L2 communication. 
L2 pedagogy has emphasized authentic use of the L2 as an essential part of language learning and 
teaching, with the aim of developing L2 students’ communicative competence. Many students, however, 
do not naturally engage in much target language production, neither inside nor particularly outside the 
classroom. As the final step before L2 production, willingness to communicate (WTC) is an important 
concept in describing, explaining, and predicting L2 communication (MacIntyre et al., 1998) and has been 
found to influence the frequency and amount of L2 communication (MacIntyre & Charos, 1996; 
Yashima, 2002), which can, in turn, facilitate successful second language acquisition (SLA). Accordingly, 
the development of WTC has been proposed as an important goal in language teaching (MacIntyre et al., 
1998), in order for students to develop their L2 beyond the language classroom (Clément et al., 2003; 
MacIntyre et al., 2001; MacIntyre et al., 1998). WTC studies have shown that language learners with high 
WTC are more likely to use the L2 in authentic communication (Kang, 2005), have more potential to 
practice in the L2(MacIntyre et al., 2001), acquire higher levels of language fluency (Derwing, Munro, & 
Thomson, 2008), generally achieve greater language proficiency (MacIntyre et al., 2001; MacIntyre et al., 
1998; Yashima, 2002), and, as a result, show more improvement in their communication skills (Yashima, 
Zenuk-Nishide, & Shimizu, 2004). Clearly, a language program that helps to engender WTC among its 
students can be considered successful. 
Consequently, research has pointed to strategies and specific classroom environments conductive to the 
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  103 
fostering of WTC. Aubrey (2010, 2011), for example, found several important factors teachers should 
consider and can manipulate to improve students’ WTC and encourage meaningful interaction during 
class. These included: cultivating group cohesiveness, lowering students’ anxiety, making the lesson topic 
interesting and relevant to students, facilitating student acceptance of the communicative approach, and 
instilling positive attitudes towards the international community, including “interest in international 
affairs, willingness to go overseas to stay or work, readiness to interact with intercultural partners, and, 
one hopes, openness or a non–ethnocentric attitude toward different cultures” (Yashima, 2002, p. 57) in 
students. In addition to these, Cao and Philip (2006), in a study in New Zealand, further identified 
familiarity with interlocutors, topical familiarity, and self–confidence as important contextual factors 
contributing to or reducing students’ WTC and classroom participation.  
Technology, and in particular Computer–Mediated Communication (CMC) has also been shown to play a 
potential role in developing WTC. Compton (2004), for example, revealed that chatting helped students to 
feel confident and consequently, willing to participate orally in class discussions. However, its impact on 
WTC varied from learner to learner and was dependent on a number of factors, particularly the topics of 
discussion and the attitudes of their partners. Jarrell and Freiermuth (2005) found that the majority of their 
students preferred chat to face-to-face interaction and that they were generally motivated to communicate 
in English using Internet chat. They concluded that chat was a potentially motivating tool because it 
appeared “to increase students’ WTC” (p. 70). In a related study, Freiermuth and Jarrell, (2006) further 
explored the use of chat as a means to resolve tasks and investigated the effect it had on students’ WTC. 
Data from the post-test questionnaire and discourse produced by students showed that the majority of 
students who participated in their study produced a greater amount of language output, experienced more 
intrinsic motivation to communicate in English and less anxiety about communication, and, importantly, 
were more willing to communicate as a result of using chat in class. Similar results were reported in a 
more recent study by Kissau, McCullough, and Pyke (2010). Six post-secondary students in the study 
completed an online course in French. A questionnaire showed they did not perceive themselves to be less 
anxious or more confident in their abilities to communicate in French than at the beginning of the course. 
However, when looking at the students’ language output the researchers found a steady increase during 
the course. In addition, interview data gave convincing evidence that students felt the online environment 
had helped to reduce their L2 anxiety, increase their perceived competence, and encourage their 
continuous active participation. These results were irrespective of students’ proficiency levels; both non-
native and heritage learners had the same experiences.  
Despite the considerable attention for the role of CMC in increasing the amount of L2 interaction and 
levels of L2 WTC, less effort has been expended on investigating other forms of online interaction, 
particularly network-based games, on students’ WTC. Digital games “have design features that are 
particularly relevant to language learning” (Gee, 2012, p. xiii) and increasingly play a role in supporting 
language learning and acquisition (e.g., deHaan, 2005a; Fujii, 2010; Ranalli, 2008). Our study takes this 
perspective further by looking at the potential of gameplay for WTC in English.  
Game-Based Learning (GBL) 
Based on the GBL literature (e.g. Gee, 2007; Mitchell & Savill-Smith, 2004; Prensky, 2001; Whitton, 
2010), the rationale for the use of digital games in class activities is commonly influenced by the 
assumption that games are motivating to students while also incorporating good learning principles. Many 
experimental studies have shown that students’ motivation increased when games were used in an e-
learning context. For example, Anyaegbu, Ting, and Li (2012) investigated how a serious game called 
‘Mingoville’ could motivate, engage, and arouse the interest of young Chinese learners of English. The 
qualitative findings indicated that the majority of their students were motivated to learn English with 
Mingoville because the game was fun for them and made them feel relaxed and avoided making them 
lose face. Other encouraging aspects were the positive collaboration that came out of the game as well as 
the rewards students received while playing. There were some students who reported that the experience 
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  104 
was demotivating because they either found playing the game boring, or generally didn’t like games. This 
supports Whitton’s (2007, 2011) view that employing games for motivational purposes alone is not 
sufficient justification for their use because they might not be motivational for all students, particularly 
students in Higher Education. Therefore, digital games should be employed to provide other benefits so 
that students will consider games as effective tools to help them learn and acquire another language. 
In addition to motivational benefits, researchers have observed that network–based digital games such as 
massively multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPGs) offer other benefits. Peterson (2010, 
2011) showed that the highly learner-centred nature of the interaction provided by network-based games, 
the anonymity and the reduced inhibition provided by personal avatars, and the reduction of paralinguistic 
cues in real-time chat are characteristics that may reduce anxiety and improve self-confidence. Findings 
reported by deHaan (2005b), Peterson (2010, 2011), Voulgari (2011), Zheng, et al. (2009), Zhao and Lai 
(2009) showed that students felt more relaxed and confident in using the target language when involved in 
MMORPGs, two major variables promoting levels of WTC.  
Moreover, past studies have demonstrated the beneficial effects of participation in MMORPGs on the 
quality of L2 use, as the contexts provided appear to offer extensive opportunities for target language use 
and social support (e.g. MacIntyre et al., 2001). A pilot study by Rankin, Gold, and Gooch (2006) 
investigated interaction between four ESL students in the MMORPG “EverQuest II” in an attempt to 
determine if participation in the game could foster students’ English language proficieny and knowledge 
of new vocaubalry. In this study, students participated in eight gaming sessions held over a period of four 
weeks. The findings demonstrated that students increased target language vocabulary output by 40% as a 
result of interaction with non-playing characters and produced a remarkable 100% increase in target 
language chat messages during social interaction between players. The social interaction among players in 
EverQuest II was further examined by Rankin, Morrison, McNeal, Gooch, and Shute (2009). The authors 
took a closer look at the in-game dialogues between eight native and 18 non-native speakers and language 
socialization in MMORPGs. The findings revealed that ESL students significantly increased their target 
language output by interacting with their native speaker interlocutors. The findings also suggested that 
EverQuest II, and possibly MMORPGs in general, encouraged L2 interaction as the players must be 
active learners and engage with other learners within the environment. Furthermore, the findings 
demonstrated that the majority of the students displayed higher levels of engagement, motivation, and 
comfort as they participated in gameplay. Major WTC studies emphasize that greater relaxation as well as 
increased frequency and greater amount of L2 output reflect higher levels of WTC. The findings from 
previous studies therefore seem to point to the possible contribution that MMORPGs can make in 
increasing students’ WTC.  
In a case study of online gaming and open Internet environments as informal settings for L2 use and 
development, Thorne (2008) explored multilingual interaction between an English speaker living in the 
United States and a Russian speaker living in Ukraine within the MMORPG “World of Warcraft.” 
Participants’ feedback was very positive, with claims that participation in the game had enhanced their 
enjoyment and motivation for language learning. In addition, the analysis of the chat logs indicated that 
conversation in the game offered participants authentic interaction in the L2 and opportunities for 
providing expert knowledge in terms of language use and language-specific explicit corrections, requests 
for assistance, and collaboratively constructing repair sequences. Roy (2007) also investigated the 
potential in World of Warcraft by playing the game in Spanish. Although the author reported that he did 
not have much interaction with native speakers, he found that real-time chatting during gameplay exposed 
him to natural target language (TL) production, and that the interaction in which he engaged was a 
meaningful way to become comfortable with using the language.  
From the literature review above, it is clear that digital games play a potential role in encouraging 
language learners to become willing to communicate. However, most of the literature is exploratory, 
limited in scope and with small sample sizes, focusing on anecdotal and descriptive evidence and 
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  105 
exploring the characteristics of games rather than their effects on language learning, and provides 
subjective views on the potential of games for language learning only. What is still unclear is if gameplay 
indeed leads to higher levels of WTC. In particular, few studies have adequately investigated the level of 
L2 WTC which the gaming environment can foster. This was the primary focus of our study.  
METHODOLOGY 
Research Question 
The purpose of the study was to investigate the effects of participating in an online game on learners’ 
willingness to communicate in English. Our research question is:  
How does playing an online game affect Thai EFL learners’ willingness to communicate in the target 
language?  
Operating WTC 
Willingness to communicate in the second language is defined as an individual’s “readiness to enter into 
discourse at a particular time with a specific person or persons, using a L2” (MacIntyre et al., 1998, p. 
547). Building on this, in our study we operationally defined WTC as “an individual’s intention to initiate 
or participate in communication in English, the target language at a particular moment and situation” (p. 
547). Intention can be understood and determined through a) perceptions of willingness to use English for 
communication and b) feelings about communicating in English, in terms of state communicative self-
confidence. State communicative self-confidence is a combination of low levels of state anxiety, 
especially anxiety about communication in English, and sufficient levels of state self-perceived 
communicative competence in English. The term “state” here refers to momentary feelings in a particular 
situation. Anxiety about communication corresponds to the level of fear or anxiety associated with real or 
anticipated communication (McCroskey, 1977). Self-perceived communicative competence is the belief 
that an individual has an adequate ability to communicate successfully (McCroskey & Richmond, 1990). 
Willingness to engage in L2 communication and self-confidence are the focus of this study because they 
a) are hypothesized to be enhanced by a non-threatening environment like computer games, b) have 
received substantial attention from researchers conducting empirical studies with this construct, and c) 
have been consistently found to be vital for prediction of individuals’ willingness to communicate in the 
L2 and in turn for contribution to successful L2 interaction and, ultimately, L2 acquisition.  
Instruments 
Two sets of questionnaires (see Appendices A and B) were developed by the researchers based on 1) our 
operational definition of the construct of WTC and 2) on the review of the literature identifying the 
variables believed to contribute to individuals’ WTC. The first questionnaire was administered prior to 
the first computer game session, enabling us to gauge learners’ general WTC in English for 
communicating in the classroom. The second questionnaire was administered after the last computer 
game session (i.e. the 6th session) in which participants were asked more specific questions relating to 
their WTC in English in a computer game setting. A comparison between participants’ WTC during class 
time and their WTC in the game environment was made to allow us to examine any differences and thus 
determine whether gameplay played a significant role in Thai EFL learners’ WTC. Although the 
questions in the two sets of questionnaires were slightly different, in order to reflect their focus on either 
the classroom or the game environment, the questionnaires were kept as similar as possible to measure the 
WTC construct (i.e., how willing participants were when communicating in English). 
They covered 1) WTC in English and 2) state communicative self-confidence, with the latter covering a) 
state anxiety and b) state self-perceived communicative competence. The questionnaires used self-report 
scales. Table 1 shows the number of items, and reports Cronbach’s alphas (α) as evidence of the internal 
reliability of each measure. Although Cronbach’s alphas indicated in most scales were not particularly 
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  106 
high, the number of items on the questionnaire was fairly low, and internal reliability was therefore 
considered to be satisfactory. 
Table 1. Questionnaires 
Measures Number 
of Items 
Internal Reliability 
Set 1 Set 2 
Willingness to communicate in English 5 .76 .70 
State communicative self-confidence 
     Anxiety    
     Self-perceived communicative competence 
10 
5 
5 
.89 
.83 
.77 
.83 
.69 
.72 
The first section of the questionnaires was composed of five items concerning students’ perceptions of 
their willingness to use English to communicate during class time (α = .76) and computer game activities 
(α = .70). Example items were: how willing are you to… “Talk to your classmates about a class 
assignment” and “Talk to other game players about a quest assignment” The items were mainly selected 
and adapted from MacIntyre et al (2001)’s WTC scale to include communication tasks common to the 
EFL class and gaming environments. Responses to items on a 5-point Likert scale were anchored with “1 
= Very unwilling” and “5 = Very willing”. It should be noted that the middle value labeled “Neutral” was 
included to elicit honest responses from some participants who might not have had experience in or strong 
feelings about particular communication tasks. High scores were interpreted as high levels of WTC.  
The second section of the questionnaires included 10 items asking participants to report their state 
communicative self-confidence in a classroom setting (α = .89) and in a computer game environment (α = 
.83). The items were selected and modified from previous studies examining language and 
communication anxiety (e.g. Horwitz et al., 1986; McCroskey & Richmond, 1982), and perceived 
competence (e.g. Compton, 2004; MacIntyre & Charos, 1996). Students were asked to indicate on another 
5-point the extent to which they agreed or disagreed with the statements indicative of state anxiety and 
state self-perceived communicative competence levels.  
Responses for items with negative meanings were reversed before summing for the total and the average 
scores of all the ten items representing participants’ level of state communicative self-confidence, which 
in turn revealed the overall impact of participation in each setting on participants’ WTC in English. 
“Low” scores indicated “low” levels of state communicative self-confidence, while “high” scores 
signified “high” levels of state communicative self-confidence. In addition, “high” scores for state anxiety 
items reflected “low” levels of state anxiety, and vice-versa. On the contrary, “high” scores for state 
perceived communicative competence items suggested “high” levels of state perceived communicative 
competence, and vice-versa. “Low” levels of state anxiety combined with “high” levels of state self-
perceived communicative competence led to “high” levels of state communicative self-confidence, and, in 
turn, indicated participants’ “high” levels of WTC.  
Participants 
A convenience sampling method was used to select prospective participants. The study was conducted 
with 30 Thai EFL learners at a university in Thailand. We were fortunate to have all students in the class 
agree to participate, so were able to conduct the study during normal class hours. 
Students were given an explanation of the study and were informed that their participation was voluntary 
and in no way affected their course grades. They were given a consent form to sign and were also 
informed that the results would be anonymised. Participants had different English language proficiency 
levels, ranging from elementary to advanced, as shown by their standardised test scores on the 
University’s Test of English Proficiency. Specifically, the study involved 13 elementary students, 8 lower 
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  107 
intermediate students, 7 upper intermediate students, and 2 advanced students. The reason for this range 
of proficiency levels was that this particular course (English for IT) was only offered once per academic 
year.  
In terms of language background, participants were fairly homogeneous; all of them were native Thai 
speakers and none had experience living in an English-speaking country. The majority had studied 
English since they started elementary school and had learned English for an average of 14 years. Their 
use of and exposure to the target language, especially speaking, was, however, limited and took place 
exclusively in the English classroom. Eighty percent of the participants (N = 24) reported that they had no 
other contact at all with English apart from formal classes, while 20% (N = 6) indicated that they 
occasionally watched movies in English. Participants were also similar with regard to game-related habits 
and experiences and familiarity with computer games and synchronous communication tools. All of the 
participants had previous experience playing computer games, particularly MMORPGs, meaning we 
could help them to focus on their language learning experience, rather than having to focus on (supporting 
them in) using the game. All the participants were also found to be sufficiently proficient in synchronous 
communication and typing skills to be able to readily engage in interaction during game play. 
Nonetheless, training and technical support were provided to the participants. It is therefore reasonable to 
expect minimal novelty and training effects (see Table 2 for a summary).  
Table 2. Participant’s Game-Related Habits and Experiences 
Years of game playing Mean 7.30  years      Range 1–12 
Time spent each week 
playing games 
Mean 22.87 hours Range 3–100 
Number of participants 
having experience in 
playing each type of 
game 
30 
9 
18 
13 
16 
10 
10 
10 
9 
5 
MMORPG* 
Simulation  
Strategy  
First-person shooter  
Sport  
Music game 
Puzzle 
Action 
Role-playing 
Platform 
Top-5 game genre 
preference 
MMORPG, Strategy, Sport, Role-playing, Puzzle (in order of preference) 
Note: *16 Ragnarok Online, played in their native language.  
The Course 
The study was carried out in a 15-week course of English for IT. The course was offered to third year 
undergraduates from the school of IT and was designed and taught by one of the researchers. The focus of 
the course was all-round skills development in the information technology field, guided by the textbook 
“Oxford English for Information Technology”. The classes met for two sessions of 90 minutes per week 
and were taught entirely in English.  
The intervention, the playing of the commercial game “Ragnarok Online”(Global Playground Gravity, 
2010), was implemented during 20% of the class hours. Like other MMORPGs such as World of 
Warcraft and Everquest, Ragnarok Online is played by a large number of players in a complex 
environment allowing a significant amount of player interaction. The real-time simulated environment in 
Ragnarok provides opportunities for collaboration and social interaction, allowing players to interact with 
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  108 
each other, combat computer-controlled creatures, and accomplish quests to progress in the game. 
Face-to-face sessions were conducted in a classroom while intervention sessions met in a CALL lab. The 
game was integrated as part of a lesson review session after students finished a unit. The course covered 
six units hence six review sessions, lasting one and half hours each. There were two pedagogical 
objectives to the game sessions: firstly, the activities were intended to give students opportunities to 
review the course material through plearn. The term “plearn” is one of the most important concepts in 
Thai education, emphasising that learning should be an enjoyable activity and students should gain 
knowledge through play. It is both a contraction of “play and learn” and also the Thai word for “enjoy” 
(Samudavanija, 1999). As part of playing a number of quests in Ragnarok, specified below, students had 
opportunities to learn and practise the vocabulary and language skills they studied in class in a fun way. 
By lowering the affective barrier, the intention was to encourage students to relax and learn in a more 
natural way (Aoki, 1999). The second objective of the sessions was to encourage more participation. Thai 
students are notoriously reticent and generally avoid interaction in English classes (Kamprasertwong, 
2010). By encouraging students to work together in a non-threatening environment, the aim was to 
encourage them to become more actively involved in the learning process.  
With permission from the game’s local distributor, we were able to host the game on a private server in 
the CALL lab, thereby giving us control over who could access the game. We also obtained permission to 
modify the game in order to ensure its appropriateness to the L2 learning context, as well as its alignment 
with the course’s learning activities and objectives. Although the original game contains a variety of 
authentic scenarios and tasks (similar in terms of their means to those that players may need to achieve in 
real life, such as negotiation and sharing – if not in their purpose, such as quests and battles!), its content 
was considered less than ideal as a CALL environment in the sense that the opportunities for target 
language exposure and “language learning potential” (Chapelle, 2001) were limited. This was due to the 
original game being created for Thai native speakers as a form of entertainment, not education. The 
international version available from Ragnarok’s servers was considered, but it was not possible to obtain 
permission to use it for our study. Also, the international version may not be suitable in terms of the 
language level used, which could be too advanced, as well as some cultural contexts with which 
participants might not have been familiar. Another important reason for modifying the Thai version of the 
game was that we considered the original in-game quests to be too long for the study participants to 
complete during class time. The modification in this study, as a result, meant creating new quest events 
relevant to the participants’ course, for application of language skills at the appropriate level. Despite 
these modifications we feel the gaming aspect of Ragnarok was left untouched; we simply optimised the 
environment for language learning.  
Based on the “endogenous game” framework in which the learning content needs to be intrinsically 
linked with the game itself (Habgood, Ainsworth, & Benford, 2005), the previously learnt material was 
integrated into the narrative of Ragnarok, in order to provide students with learning opportunities while 
engaged in the process of playing. In particular, the six new quests (i.e. the missions that players are 
assigned to accomplish within the game) covered scenarios and player experiences, which were related to 
the courses’ learning content and objectives. Table 3 shows an example of how the learning objectives 
were mapped to activities in the game.  
Table 3. Example of a Mapping of Learning Objectives to Game Activities (Quests) 
Unit 1   Computer Users 
Objectives for this unit 
  1.1 Talk about how they and people from different professions use computers.  
 1.2 Exchange information about the use of computers in their free time. 
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  109 
 1.3 Understand the difference between the Past Simple and the Present Perfect and 
use these tenses fluently and correctly. 
 1.4 Read and comprehend an article in IT and computing contexts. 
 1.5 Understand basic guidelines of how to write a good paragraph. 
 1.6 Write a paragraph describing the use of computers in their study and free time. 
Quest 
 Event: Finding how David uses his new computer 
Description: In this quest, students needed to help the starting NPC* named Austin find out 
how his student uses computers in his study and free time. Students had to 
interact with several NPCs to complete particular tasks, i.e. talking about 
computer use (1.1, 1.2), reading paragraphs in IT (1.4), and engaged in non-
violent combat with monsters to earn required items. 
  During communication in the game, students had opportunities to use and 
practice the language they had learned in class, such as using appropriate 
tenses to talk about what they had done in the game (1.3). 
Note: *NPC stands for Non-player character 
When participants played the game and worked through the language learning elements included in the 
modified quests, they therefore had opportunities to develop their comprehension of what they read and 
heard when completing the tasks. Participants were also allowed to practise and demonstrate 
understanding of the language skills previously learnt, and, importantly, use the L2 to communicate for 
real purposes in a socially meaningful context. Some evidence of how the participants used the L2 during 
game play can be obtained from an earlier pilot study (Reinders & Wattana, 2011).  In summary, playing 
games was found to encourage a significant increase in the quantity of L2 interaction which also 
contained a variety of discourse functions associated with social, collaborative interaction (e.g., greetings, 
requests, and questions) and covered a range of linguistic features (e.g., use of a variety of verb forms). 
We intend to investigate this further in the future. In this study, we report on participants’ self-reported 
willingness to use the L2.  
The modified quest events still followed the original game which has an emphasis on interaction between 
players through either text or voice chatting, and between players and NPCs through controlled dialogues 
in which participants had to either type their reply or choose what to say in response to what NPCs had 
said. In addition, it should be noted that the tasks in the modified quests gradually increased in difficulty 
as the game progressed and constantly gave participants instantaneous feedback. This practice was likely 
to encourage more interaction among participants before they selected a choice of message to interact with 
an NPC or before they typed a reply to interact with each NPC (see Figure 1). 
Before each of the six sessions a 15-minute briefing session was given. Participants were informed of the 
computer game session objectives, how to play the game, as well as the contents of the quest. Next, they 
were given time to discuss with other students any relevant grammar and vocabulary points that they 
might need to complete the quest. They were reminded that their interaction in the game was not being 
graded and were simply encouraged, but not forced, to use the target language for communication in the 
game when they felt that they were ready and willing to do so. Participants were given an opportunity to 
ask any questions. 
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  110 
 
Figure 1. A screenshot of Quest1: Finding out how David uses his new computer.  
Participants used Skype and the recording program “Pamela for Skype” to communicate during the game. 
In the first three computer game sessions, participants used group text chat. Although pairing students 
might have led to more communication, group chat was used to promote natural and real communication 
in the game in which players were free to talk to anybody; in addition, if inexperienced, unconfident 
participants were paired together, they might have been unable to complete the quests. In the final three 
computer game session, participants were required to communicate to each other using their voice. In this 
case, they were randomly paired and asked to call each other. Since participants had played the game for 
three sessions, we assumed they felt experienced and confident enough to be able to complete the quests 
together in pairs. The pairs remained the same throughout the last three computer game sessions with the 
voice-based chatting tool. 
While participants were playing the game, the researchers did not participate in any of the game tasks in 
order to allow participants to develop mutual support through collaboration and give them complete 
control over their progress in the game. However, the teacher-researcher remained present in the lab to 
assist with technical problems (but not with language-related problems), and to observe the research 
environment. After each game session, participants saved their chat history from the recording software. 
Finally, a collaborative debriefing took place during which students shared their experience playing the 
game.  
RESULTS 
Questionnaire 1: Perceptions of WTC in English in the Classroom 
The first section of the first set of WTC questionnaires asked participants to rate their perceptions of their 
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  111 
WTC on a scale of 1 to 5 (“very unwilling” to “very willing”) in a range of communication tasks they 
normally engage in during class time.  The overall mean of 2.33 with a standard deviation of .55 indicated 
that participants perceived that they were somewhat unwilling to engage in communication situations in 
the classroom using the target language. As indicated in Table 4, participants generally showed a low 
level of WTC in English as they were somewhat unwilling to talk to their classmates about a class 
assignment (M = 2.33, SD = .88), to communicate their ideas, feelings and opinions  (M = 1.63, SD = 
.76), and to read task description/instructions before they started (M = 1.96, SD = .81). Additionally, when 
participants were confused about a task they should have completed and when their classmates said 
something in English, they reported neutrality towards their willingness to ask for clarification (M = 2.86, 
SD = .819) and to listen to what their classmates said (M = 2.86, SD = .78). 
Table 4. Participants’ Perceptions of WTC in English in the Classroom*  
Communication tasks Mean SD Interpretation 
Ask for clarification when you are confused about a task you 
must complete. 
2.86 .82 Neutral 
Listen to what your classmates say in English. 2.86 .78 Neutral 
Talk to your classmates about a class assignment. 2.33 .88 Somewhat unwilling 
Read task description/instructions before you start completing. 1.96 .81 Somewhat unwilling 
Communicate ideas, feelings and opinions. 1.63 .76 Somewhat unwilling 
Overall Mean 2.33 .55 Somewhat unwilling 
*Note: the order in the table above is listed in order from highest to lowest, not in the order in which the items appeared in the 
questionnaire 
Questionnaire 1: Levels of State Communicative Self-Confidence in the Classroom 
The second section of the questionnaire dealt with participants’ feelings about communication in terms of 
state communicative self-confidence felt when using English in a classroom setting. The question items 
measured participants’ state anxiety levels and state self-perceived communicative competence degrees to 
indicate their state communicative self-confidence and, in turn, their WTC in the target language.  
Overall, participants showed low levels of state communicative self-confidence, as indicated by low 
averaged scores of the ten items (M = 2.18, SD = .35) (see Table 5), which in turn suggested that they 
generally were not very willing to use English to communicate in a classroom context. According to 
Table 5, low averaged scores for state anxiety items (M = 2.29, SD = .41) signified that participants 
suffered from anxiety when it came to communicating in English during class time. Particularly, they 
were worried about making mistakes (M = 2.33, SD = 1.18) and felt nervous about using English while 
participating in class activities (M = 2.00, SD = .83). Participants also felt uncomfortable sharing their 
ideas/feelings/opinions in English with their classmates (M = 2.49, SD = .73), which corresponds with the 
perception that that they were somewhat unwilling to do so (M = 1.63, SD = .76, see Table 4). In addition 
to communication, participants were also worried about their comprehension; specifically, the results 
showed that participants were worried that they would not understand what their classmates said in 
English (M = 1.80, SD = .81). Finally, when asked about their feelings about communication in class, they 
remained neutral (M = 2.83, SD = .79) about using English in this formal [classroom] environment being 
relaxing. 
Participants’ reported suffering from high levels of state anxiety regarding communication in English was 
found to influence the way they perceived their communicative competence. That is, anxious individuals 
were likely to perceive their competence to be low. The results in Table 5 showed low averaged scores for 
state self-perceived communicative competence items (M = 2.06, SD = .29), which suggested 
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  112 
participants’ low levels of state self-perceived communicative competence when engaged in 
communication in English in the classroom. Participants generally perceived that communicating in 
English was difficult (M = 1.83, SD = .75) by thinking that they could not say what they want to say in 
English (M = 1.96, SD = .72) and that they did not know the vocabulary required for each task completion 
(M = 1.80, SD = .81). They also perceived themselves to have English at such a low level as to negatively 
affect their interlocutors’ comprehension (M = 2.30, SD = .84). Further, participants did not really believe 
that class activities helped develop their fluency (M = 2.43, SD = .73).  
Table 5. Participants’ Levels of State Communicative Self-Confidence in the Classroom 
Statements Mean SD Interpretation 
 State anxiety items    
    In general, I find communicating in English in 
classroom situations relaxing.    
2.83 .79 Neutral / 
No opinion 
    I feel comfortable sharing my ideas/feelings/opinions 
with my classmates. 
2.49 .73 Disagree 
    I am not worried about making mistakes. 2.33 1.18 Disagree 
    I feel nervous about using English while participating 
in class activities.* 
2.00 .83 Agree 
    I am worried that I will not understand what my 
classmates say in English.* 
1.80 .81 Agree 
  Total mean of state anxiety items 2.29 .41 Disagree  
 State perceived communicative competence items    
    I think participating in class activities help me develop 
my fluency (i.e. with little hesitation and pauses). 
2.43 .73 Disagree 
    I think my classmates cannot understand me because of 
my poor English.* 
2.30 .84 Agree 
    I can say what I want to say in English. 1.96 .72 Disagree 
    I find it difficult to communicate in English.* 1.83 .75 Agree 
    I know the words required for each task completion. 1.80 .81 Disagree 
  Total mean of state perceived communicative competence 
items 
2.06 .29 Disagree  
Overall Mean 2.18 .35 Disagree 
*Note: Responses for these items were reversed.  
Questionnaire 2: Perceptions of WTC in English in the Computer Game 
The first section of the second set of WTC questionnaires, administered after the six gaming sessions, 
examined participants’ perceptions of their willingness to interact in English while engaged in 
communication tasks common to a gaming environment, Ragnarok, presented in Table 6. Taken as a 
whole, participants’ perceptions towards WTC were positive as they perceived that they were somewhat 
willing to use the target language for both talking and comprehending in the game (M = 3.84, SD = .286). 
Particularly, when participants were confused about a task and when other game players were talking, 
they perceived that they somewhat willing to ask for clarification (M = 4.06, SD = .78) and listen to their 
friends (M = 4.06, SD = .69).  They also thought that they were somewhat willing to talk to other game 
players about a quest assignment (M = 3.86, SD = .68). However, they remained neutral to willingly 
express ideas, feelings and opinions in the game (M = 3.36, SD = .76). 
 
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  113 
Table 6. Participants’ Perceptions of WTC in English in the Computer Game Ragnarok 
Communication tasks Mean SD Interpretation 
Ask for clarification when you are confused about a task you must 
complete. 
4.06 .78 Somewhat willing 
Listen to what other game players say in English. 4.06 .69 Somewhat willing 
Read quest description/instructions before you start completing. 3.86 .73 Somewhat willing 
Talk to other game players about a quest assignment. 3.86 .68 Somewhat willing 
Communicate ideas, feelings and opinions. 3.36 .76 Neutral 
Overall Mean 3.84 .286 Somewhat willing 
Questionnaire 2: Levels of State Communicative Self-Confidence in the Computer Game 
The second section of the second questionnaire measured participants’ overall state communicative self-
confidence while communicating in English in the game on a 5-point Likert scale, with response anchors 
ranging from “strongly disagree” (1) to “strongly agree” (5).  The levels of state anxiety about using 
English and state self-perceived communicative competence participants experienced during the game 
activities were used to indicate their state communicative self-confidence which, in turn, reflected their 
levels of WTC. Generally, participants had positive feelings about using English during game play since 
low levels of state anxiety and high levels of state perceived communicative competence were reported, 
as shown in Table 7. It was clear that participants were not anxious when communicating during 
gameplay (M = 4.19, SD = .33). Most importantly, participants reported that they were not nervous about 
using English (M = 4.57, SD = .50) and found communicating during gameplay relaxing (M = 4.50, SD = 
.51). They also claimed that they were anxious neither about communicating nor about comprehension in 
the game. In other words, they were not afraid of making mistakes (M = 3.83, SD = .75), felt relaxed 
about sharing their ideas/feelings/opinions with their friends in the game (M = 3.97, SD = .72), and were 
not nervous about understanding what was said in English during gameplay (M = 4.07, SD = .58).  
Results from the second part of the questionnaire reveal that participants were quite confident in their 
abilities to communicate in the game (M = 3.77, SD = .39). They believed that participating in the game 
activities helped them develop their fluency (M = 4.27, SD = .45). They also expressed positive views 
about their ability and lack of difficulty communicating in English successfully in the game (M = 4.10, 
SD =.71), perceived themselves to have the ability to say what they wanted to say (M = 3.50, SD = .57) 
and regarded their English as not too poor for their friends to understand (M = 3.53, SD = .68). These 
results, therefore, suggested that participants were willing to communicate in English in a computer game 
environment.  
Table 7. Participants’ Levels of State Communicative Self-Confidence in the Computer Game 
Statements Mean SD Interpretation 
State anxiety items    
 I feel nervous about using English while participating in 
computer game activities.* 
4.57 .50 Strongly disagree 
 In general, I find communicating in English in computer 
game situations relaxing.    
4.50 .51 Strongly agree 
 I am worried that I will not understand what other players 
say in English.* 
4.07 .58 Disagree 
 I am not worried about making mistakes.  3.97 .72 Agree 
Total mean of state anxiety items 4.19 .33 Agree  
State perceived communicative competence items    
 I find it difficult to communicate in English.*    
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  114 
 I find it difficult to communicate in English.* 4.27 .45 Agree 
 I can say what I want to say in English.  4.10 .71 Disagree 
 I know the words required for each task completion.  3.53 .68 Disagree 
 I think other players cannot understand me because of my 
poor English.* 
3.50 .57 Agree 
 I think participating in computer game activities help me 
develop my fluency (i.e. with little hesitation and pauses). 
3.43 .77 Neutral / No 
opinion 
Total mean of state perceived communicative competence items 3.77 .39 Agree  
Overall Mean 3.98 .40 Agree 
*Note: Responses for these items were reversed.  
To conclude, our results indicate that computer games may have had an effect on participants’ levels of 
state communicative self-confidence. To investigate whether this was indeed the case we conducted a 
statistical analysis. 
Statistical Analysis  
A paired-samples t-test (with an alpha level of .05) was performed to determine the difference between 
learners’ WTC in English in the classroom from their WTC in English playing the computer game. 
Cohen’s d (1988) was subsequently calculated using means and standard deviations to indicate effect size. 
Statistical analysis results are shown in Tables 8-11. Firstly, as shown in Table 8, the mean scores of 
participants’ perceptions of WTC in English during class time (M = 11.67, SD = 2.9) were significantly 
different from the mean scores of participants’ perceptions of WTC during computer game activities (M = 
19.23, SD = 2.49).  The difference was found to be statistically significant (t(29) = 21.54, p < 0.001), 
showing a statistical effect for difference between participants’ perceptions of WTC in English in the two 
settings, with a very large effect (d = 2.79). 
Table 8. T-Test for Perceptions of WTC during Class Time and Computer Game Activities (N = 30) 
   95% Confidence Interval of the Difference 
Pair Mean SD Lower Upper t df Sig. (2-tailed) Effect size 
WTC in game 
WTC in class 
19.23  
11.67  
2.49 
2.90 
6.85 8.29 21.54 29 .000 d = 2.79 
 
Secondly, the results in Table 9 show that participants had statistically significantly lower levels of state 
anxiety when it came to communicating in English during gameplay than they did during class time 
(t(29)= 21.20, p < 0.001), again with a very large effect size (d = 3.33). 
Table 9. T-Test for Levels of State Anxiety during Class Time and Computer Game Activities (N = 30) 
   95% Confidence Interval of the Difference 
Pair Mean SD Lower Upper t df Sig. (2-tailed) Effect size 
SA in game 
SA in class 
20.93 
11.47  
2.08 
3.43 
8.55 
 
10.38 21.20 29 .000 d = 3.33 
Thirdly, as shown in Table 10, levels of state perceived communicative competence participants felt 
during computer game activities (M = 18.83, SD = 2.23) differed from those felt during class time (M = 
10.33, SD = 2.78) and again, this was statistically significant (t(29)= 24.40, p < 0.001 with a very large 
effect size (d=3.37).  
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  115 
Table 10. T-Test for Levels of State Perceived Communicative Competence during Class Time and 
Computer Game Activities (N = 30) 
   95% Confidence Interval of the Difference 
Pair Mean SD Lower Upper t df Sig. (2-tailed) Effect size 
SPCC in game 
SPCC in class 
18.83  
10.33  
2.23 
2.78 
7.79 
 
9.21 24.40 29 .000 d = 3.37 
Finally, participants reported significantly higher levels of state communicative self-confidence while 
engaged in computer game activities than during class time (t(29)= 25.89, p < 0.001), with a very large 
effect size (d) of 3.54, as shown in Table 11. 
Table 11. T-Test for Levels of State Communicative Self-Confidence during Class Time and Computer 
Game Activities (N = 30) 
   95% Confidence Interval of the Difference 
Pair Mean SD Lower Upper t df Sig. (2-tailed) Effect size 
SCSC in game 
SCSC in class 
39.77  
21.80  
3.95 
5.99 
16.55 19.38 
 
25.89 29 .000 d = 3.54 
DISCUSSION 
The results above allow us to draw a number of preliminary conclusions. Firstly, the descriptive results 
from the first questionnaire showed that the participants in this study generally reluctant to interact in the 
target language in class; they were either unwilling or somewhat willing to, amongst others, talk to 
classmates about assignments, to ask for clarification or to listen to others. The results from the second 
part of the questionnaire showed that participants experienced considerable anxiety and were, amongst 
others, worried about making mistakes, and felt uncomfortable about sharing their feelings and opinions. 
Similarly, participants reported low state self-perceived communicative competence, thinking of 
themselves as having poor English and, importantly, not believing that class activities helped develop 
their fluency. Together, these results show that the students had low WTC in English in the classroom. 
These results contrast with those for participants’ WTC during game play. Students reported being more 
willing to interact in English during game play, feeling more confident to talk to other students, or ask for 
help. They also felt considerably less anxious and were not as nervous about making mistakes. In terms of 
their state self-perceived communicative competence, participants felt quite confident in their English 
ability and felt that game play helped them develop their L2 fluency. Together, these results show that the 
students had high WTC in a game environment.  
Statistical analyses showed the differences in participants’ responses to be significant and with large 
effect sizes, meaning participants were more willing to interact in English, were less anxious and felt 
better about (their ability to use) English in a game environment than in class. It is important, however, to 
acknowledge that the two questionnaires, although asking similar questions, were necessarily slightly 
different too, as the first asked about WTC in the classroom and the second about WTC during game play. 
Nonetheless, we feel that the results allow us to tentatively draw the conclusion that the participants in 
this study had a greater WTC in a game environment than in classroom one. This is an important result, 
especially as the participants were not simply told to go and enjoy themselves. They were given specific 
instructions and tasks to complete. Their responses therefore do not simply indicate a preference for 
playing games over taking classes, as they were responding to similar questions about communicating in 
English in two different environments.  
This has a number of implications. Firstly, if WTC is a facilitating factor in second language acquisition 
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  116 
(MacIntyre et al., 1998), then it is important to create an environment conducive to encouraging this. It 
appears that for the participants in this study the environment offered by the computer game did this to a 
significantly greater degree than the classroom environment. Our study mirrors some of the findings from 
Aubrey (2010, 2011), regarding the factors contributing to WTC. Digital games clearly make learners feel 
less anxious and encourage collaboration and group cohesiveness. Further research is required to establish 
whether these findings generalise to other contexts, but our study does appear to corroborate findings 
from previous research by Compton (2004) and Jarrell and Freiermuth (2005) showing the benefits of 
using technology, and in particular text chat (one of the means of communication within the game), for 
increasing WTC. Of course, game play did not occur in a pedagogical vacuum, and it is important to point 
out other aspects of the intervention (such as the fact that the activities were not assessed) are likely to 
have played a role. Nonetheless, our instruments specifically probed the effects of the game on the 
students, and these results are clear.  
More specific implications require briefly highlighting here. Firstly, on the initial questionnaire, 
participants indicated fairly low agreement with the statement that English classes help develop fluency. 
This may be a reflection particularly of English teaching in Thailand, which may be of a more traditional 
nature (such as teacher dominated talk, rote learning, and grammar translation in which students are 
mainly tested on grammar structures) and less focused on the development of communicative skills than 
in other countries. When asked about games, however, the participants said they thought it did help to 
develop fluency. In contexts where English (and other languages) are taught as a foreign language, and 
where students have limited access to opportunities for target language production, games can possibly 
play a role. Particularly, this may be the case in situations where the teachers themselves are non-native 
speakers and less confident or fluent in L2 interaction.  
In addition to the issue of the development of fluency, game play also made learners feel more confident 
in their ability to use English. This is interesting as in the short period (nine hours over six weeks) of time 
students would have been unlikely to improve their productive skills very much. Clearly, aspects of the 
game environment make learners feel they are achieving better. One likely explanation for this is the fact 
that the game offered continuous feedback and allowed students to complete actions through language, 
and in this way gave students a sense of success. Interacting with other students and exchanging 
information helped them, for example, to get information on where to go or which character to find. 
Obtaining this information then helped them to complete those actions, immediately showing them the 
value of their communication, and giving them an immediate sense of achievement. Experiencing the 
transformative power of language in this way can provide significant motivational benefits (van Lier, 
1996). 
Finally, participants were reluctant in particular to share personal information in the classroom. Most 
were unwilling to exchange opinions and feelings. This was not the case in the game environment. Much 
research has shown the value of personally engaging in the learning process (e.g. Ushioda, 1996) and its 
potential on language acquisition. If games encourage learners to engage more, this may help them in 
their learning. One important reason for these findings may well be the anonymity the games afford; 
although all the students in this study knew each other and were probably easily able to tell which avatar 
represented which student, still a degree of projection may have made students feel more comfortable to 
communicate, and in particular, to make mistakes. This is in line with previous findings from studies by 
deHaan (2005b) and Peterson (2010, 2011), who showed that games, particularly MMORPGs, helped to 
reduce anxiety levels and encourage opportunities for taking risks in using the target language. 
All this begs the broader question about whether game play should be encouraged as part of the L2 
learning process, or even integrated into the curriculum, and/or whether features of game play should be 
used to change classroom teaching. Although our study did not directly attempt to address these questions 
we do feel that it contributes to the body of research that shows the potential of game play to facilitate 
important elements of the L2 acquisition process and as such, deserves more attention as a field of study.  
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  117 
CONCLUSION AND LIMITATIONS  
One 1 limitation of our study is that it did not investigate L2 acquisition, thus not allowing us to make 
claims about the benefits of game play on learning. Although it is likely that greater willingness to 
communicate will lead to more interaction, this is something we have yet to investigate (although we did 
find a positive effect in an earlier pilot study (Reinders & Wattana, 2012)). Although our current data 
allows us to do so, this would still not allow us to draw conclusions on whether or not that interaction led 
to improved fluency or accuracy, as we did not measure these. Our aim with this study was more 
specifically to compare gaming and classroom environments and their effect on students’ willingness to 
engage in target language communication. We hope future studies will continue from ours and investigate 
the effects of acquisition as well. 
Another possible limitation of our study was the fact that the participants had very different levels of 
proficiency. It is possible that students at different stages of development feel differently, either about 
communicating in class, in a game, or both. However, we feel that using an intact class increased the 
ecological validity of our study. The participants were part of an existing group and thus represent an 
actual and ‘real’ community of learners that teachers (in Thailand) would be likely to face. If, as a group, 
these learners feel more comfortable communicating in a game than in a class, that is potentially useful 
information for their teachers. Nonetheless, future studies could employ a more strictly empirical design 
and control for factors such as proficiency level. 
Further, there may well be a novelty factor at play here. Although we tried to minimise this by conducting 
our study with Engineering students, all of whom are fluent computer users as well as regular game 
players, the fact that something unusual happened during their course may in itself have added a degree of 
excitement and may have coloured their responses. At the same time, if students feel excited about game 
play and if that leads to greater WTC in English, then we feel this does not significantly take away from 
the findings.  
Digital game-based learning is a relatively new field, with a great deal of potential. We believe future 
studies will add a great deal to our further understanding of their effect on communication and 
acquisition. We hope our study has made a small contribution to this exciting developing field.  
 
APPENDIX A. Willingness to Communicate Questionnaire Set 1 
This questionnaire contains 2 sections for measuring your willingness to communicate in the target 
language (English) particularly inside the language classroom. It should take about 10-15 minutes to 
complete. Please answer truthfully to guarantee the success of this study. Your answers will be treated 
confidentially and only the researchers will have access to the information you provide. Although we ask 
for your name, we do so only because we want to associate your answers to this questionnaire with your 
other data. Remember, you are telling the researchers about your communication in a classroom context. 
There are no right or wrong answers. 
 
Name: _________(Please give the character’s name that you use when playing Ragnarok Online©)  
Gender  (  ) Male   (  ) Female 
 
Section 1: Willingness to Communicate 
Instructions: Below you will read a number of different communication tasks in which you might 
engage in the language classroom. We would like you to tell us how willing you would be to do each of 
these in English. By ‘willing’ we mean ‘showing strong intention’ so please put an “X” in the box that 
describes the level of your willingness, using the following scales. 
1         2        3              4        5 
    Very unwilling   Somewhat unwilling   Neutral         Somewhat willing       Very willing 
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  118 
 Communication Tasks 1 2 3 4 5 
1 Talk to your classmates about a class assignment.      
2 Communicate ideas, feelings and opinions.      
3 Ask for clarification when you are confused about a task you must 
complete. 
     
4 Read task description/instructions before you start completing.      
5 Listen to what your classmates say in English.      
 
Section 2: State Communicative Self–confidence 
Instructions: We are interested in your anxiety about communication and self-perceived communicative 
competence when communicating in English in the classroom. Put an “X” in the box that represents the 
degree to which you agree or disagree with each statement, using the following scales: 
1        2 3        4 5 
Strongly disagree      Disagree     Neutral/No opinion          Agree       Strongly agree 
 Communication Tasks 1 2 3 4 5 
1 I am not worried about making mistakes.       
2 I find it difficult to communicate in English.       
3 I am worried that I will not understand what my classmates say 
in English.  
     
4 I feel nervous about using English while participating in class 
activities. 
     
5 I can say what I want to say in English.       
6 I think my classmates cannot understand me because of my poor 
English.  
     
7 I feel comfortable sharing my ideas/feelings/opinions with my 
classmates.  
     
8 I know the words required for each task completion.       
9 In general, I find communicating in English in classroom 
situations relaxing.    
     
10 I think participating in class activities help me develop my 
fluency (i.e. with little hesitation and pauses). 
     
THIS IS THE END OF THE QUESTIONNAIRE. 
 
APPENDIX B. Willingness to Communicate Questionnaire Set 2  
This questionnaire contains 2 sections for measuring your willingness to communicate in the target 
language (English) particularly during gameplay. It should take about 10 minutes to complete. Please 
answer truthfully to guarantee the success of this study. Your answers will be treated confidentially and 
only the researchers will have access to the information you provide. Although we ask for your name, we 
do so only because we want to associate your answers to this questionnaire with your other data. 
Remember, you are telling the researchers about your communication in a gaming environment. There 
are no right or wrong answers. 
 
Name: _________(Please give the character’s name that you use when playing Ragnarok Online©)  
Gender  (  ) Male   (  ) Female 
 
Section 1: Willingness to Communicate 
Instructions: Below you will read a number of different communication tasks in which you might 
engage in a computer game setting. We would like you to tell us how willing you would be to do each 
of these in English. By ‘willing’ we mean ‘showing strong intention’ so please put an “X” in the box that 
describes the level of your willingness, using the following scales. 
1 2          3      4  5 
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  119 
Very unwilling    Somewhat unwilling            Neutral    Somewhat willing    Very willing 
 Communication Tasks 1 2 3 4 5 
1 Talk to other game players about a quest assignment.      
2 Communicate ideas, feelings and opinions.      
3 Ask for clarification when you are confused about a task you must 
complete. 
     
4 Read quest description/instructions before you start completing.      
5 Listen to what other game players say in English.      
Section 2: State Communicative Self-confidence 
Instructions: We are interested in your anxiety about communication and self-perceived communicative 
competence that you feel when communicating in English in a computer game setting. Put an “X” in 
the box that represents the degree to which you agree or disagree with each statement, using the 
following scales:  
1 2 3 4             5 
Strongly disagree         Disagree     Neutral/ No opinion           Agree        Strongly agree 
Statements 1 2 3 4 5 
1 I am not worried about making mistakes.       
2 I find it difficult to communicate in English.       
3 I am worried that I will not understand what other players say in 
English.  
     
4 I feel nervous about using English while participating in 
computer game activities. 
     
5 I can say what I want to say in English.  
 
     
6 I think other players cannot understand me because of my poor 
English.  
     
7 I feel comfortable sharing my ideas/feelings/opinions with other 
players. 
     
8 I know the words required for each task completion.       
9 In general, I find communicating in English in computer game 
situations relaxing.    
     
10 I think participating in computer game activities help me develop 
my fluency (i.e. with little hesitation and pauses). 
     
THIS IS THE END OF THE QUESTIONNAIRE. 
 
NOTE 
1. Our research has shown that the learners in our study were significantly more willing to communicate 
in a game environment than in the classroom. There are two significant aspects to this finding; firstly, 
students do not have positive feelings about communicating in class, which goes some way to 
explaining low participation rates in English classes, in particular in Thailand. Secondly, students do 
have significantly more positive feelings about communicating in a game environment. This implies 
that there may be a role for the use of digital games in the English language curriculum, at least with 
learners of similar backgrounds as in this study. The challenge is to do so in a manner that benefits the 
L2 acquisition process; simply making learners enjoy themselves is not sufficient. The use of games 
needs to be integrated into the broader curriculum, in such a way that it supports the achievement of 
the objectives set within that context. (One of the reviewers made the suggestion of investigating the 
possibility of gamification of the learning environment, i.e. using game-like elements in regular 
classes. We think this is an excellent suggestion for future research).  
 
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  120 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Dr. Hayo Reinders is Director of the doctoral program in TESOL (Teaching English to Speakers of Other 
Languages) at Anaheim University in the United States and Head of Education at Unitec in New Zealand. 
He is also Editor-in-Chief of Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching. Hayo’s interests are in 
technology in education, learner autonomy, and out-of-class learning and he is a speaker on these subjects 
for the Royal Society of New Zealand. His most recent books are on teacher autonomy, teaching 
methodologies, and second language acquisition and he edits a book series on ‘New Language Learning 
and Teaching Environments’ for Palgrave Macmillan. 
E-mail: hayoreinders@gmail.com 
Dr. Sorada Wattana is a lecturer at Dhurakij Pundit University in Bangkok, Thailand. She is keen to 
implement emerging technologies in her teaching practice and wants to continue contributing to a variety 
of research projects in computer-assisted language learning. 
E-mail: nuttakritta.cho@dpu.ac.th 
 
REFERENCES 
Anyaegbu, R,, Ting, W., & Li, Y. (2012). Serious game motivation in an EFL classroom in Chinese 
primary school. TOJET: The Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, 11(1), 154–164.  
Aoki, N. (1999). Affect and the role of teachers in the development of learner autonomy. In J. Arnold 
(Ed.), Affect in language learning (pp. 142–154). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Aubrey, S. (2010). Influences on Japanese students’ willingness to communicate across three different 
sized EFL classes (Master’s thesis). Asian EFL Journal. www.asian-efl-journal.com/Thesis/Thesis-
Aubrey.pdf 
Aubrey, S. (2011). Facilitating interaction in East Asian EFL classrooms: Increasing students' willingness 
to communicate. Language Education in Asia, 2(2), 237–245.  
Baker, S., & MacIntyre, P. (2000). The role of gender and immersion in communication and second 
language orientations. Language Learning, 50(2), 311–341.  
Cao, Y., & Philp, J. (2006). Interactional context and willingness to communicate: A comparison of 
behavior in whole class, group and dyadic interaction. System, 34(4), 480–493.  
Chapelle, C. (2001). Computer applications in second language acquisition: Foundations for teaching, 
testing, and research. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Chu, H. (2008). Shyness and EFL learning in Taiwan: A study of shy and non-shy college students’ use of 
strategies, foreign language anxiety, motivation, and willingness to communicate. (Unpublished PhD 
dissertation), University of Texas at Austin.    
Clément, R., Baker, S, & MacIntyre, P. (2003). Willingness to communicate in a second language: The 
effects of context, norms, and vitality. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 22(2), 190–209.  
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Compton, L. (2004). Using text chat to improve willingness to communicate. In J.-B. Son (Ed.), 
Computer-Assisted Language Learning: Concepts, contexts, and practices (pp. 123–144). New York, 
NY: iUniverse. 
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  121 
deHaan, J. (2005a). Acquisition of Japanese as a foreign language through a baseball video game. 
Foreign Language Annuals, 38(2), 278–282.  
deHaan, J. (2005b). Learning language through video games: A theoretical framework, an evaluation of 
game genres and questions for futhre research. In S. P. Schaffer & M. L. Price (Eds.), Interactive 
convergence: Critical issues in multimedia (pp. 229–239). Oxford, UK: Inter-Disciplinary Press. 
Derwing, T., Munro, M. , & Thomson, R. (2008). A longitudinal study of ESL learners' fluency and 
comprehensibility development. Applied Linguistics, 29(3), 359–380.  
Freiermuth, M., & Jarrell, D. (2006). Willingesss to communicate: Can online chat help? International 
Journal of Applied Linguistics, 16(2), 189–212.  
Fujii, Y. (2010). Acquisition of English as a foreign language with an adventure puzzle video game. 
(Unpublished graduation thesis), University of Shizuoka, Japan.    
Gee, J. (2007). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Gee, J. (2012). Foreword. In H. Reinders (Ed.), Digital games in language learning and teaching. 
Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Habgood, M., Ainsworth, S.. & Benford, S. (2005). Endogenous fantasy and learning in digital games. 
Simulation & Gaming, 36(4), 483–498.  
Hashimoto, Y. (2002). Motivation and willingness to communicate as predictors of reported L2 use: The 
Japanese ESL context. Second Language Studies, 20(2), 29–70.  
Horwitz, E., Horwitz, M., & Cope, J. (1986). Foreign language classroom anxiety. The Modern Language 
Journal, 70(2), 125–132.  
Jarrell, D., & Freiermuth, M. (2005). The motivational power of Internet chat. RELC Journal, 36(1), 59–
72.  
Kamprasertwong, M. (2010). Willingness to communicate in English speech as a second language: A 
study of Thai, Chinese, and Dutch samples. (Unpublished MA dissertation), University of Groningen, The 
Netherlands.    
Kang, S.-J. (2005). Dynamic emergence of situational willingness to communicate in a second language. 
System, 33(2), 277–292.  
Kissau, S., McCullough, H., & Pyke, J. (2010). Leveling the playing field: The effects of online second 
language instruction on student willingness to communicate in French. CALICO Journal, 27(2), 277–297.  
Lu, Y., & Hsu, C. (2008). Willingness to communicate in intercultural interactions between Chinese and 
Americans. Journal of Intercultural Communication Research, 37(2), 75–88.  
MacIntyre, P. (1994). Variables underlying willingness to communicate: A causal analysis. 
Communication Research Reports, 11(2), 135–142.  
MacIntyre, P., Babin, P., & Clément, R. (1999). Willingness to communicate: Antecedents & 
consequences. Communication Quarterly, 47(215–229).  
MacIntyre, P., Baker, S., Clément, R., & Conrod, S. (2001). Willingness  to communicate, social support, 
and language-learning orientations of immersion students. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 
23(3), 369–388.  
MacIntyre, P., Baker, S., Clément, R., & Donovan, L. (2003). Talking in order to learn: willingness to 
communicate and intensive program. Canadian Modern Language Review, 59(4), 589–607.  
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  122 
MacIntyre, P., & Charos, C. (1996). Personality, attitudes, and affect as predictors of second language 
communication. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 15(1), 3–26.  
MacIntyre, P., Dörnyei, Z., Clément, R., & Noels, K. (1998). Conceptualizing willingness to 
communicate in a L2: A situational model of L2 confidence and affiliation. The Modern Language 
Journal, 82(4), 545–562.  
MacIntyre, P., & Gardner, R. (1994). The subtle effects of language anxiety on cognitive processing in 
the second language. Language Learning, 44(2), 283–305.  
McCroskey, J. (1977). Oral communication apprehension: A summary of recent theory and research. 
Human Communication Research, 4(1), 78–96.  
McCroskey, J. (1991). Willingness to communicate, communication apprehension, introversion, and self-
reported communication competence: Finnish and American comparisions. Communication Research 
Reports, 8(1), 55–64.  
McCroskey, J., & Richmond, V. (1982). Communication apprehension and shyness: Conceptual and 
operational distinction. Central States Speech Journal, 33(4), 458–468.  
McCroskey, J., & Richmond, V. (1990). Willingness to communicate: Differing cultural perspectives. 
Southern Communication Journal, 56(1), 72–77.  
Mitchell, A., & Savill-Smith, C. (2004). The use of computer and video games for learning: A review of 
the literature. London: Learning and Skills Development Agency. 
Peng, J. (2007). Willingness to communicate in the Chinese EFL classroom: A cultural perspective. In J. 
Liu (Ed.), English language teaching in China: New approaches, perspectives and standards (pp. 250–
269). Bodmin, UK: Continuum. 
Peng, J., & Woodrow, L. (2010). Willingness to communicate in English: A model in the Chinese EFL 
classroom context. Language Learning, 60(4), 834–876.  
Peterson, M. (2010). Computerized games and simulations in computer-assisted language learning: A 
meta-analysis of research. Simulation & Gaming, 41(1), 72–93.  
Peterson, M. (2011). Digital gaming and second language development: Japanese learners interactions in 
a MMORPG. Digital Culture & Education, 3(1), 56–73.  
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital game-based learning. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 
Ranalli, J. (2008). Learning English with The Sims: Exploring authentic computer simulation games for 
L2 learning. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(3), 441–445.  
Rankin, Y., Gold, R., & Gooch, B. (2006). 3D role-playing game as language learning tools. Paper 
presented at the EuroGraphics 2006, Vienna, Austria. 
Rankin, Y., Morrison, D., McNeal, M., Gooch, B., & Shute, M. (2009). Time will tell: in-game social 
interactions that facilitate second language acquisition. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 4th 
International Conference on Foundations of Digital Games, Orlando, Florida. 
Reinders, H. (Ed.). (2012). Digital Games in Language Learning and Teaching. Basingstoke, UK: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
Reinders, H. & Wattana, S. (2011). Learn English or die: The effects of digital games on interaction and 
willingness to communicate in a foreign language. Digital Culture and Education, 3(1), 4–28.  
Reinders, H., & Wattana, S. (2012). Talk to me! Games and students' willingness to communicate. In H. 
Reinders (Ed.), Digital games in language learning and teaching (pp. 156–188). Basingstoke, UK: 
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana Can I Say Something? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  123 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
Roy, D. (2007). Warcraft teaches Spanish.  Retrieved from 
http://www.crossgamer.com/warcraft_teaches_spanish_1 
Samudavanija, C. (1999). Plearn Puea Roo (Enjoyment for learnng). Bangkok, Thailand: Vajiravudh 
College. 
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and comprehensible 
output in its development. In S. Gass & C. Madden (Eds.), Input in second language acquisition (pp. 
235–253). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1995). Problems in output and the cognitive processes they generate: A step 
towards second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 16, 371–391.  
Thorne, S. (2008). Transcultural communication in open Internet environments and massively multiplayer 
online games. In S. S. Magnan (Ed.), Mediating discourse online (pp. 305–327). Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Ushioda, E. (1996). Learner autonomy 5: The role of motivation. Dublin, Ireland: Authentik. 
van Lier, L.(1996). Interaction in the language curriculum: Awareness, autonomy and authenticity. 
London, UK: Longman. 
Voulgari, I. (2011). Collaborative learning in massively multiplayer online games: A review of social, 
cognitive, and motivational perspectives. In P. Felicia (Ed.), Handbook of research on improving learning 
and motivation through educational games: Multidisciplinary approaches (Vol. 1, pp. 370–394). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
Whitton, N. (2007). Motivation and computer game based learning. ICT: Providing choices for learners 
and learning. Proceedings ascilite Singapore, 1063–1067.  
Whitton, N. (2010). Learning with digital games: A practical guide to engaging students in Higher 
Education. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Whitton, N. (2011). Theories of motivation for adults learning with games. In P. Felicia (Ed.), Handbook 
of research on improving learning and motivation through educational games: Multidisciplinary 
approaches (Vol. 1, pp. 352–369). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
Yashima, T. (2002). Willingness to communicate in a second language: The Japanese EFL context. The 
Modern Language Journal, 86(1), 54–66.  
Yashima, T., Zenuk-Nishide, L., & Shimizu, K. (2004). The influence of attitudes and affect on 
willingness to communicate and second language communication. Language Learning, 54(1), 119–152.  
Zhao, Y., & Lai, C. (2009). MMORPGs and foreign language education. In R. E. Ferdig (Ed.), Handbook 
of research on effective electronic gaming in education (Vol. 1, pp. 402–421). New York, NY: 
Information Science Reference. 
Zheng, D., Young, M., Brewer, R., & Wagner, M. (2009). Attitude and self-efficacy change: English 
language learning in virtual worlds. CALICO Journal, 27(1), 205–231.  
OTHER MEDIA 
EverQuest II. (2004). Sony Online Entertainment. 
Global Playground Gravity. (2010). http://www.gravity.co.kr/eng/games/ragnarok.asp 
World of Warcraft. (2004). Blizzard Enterntainment. 
