Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/review3.pdf 
February 2014, Volume 18, Number 1 
pp. 49–52 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 49 
REVIEW OF ENCOUNTERS: CHINESE LANGUAGE AND CULTURE  
Encounters: Chinese Language and Culture (Student Book 1) 
Encounters: Chinese Language and Culture (Character 
Writing Workbook 1) 
Cynthia Y. Ning; John S. Montanaro 
2012 
ISBN: 978-0-300-16162-5 
           978-0-300-16170-0 
US $94.99; US $29.99 
336 pp.; 256 pp. 
Yale University Press; China International Publishing Group 
New Haven and London 
 
Review by Yaqiong Cui, Michigan State University 
In the past two decades, great value has been placed on communicative and cultural competency in 
language classrooms. This has led to a burgeoning of textbooks focusing on learners’ communicative 
skills and their ability to use the language in the target culture. However, Chinese textbooks often lack 
key communicative criteria and often do not require learners to be able to use Chinese in authentic, real-
life settings. Some Chinese textbooks on the market, such as Chinese Link (Wu, Yu & Zhang, 2007) and 
Integrated Chinese (Liu, 2008), seem to place great emphasis on learners’ reading and writing skills and 
introduce a large amount of vocabulary and grammar rules in each chapter. Few activities are devoted to 
learners’ communicative skills, and instructions are sometimes unclear, which require teachers to invest 
much time preparing for class. Culture might only be presented as facts within limited space at the end of 
each chapter. Thus, teachers of Chinese might be intrigued by Encounters: Chinese Language and 
Culture, because it is promoted as a truly communicative and task-based textbook. I am glad to report that 
it is highly communicative, has authentic materials, and most importantly, is, as it is promoted, “culturally 
rich and delightfully engaging” (p. xvii). However, teachers who use it will still need to supplement parts 
of the book to enhance its potential to promote task-based learning. 
Integrated, Authentic, Practical, and Engaging 
The Encounters program provides an integrated series of learning materials: student books, character 
writing workbooks, companion website, CD-ROMs (dramatic video episodes, instructional videos on 
Chinese culture, information about class testing and sample exams, etc.), and annotated instructor editions. 
One of the most distinctive features of the Encounters program is that it includes a dramatic storyline that 
was filmed in six different locations across China with a cast of nine characters from different areas and 
with different cultural and social backgrounds. These characters discover themselves and others as they 
explore the language and culture of China. This is very similar to Sol Viente (VanPatten, Lesser & 
Keating, 2011), a Spanish textbook, in that it also provides a video series particularly made for the 
textbook. This genre of textbook has been gaining popularity in language education in the United States. 
Yaqiong Cui                            Review of Encounters: Chinese Language and Culture 
 
Language Learning & Technology  50 
An additional bonus is a series of video culture notes. For example, people on the street talk about their 
views on topics such as different forms of greetings in Chinese and different methods of bargaining in 
street markets. For the culture notes, the videographers recorded a mix of non-actors (passers-by), actors 
tasked with certain communicative speech acts (these appear to be mainly unscripted), and teachers, who 
comment on the speech acts and explain them through a Chinese cultural lens. Learners thereby become 
engaged in both urban and rural settings in China. Also importantly, through watching these videos, 
learners get a chance to hear a range of native speakers’ accents. 
The title of each unit is written in English, Pinyin, and Chinese characters. Interestingly, unlike the other 
textbooks in which the titles are simply “Lesson X”, specific expressions that are related to the topics in 
the unit are presented as the titles. These are often four-character Chinese idioms or widely used proverbs. 
For example, Unit Five concerns family and friends, with title “亲朋好友” (qīnpénghǎoyǒu, “family and 
friends”); Unit Nine deals with shopping and bargaining; the title is, then, “一分价钱一分货” (yì fēn 
jiàqián yì fēn huò, “you get what you pay for”). In addition, on each unit’s introductory page, students can 
garner a clear idea of what they will learn in the unit from a list of skills and topics that will be covered in 
each lesson. Introducing a unit in this way is not only appealing to learners but also culturally rich and 
authentic. It corresponds with the authors’ idea that students should be immersed in the target language 
and culture immediately, from the start of Chinese learning. When overviewing the complete table of 
contents, I sensed that this textbook might be task-based, in that the chapter topics are based on what 
students will need to know to communicate in Chinese.  
The units in the textbook contain supplementary or additional information through three types of colored 
“boxes”: “Grammar Bits” (blue), “FYI” (green), and “Cultural Bits” (red). Vocabulary, grammar, culture, 
and other information are, in this way, not presented as isolated sections as seen in many other textbooks. 
Rather, they are interspersed throughout the units, interwoven with the storyline, and embedded in the 
audio and video materials. “Grammar Bits” boxes explicitly instruct the grammar needed to convey 
meaning related to the unit topics and activities. The authors created these grammar lessons as 
“incidental”; however, one might contextualize them better as reflecting a planned focus on form, as the 
grammar forms highlighted anticipate the language needed to complete the communicative tasks at the 
heart of the lessons. The grammar explanations in these boxes are presented in English, which might 
negate the need for teachers to focus precious in-class time explaining sometimes complicated grammar 
points, which further allows teachers to only talk in Chinese during class. “FYI” boxes provide factual 
information (for example, that China has only one time zone) and study tips. The “Cultural Bits” boxes 
often have questions for discussion related to the cultural aspects of the video and only provide, as the 
authors note, a “jumping-off point” (p. xxvii) for investigations into Chinese society and culture. In other 
words, teachers have plenty of room to supplement the instruction with their own culturally-focused tasks 
here. But the authors should be commended for not leaving culture to the very end of each unit and for 
not simply listing cultural facts. With this textbook the Chinese teaching field is closer to the notion that 
culture is inseparable from language. It helps students explore how Chinese culture is different from or 
similar to their own by providing thought-provoking questions. 
With a great emphasis on practicality, lessons in Encounters deal with up-to-date topics. For instance, 
when studying Unit Six, in which professions and careers are discussed, students learn about the changes 
taking place in workplaces in modern China, which leads to a further discussion of the relationship 
between education and careers in contemporary Chinese society. Another example is Unit Nine, which 
deals with shopping and bargaining. Different from other textbooks in which students only learn about 
some expressions used when shopping, this unit embeds language learning within the art of bargaining 
and offers useful tips for bargaining in China. Another enjoyable aspect about Encounters is that 
numerous authentic texts are presented throughout. By incorporating authentic materials—business cards, 
advertisements, newspapers, signs, and hand-written notes—the lessons provide practical information that 
enables students to better understand Chinese culture. 
Yaqiong Cui                            Review of Encounters: Chinese Language and Culture 
 
Language Learning & Technology  51 
Unlike some other Chinese textbooks, which can be monotonous in design, Encounters features a colorful 
layout. It has authentic photographs, attractive illustrations, and organizing icons. These bells and 
whistles likely keep learners motivated because they are visually pleasing. To encourage students to learn 
Chinese, entertaining rap songs are presented to review the core vocabulary and expressions in each unit. 
A “Recap” (wrap-up) section appears at the end of each unit. Each of these sections includes a summary 
of grammar points, a list of vocabulary, and a checklist of “can-do” skills that students should have 
mastered after learning the unit. Those skills span listening, speaking, reading, writing, and particularly, 
understanding culture. The “Recap,” which corresponds to the preview section on the introductory page 
of that unit, also helps students monitor their progress, identify gaps in their learning, and appreciate their 
accomplishments. All of these features may help deepen learners’ understanding of the language, the 
culture, and the people of China, and also make the learning process more organized and enjoyable. This 
is particularly important to help build self-regulating and autonomous learners, ones who will be more 
likely to continue to learn Chinese to the advanced level.  
A Variety of Activities 
Another characteristic of Encounters is the provision of a wide range of activities. Each unit is comprised 
of several “Encounters” in which real-life topics are presented, and activities are designed in such a way 
that students start from more form-focused practices and then progress to more meaning-based 
communicative exercises. For example, in Unit Four in which nationalities are discussed, the first 
encounter is “expressing nationality.” To begin, students are introduced to vocabulary concerning 
nationalities through various form-focused exercises. Once they become familiar with the expressions, 
they start doing communicative activities. For example, students are asked to take notes on short 
conversations with classmates about their home cultures. The next encounter focuses on talking about 
places students have lived, in which students, again, learn vocabulary and expressions through exercises, 
and then move to a “mingling” communicative activity, in which they are instructed to ask several 
classmates where they were born, where they grew up and where they live now. The following encounters 
follow a similar pattern. The last encounter of each unit is always Reading and Writing, in which the 
focus shifts to reading and writing skills so that students can develop a range of communication abilities. 
However, within this variety, I found the various activities to be somewhat unrelated at times. For 
example, in Unit Four, students first read various window signs from China and a postcard from Taiwan, 
all of which they then translate into English, and then they are instructed to write an introductory note to a 
new friend, explaining a bit about oneself. It is perhaps a shame that the various activities are not 
integrated more, with, for example, the post-card writing example being extended into a postcard writing 
task. The content of the postcards could have also been related to the text presented in the window signs. 
These missed opportunities are unfortunate and would be worth revisiting in a subsequent edition. While 
the speaking and writing activities often provide a nice shell for the communicative activities, teachers 
will need to thoughtfully consider how to make the activities more meaningful and more developed into 
complex tasks with outcomes that can be assessed. The annotated instructor’s edition provides useful tips 
and suggestions on how to use the materials. Teachers may want to take those tips a step further and 
create links between the activities in order to design more robust and meaningful speaking and writing 
task. 
Use of Multimedia and Technology 
An outstanding feature of Encounters is that the program has a companion website which offers an array 
of materials and activities, including interactive exercises, streaming video and audio content, and other 
resources for practicing speaking, listening, reading, and writing in Chinese. Online media enhances 
learning and teaching by providing a powerful yet intuitive tool to engage language learners and 
instructors (Cairncross & Mannion, 2001; Evans & Gibbons, 2007). The use of music also provides 
Yaqiong Cui                            Review of Encounters: Chinese Language and Culture 
 
Language Learning & Technology  52 
students a lighthearted and friendly environment to engage in Chinese learning.  
Other Notes 
What I also like about the Encounters program is that the character writing workbook presents the stroke 
order of each character and contextualizes each character to help learners’ understanding. Strategies for 
remembering the characters are also suggested. In addition, the workbook shows the evolution of 
characters from ancient to modern Chinese in both traditional and simplified forms. Indeed, the inclusion 
of both traditional and simplified characters may help learners who have different learning purposes; 
however, for beginning learners with no previous experience with the Chinese writing system, it might be 
confusing. Also, unlike many other textbooks in which the exercises are written solely in characters, 
Encounters provides both Pinyin and character forms, with instructions in English. This may help 
beginning learners better recognize Chinese characters; however, it also involves the potential problem 
that learners may overly rely on Pinyin as they go through the units.  
Despite those minor flaws, Encounters provides learners with meaningful, authentic, and engaging 
contexts. More importantly, the use of multimedia and technology helps learners explore China and 
Chinese culture. As the authors claim, Encounters “masterfully guides learners along a well-prepared path 
toward intercultural communication and understanding, a path that also leads to fuller participation in the 
modern global community” (p. xvii). There is no doubt that this textbook can bring significant 
contributions to the field of Chinese language teaching and inspire new innovations in the development of 
Chinese teaching materials. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Yaqiong Cui is a doctoral student and research assistant in the Second Language Studies Ph.D. Program 
at Michigan State University. Her primary research interest is second language acquisition and the 
processing of Chinese from a psycholinguistic perspective. She has taught Chinese for three years in the 
Department of East Asian Languages and Cultures at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. She 
is now working as a language facilitator at the Center for Language Teaching Advancement at MSU.    
E-mail: cuiyaqio@msu.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Cairncross, S., & Mannion, M. (2001). Interactive multimedia and learning: Realizing the benefits. 
Innovations in Education and Teaching, 38(2), 156–164. 
Evans, C., & Gibbons, N. J. (2007). The interactivity effect in multimedia learning. Computer & 
Education, 49(4), 1147–1160. 
Liu, Y. (2008). Integrated Chinese (3rd ed.). Boston, MA: Cheng & Tsui.  
VanPatten, B., Lesser, M. J., & Keating, G. D. (2011). Sol Viente (3rd ed.). Columbus, OH: McGraw-Hill. 
Wu, S., Yu, Y., & Zhang, Y. (2007). Chinese link: Zhongwen Tiandi. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall. 
