Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/olson.pdf 
October 2014, Volume 18, Number 3 
pp. 173–192 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 173 
BENEFITS OF VISUAL FEEDBACK ON SEGMENTAL  
PRODUCTION IN THE L2 CLASSROOM 
Daniel J. Olson, Purdue University 
While a growing body of research has established the benefits of pronunciation training on 
second language (L2) production, these benefits have yet to be incorporated into the 
general skills language classroom in a systematic manner. Furthermore, although 
relatively new speech analysis software has been shown to be useful in providing visual 
feedback for L2 suprasegmental (i.e., intonation) production, there is a relative lack of 
research on its potential implementation for segmental instruction. The current paper 
presents a systematic analysis of the effectiveness of a visual feedback paradigm (VFP), in 
an L2 Spanish classroom, as a pedagogical method for pronunciation teaching at the 
segmental level (i.e., Spanish intervocalic stops). Results demonstrate a significant 
improvement of L2 stop production relative to a control group receiving traditional 
pronunciation feedback. Furthermore, findings demonstrate that VFP leads to small 
incremental gains. Discussion addresses the role of VFP on segmental production and the 
potential practical implementations of visual feedback in the lower-level, general skills 
language classroom. 
Keywords: Pronunciation, Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Second Language 
Learning, Phonetics 
APA Citation: Olson, D. J. (2014). Benefits of visual feedback on segmental production 
in the L2 classroom. Language Learning & Technology, 18(3), 173–192. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/olson.pdf 
Received: November 18, 2013; Accepted: February 27, 2014; Published: October 1, 2014 
Copyright: © Daniel J. Olson 
INTRODUCTION 
Within second language acquisition and applied linguistics research, the instruction of second language 
(L2) pronunciation has often taken a back seat to the more prominent aspects of syntax and morphology 
(Deng et al., 2009). This relative secondary role has led some researchers to claim that the study and 
teaching of pronunciation has been “marginalized” (Derwing & Munro, 2005, p. 382). As a growing body 
of research has steadily built a case for the benefits of pronunciation instruction, there remains a 
disconnect between the laboratory-based empirical research and pedagogical classroom implementations 
(e.g., Wang & Munro, 2004), a general lack of pedagogical materials for the teaching of pronunciation, 
and high levels of instructor uncertainty (e.g., Foote, Holtby, & Derwing, 2011). The lack of empirically 
proven classroom methods is most acute at the lower-levels of language instruction, as materials focused 
on pronunciation are often geared towards advanced learners of a second language. Furthermore, with the 
advent of easily accessible speech analysis technology, researchers and instructors are faced with 
questions about if and how such technology may be applicable in the L2 general skills classroom.  
In light of these gaps in both research and implementation of methods for pronunciation instruction in the 
L2 classroom, this paper has two main goals. First, drawing on emerging research on the use of speech 
analysis technology for phonetic segmental instruction, this paper seeks to provide empirical evidence for 
the effectiveness of a visual feedback paradigm (VFP) on L2 segmental production in a classroom setting. 
As a second, but closely related goal, this paper investigates the generalizability of pronunciation gains, to 
determine if production improvements resulting from a VFP are transferrable to phonetic phenomena not 
directly addressed in the pedagogical activities. 
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 174 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Pronunciation Instruction in the L2 Classroom  
For researchers of pronunciation instruction, a topic of primary interest has been whether or not training 
has any significant effect on L2 pronunciation, and if so to what extent. To that end, a number of studies 
have worked to isolate the effect of various types of training, with pre- and post-test evaluations (e.g., 
Archibald, 1998; Derwing, Munro, & Wiebe, 1998; Derwing & Rossiter, 2003; Elliot, 1995; Simões, 
1996; Zampini, 1996). This line of research has examined a variety of L2 phonetic features, including 
vowel quality, rhotics and trills, voice onset time, liquids, and prosodic features, and has regularly found 
positive effects of training, albeit to widely varying degrees. Furthermore, these studies have shown 
pronunciation improvements resulting from a wide variety of treatments, including auditory 
discrimination training (Bradlow, Pisoni, Akahane-Yamada, & Tohkura, 1997), explicit articulatory 
instruction (Castino, 1996), awareness training (Pennington & Ellis, 2000), high variability phonetic 
training (Thomson, 2012) and mixed-approaches (Couper, 2003; Derwing, Munro, & Wiebe, 1997; Elliot, 
1999; González-Bueno, 1997; Lord, 2005, 2010). While such findings have been subject to some 
variation (e.g., Suter, 1976), there is general consensus in the literature that pronunciation training has 
been shown to improve pronunciation. 
While L2 pronunciation has been the subject of an active research agenda, it is clear that the benefits of 
such investigation have not been systematically incorporated into pedagogical approaches to language 
teaching (Levis & Grant, 2003), as evidenced by the lack of adequate materials, the largely ad-hoc 
pronunciation methods such as corrective feedback (Olson, 2014), and instructor uncertainty regarding 
pronunciation instruction (Foote, Holtby, & Derwing, 2011). The lack of pronunciation materials is most 
acute at the lower-levels of language learning, with most materials having been designed for advanced 
learners or for stand-alone pronunciation courses (Darcy, Ewert, & Lidster, 2012). When pronunciation is 
included in general skills materials, it often lacks sufficient detail, contains inaccurate or inconsistent 
information, and/or is given minimal attention (for Spanish, see Arteaga, 2000; for French, see Miller, 
2012; for ESL, see Derwing, Diepenbroek, & Foote, 2012). With respect to the current methods used for 
pronunciation instruction in the general skills classroom, a recent survey in the lower-level university L2 
classroom found that most instructors included pronunciation in an impromptu manner, with modeling or 
corrective feedback as the most frequently employed method (Olson, 2014). Furthermore, surveyed 
instructors spent an average of less than 3 minutes per class period on pronunciation, considered to be 
insufficient by a majority of the instructors polled (77%). These results parallel other recent findings 
through both observational methods (Foote, Trofimovich, Collins, & Soler Urzúa, 2013) and instructor 
self-reports (Foote, Holtby, & Derwing, 2011; Murphy, 2011), demonstrating that pronunciation training 
is dedicated relatively little class time and consists most commonly of corrective feedback. Finally, 
instructors have been shown to lack both formal training and confidence to teach pronunciation (Burgess 
& Spencer, 2000; Derwing, 2010), consistently seeking professional development in the area (Breitkreutz, 
Derwing, & Rossiter, 2002; Burns, 2006; MacDonald, 2002). 
In addition to a general lack of pedagogical materials and methods for pronunciation training, many 
researchers have noted the lack of investigation dedicated to the teaching of phonetics relative to other 
language domains, namely syntax and morphology (Deng et al., 2009; Derwing & Munro, 2005; Leather, 
2000; Levis, 1999; Lord, 2005; Major, 1998). As such, while a number of studies have demonstrated a 
positive effect of pronunciation instruction for L2 learners, there appears to be inadequate pedagogical 
materials and a relative lack of classroom-based empirical research. These shortcomings have led to a 
“marginalization” of pronunciation in the classroom. 
Visual Feedback for L2 Pronunciation Instruction 
Significant advances in technology in the last 40 years have led to the creation of a number of speech 
analysis tools. While early tools were limited in scope and accessibility, more recent developments are 
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 175 
powerful, freely accessible, and extremely versatile. A growing number of researchers have sought to 
determine if these tools might serve to improve L2 pronunciation, and if so, how they might be 
incorporated into the language classroom. 
While such technology has come in a variety of forms, one of the most fruitful avenues for research has 
been the visual feedback paradigm (VFP), also termed electronic visual feedback, as well as the earlier 
iteration of model visual input. With the advent of software such as Visi-Pitch (Kay Elemetrics, 1986), 
researchers have investigated the benefits of visual analysis of self-produced speech by non-native 
speakers and/or visual modeling of native speaker productions (de Bot, 1983). Although early work 
focused more on native models rather than on feedback, the current typical VFP consists of: (a) a non-
native speaker recording the stimuli; (b) a visual display of the speech feature, most commonly the 
intonation contour; (c) a visual display of a native speaker production for comparison, often accompanied 
by a corresponding auditory presentation; and (d) a re-recording on the part of the non-native participant 
attempting to match the native-speaker productions (although for transient visual feedback, see Hincks & 
Edlund, 2009).  
Within this framework, suprasegmental speech features, in particular intonation contours, have been 
among the most studied (Anderson-Hsieh, 1992, 1994; Chun, 1989, 1998, 2002; Molholt, 1988). Much of 
the early work was conducted by de Bot and colleagues, and showed potential improvements in L2 
learner production through visual presentation of native speaker-produced model intonation contours (de 
Bot, 1980; de Bot & Mailfert, 1982; Weltens & de Bot, 1984). The gains made by L2 learners using a 
combination of visual and auditory input, were found to be superior to the gains made solely with 
auditory feedback (de Bot, 1983). More recently, Levis and Pickering (2004) have noted that such a 
paradigm can be useful for instruction of both local and discourse level pitch contours. With respect to the 
nature of gains for suprasegmental features, Hardison (2004) showed that improvements in intonation 
contour productions are generalizable to novel utterances, not included in the initial training (for caution 
on generalizability, see Seferoğlu, 2005).  
Prosodic features represented an ideal starting point for investigation of VFP for a number of reasons, 
including both practical and pedagogical. Specifically, early speech software was able to produce accurate 
representations of intonation contours, and interpretation of the contours was found to be relatively 
intuitive for speakers (Léon & Martin, 1972). While early studies focused specifically on pitch contour, 
Chun (2007) makes a call to extend the focus beyond the suprasegmental level. Further technological 
developments and increased accessibility have allowed for investigation of the effects of VFPs on 
individual speech segments, such as syllables, consonants, and vowels. For example, Lambacher (1999) 
detailed a VFP implemented in a second language classroom, focused on segmental features (see also 
Molholt, 1988). Using spectrograms, the VFP provided learners with visual representations of a variety of 
speech sounds: stops, fricatives, and liquids. While Lambacher (1999) sought only to provide a possible 
method, subsequent work has aimed to evaluate the quantifiable benefits of a VFP on segmental features, 
with mixed results. Saito (2007), using PRAAT speech analysis software, for example, showed an 
increase in vowel pronunciation accuracy for Japanese learners of English who were presented with visual 
images of their own productions to compare to those of native-English speakers. Similarly, positive 
results have been found for waveform displays, in conjunction with perceptual training, in the acquisition 
of two different length contrasts, including vowel length (Okuno, 2013), and singleton/geminate contrasts 
(Motohashi-Saigo & Hardison, 2009). For example, Motohashi-Siago and Hardison (2009) reported 
significantly improved geminate production accuracy in L2 English learners of Japanese, as rated by 
native listeners, following an audio-visual perceptual training involving waveform displays. In contrast, 
Ruellot (2011) investigated the benefits of a VFP on vowel production (i.e., /u/ and /y/) in native-English 
L2 learners of French, and found no overall improvement. Correspondingly, Carey (2004) investigated 
the benefits of a VFP on vowel production, using Kay Sona-Match software, with varying results for 
different vowels. Thus, while the bulk of the work has examined the effect of visual feedback on 
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 176 
suprasegmental production, there is both clear promise and a need for further investigation of the utility of 
VFP on segmental production.  
It is important to note that much of the previous research has implemented visual feedback within the 
laboratory (for intonation, see de Bot, 1983; for segmental features, see Saito, 2007), or as part of a larger 
phonetic-focused course for advanced learners (Lord, 2010). While as a whole, this research demonstrated 
significant gains in L2 pronunciation, it remains to be seen if such benefits may also be found through 
implementation of VFP into the lower-level L2 classroom setting where students are still developing their 
general skills.  
Concerns about VFP and Speech Analysis Software 
It is worth noting that a number of researchers have raised concerns over the use of stock speech analysis 
programs, particularly in the L2 classroom. These concerns have predominantly been about practical 
issues, rather than theoretical ones. Some authors have claimed that speech analysis software was 
designed for researchers, and is thus ill-suited to the needs of the student (Derwing, 2010; Setter & 
Jenkins, 2005; Wang & Munro, 2004). In addition, claims can be made that interpretation of visual 
presentations may not be intuitive for non-trained students (e.g., Chun, 1998), although some forms of 
visual feedback, such as intonation contours (e.g., Hardison, 2004) may be easier to interpret than others 
(e.g., spectrograms). Finally, given that much of the previous research on the effect of the VFP has taken 
place in a laboratory setting, not within the actual L2 classroom, there may be additional practical 
concerns associated with pedagogical implementation.  
Addressing these concerns, Olson (2014), following the implementation of a VFP in a third semester 
university level Spanish course, assessed student perceptions of the VFP via a usability questionnaire. 
Overwhelmingly, students found the PRAAT software easy to use. Moreover, students felt that the VFP 
was a good method for conceptualizing pronunciation and would ultimately be beneficial to improving 
pronunciation. Olson concluded that although more streamlined, user-friendly visual feedback software 
should be an ongoing goal in the field, the current researcher-focused iterations are clearly usable in the 
L2 classroom. 
Research Questions 
Considering the need for systematic methods of pronunciation instruction and the relevancy of the visual 
feedback paradigm for improving segmental production, the research questions of the current paper are 
twofold: (1) Does a visual feedback paradigm significantly improve L2 segmental production in a 
classroom setting? And (2) are L2 segmental production gains generalizable to similar contexts? 
METHODOLOGY 
To answer the above questions, this paper presents a visual feedback paradigm tailored to the classroom 
setting, implemented with lower-level language learners. The benefits of the VFP on segmental 
pronunciation, limited to the production of intervocalic stop consonants, are addressed through acoustic 
analysis. Generalizability is addressed in two distinct ways: (a) Segmental generalizability, defined as 
gains made on non-target segments from training on target segments in a similar phonetic context (i.e., 
improvement for [β] production during training on [ð]); (b) Utterance-level generalizability, defined as 
gains made on segmental production in connected speech resulting from training on targets in isolation.  
Participants 
Participants in the study were drawn from two third semester Spanish course sections at a large, 
Midwestern university. The third semester Spanish course is considered to be an intermediate-low level 
course, focused on the four basic language skills and on culture. As such, participating students have a 
basic knowledge of Spanish structures. One section (N = 26) served as the experimental group, receiving 
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 177 
the visual feedback paradigm described below, while the other section (N = 24) served as a control. The 
assignment of control or experimental group was determined at random.1 The instructor, the same for 
both groups and semi-blind to the nature of the experiment, was informed that the visual feedback 
paradigm was being evaluated for inclusion in the curriculum. For both groups, the activities formed part 
of the curriculum and were thus obligatory. After the final activity, both groups were informed about the 
experiment and given the option to provide their data, via informed consent, for research purposes. All 
participants, from both the control and experimental groups chose to provide their data and participate in 
the study. Participants received no compensation for agreeing to provide their data. 
All participants were native English speakers and reported growing up in English-dominant regions of the 
US, with little to no contact with Spanish in daily interactions. Three participants reported spending 
significant time, greater than one month, in a region where Spanish is a dominant or co-dominant 
language, and were subsequently eliminated from the analysis. Two participants reported having taken a 
phonetics course, thus were also eliminated from the analysis. Relevant for the current study, all 
participants placed into this course via a standardized placement test or as the result of successfully 
completing the previous course in the sequence, ensuring relatively similar proficiency levels. Those 
taking the placement test had some number of Spanish courses either during secondary education (i.e., 
high school) or at another university. Lastly, all participants reported their current use of Spanish in 
contexts outside the classroom, on a scale from 1 to 9 (1= Use Spanish daily; 9= Never use Spanish). 
Participants reported minimal use of Spanish outside the classroom (M = 7.3, SD = 1.0). In sum, all 
participants had English as their first language (L1), with no early experience speaking any language 
other than English, minimal current interaction with Spanish outside the classroom, and no formal 
phonetic training. 
Stimuli 
Stimuli for the paradigm (pre-test, VFPs, and post-test) consisted of Spanish words containing the 
segments [β, ð, ɣ] in intervocalic position, produced in two contexts: in isolation and embedded in 
utterances. The segmental features studied here, commonly mispronounced by native English speakers 
learning Spanish, are the intervocalic voiced stops /b, d, g/. In English, the occlusive realizations of these 
phonemes [b, d, g] are produced in all phonological contexts. In Spanish, the voiced stop is produced as 
an approximant allophone [β, ð, ɣ] in intervocalic position (e.g., Hualde, 2005).2 Native L1 English 
learners of Spanish, with the exception of advanced learners, almost exclusively produce the full stop [b, 
d, g] in intervocalic position (e.g., Lord, 2010), as a result of L1 transfer (e.g., Eckman, 2008). 
The first set of stimuli consisted of a set of 15 words in isolation, used in each of the recordings (i.e., pre-
test, 3 VFPs, delayed post-test) (Appendix A). There were five occurrences of each of the three segments 
[β, ð, ɣ]. All isolation tokens consisted of two or three syllable words. To control for the effect of stress 
on lenition (Ortega-Llebaria, 2004), each token was controlled for stress with the target phone occurring 
in an unstressed syllable, immediately preceded by a tonic syllable. In addition, each target was controlled 
with respect to the phonetic context, with an equal distribution of the five Spanish vowels (/i, e, a, o, u/) 
preceding the target segment. Owing to restrictive Spanish morphology, the vowel following the target 
phone was always a mid or low vowel. Table 1 shows sample target tokens. 
Table 1. Sample Stimuli. 
[β] [ð] [ɣ] 
escribo  I write comida  food digo  I say 
subo  I go up ayudo  I help jugo  juice 
sabe  he knows cansado  tired paga  he pays 
Note: Spanish target tokens are indicated in italics. English translations are provided here for convenience. 
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 178 
Second, unique sets of nine novel words, also containing [β, ð, ɣ] in intervocalic position, embedded in 
utterances were also recorded during each session (Appendix B). The novel words were not part of the set 
of words in isolation that was included in the training. These sets of novel words in utterances were 
included to gauge the extent of carry over from the tokens addressed in isolation to tokens in connected 
speech (i.e., utterance-level generalizability). A different set of novel words was used in each session and 
none was included in any of the visual analyses. Parallel to the isolated word tokens, each embedded 
token was controlled for stress and phonetic context. Ordering of all stimuli was randomized. 
A total of 3,656 tokens were coded for analysis (2,280 words in isolation and 1,376 novel words in 
utterances).3 
Procedure 
The control group received typical pronunciation verbal feedback, predominantly using an ad-hoc 
approach of individual correction and correct pronunciation modeling, representative of the most common 
approaches found in the previous literature (e.g., Olson, 2014). The types of corrective feedback reported 
by the course instructor aligned with the feedback typology proposed by Lyster and Ranta (1997) and 
included explicit correction, recasts, clarification requests, repetition, elicitation, and metalinguistic 
feedback. This approach took place in an unstructured manner, and based on previous instructor self-
reported accounts (Olson, 2014), it is estimated that such feedback accounted for less than a few minutes 
per class period. For both groups, no correction was given for the target segments and no explicit 
articulatory explanations were provided. In addition, the experimental and control groups received the 
same total minutes of classroom instruction (i.e., 150 minutes per week), with the control group being 
given a corresponding amount of time dedicated to socio-cultural aspects of the Spanish language relative 
to the experimental group’s time spent on the VFP. Furthermore, while the text used for the course 
contains a limited number of references to pronunciation, principally via orthographic conventions, these 
were not included as part of the course requirements, assigned readings, curriculum, or assessments for 
either group. Participants in the control group were also asked to perform audio recordings of the same 
stimuli, at the same point in the course, for the pre-test and the three activities. They never received any 
feedback on their recordings, and did not participate in the VFP. With the exception of the VFP for the 
experimental group (detailed below), the remainder of the course design (i.e., instructor, curriculum, 
assessments, etc.) was identical for both groups.4 Thus, while the experimental group participated in the 
visual feedback paradigm and the control group did not, the type and quantity of feedback, total 
instruction time, and all other aspects of the course were similar for the two groups.  
Broadly, for the experimental group, the procedure consisted of a pre-test, three separate VFPs of 
approximately 20 minutes, and a delayed post-test conducted three and a half weeks after the final VFP. 
Assignments were assessed on a completion/non-completion basis. The instructor never gave feedback 
with regard to how well the students performed the assigned task or pronounced the target word. Crucial 
for the question of segmental generalizability, while participants recorded productions of all three 
intervocalic segments during each recording session, the visual feedback paradigm conducted in each 
session focused only on a single phone: VFP 1 focused on [ð]; VFP 2 focused on [ɣ]; VFP 3 focused on 
[β].5 The pre-test, each VFP, and the delayed post-test each took place approximately three weeks apart. 
Each of the three VFPs consisted of: (a) initial self-recording; (b) guided visual analysis; and (c) practice 
and re-recording. The visual feedback paradigm employed the speech analysis program PRAAT 
(Boersma & Weenink, 2011), which was selected based solely on availability (free and downloadable) 
and versatility (available for Macintosh, PC, and Linux). Generally, PRAAT allows for the recording of 
speech sounds and provides a visual representation of the acoustic signal through waveforms, 
spectrograms, and intonation contours. Prior to the pre-test, students were given a brief tutorial in the L2 
on the mechanics of using PRAAT to record a sound file and produce the “visual picture” (i.e., waveform 
and spectrogram).  
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 179 
Pre-recording  
For each of the three VFPs, participants first recorded the given set of stimuli prior to the class meeting, 
generally on their personal computers. Participants were then instructed to bring to class the visual 
representation of the first four words produced in isolation from the list of stimuli. They were also 
directed to mark their images for the different “sounds/letters”, mainly through repeated listening to the 
recording and segments of the recording.  
Self and Native Speaker Analysis 
In class, participants were instructed to: (a) visually examine their own productions, (b) visually analyze 
native speaker productions, (c) compare their own productions with those of a native Spanish speaker, 
and (d) compare three sets of spectrograms produced by native and non-native Spanish speakers.  
Participants first answered a series of questions regarding their own productions, drawing particular 
attention to the segment in consideration and its production relative to preceding and following vowels. 
Example (1) provides sample guiding questions given to participants, originally given in the L2. Typical 
answers to this set of questions included that the “d” was much lighter in color than the vowels, roughly 
the same length, and was very different visually from the preceding and following vowel. These 
descriptions correspond to a full closure for the voiced occlusive and less energy across the frequency 
spectrum. Figure 1 illustrates the spectrogram of the word comido (‘eaten’) produced by a native English 
speaker. 
(1) a. What are the visual characteristics of your “d”? 
 b. Is your “d” darker or lighter than the sounds around it? 
 c. Is your “d” easy or hard to distinguish from the sounds around it? 
 
 
Figure 1. Sample spectrogram of the token comido (‘eaten’) produced by a native English speaker. 
Participants then answered a parallel set of questions regarding a spectrogram and waveform produced by 
an age-matched, male native Spanish speaker (central peninsular dialect) (Example 2). Typical answers to 
this set of questions, provided by students in either the L1 or L2, included that the “d” produced by the 
Spanish speaker (Figure 2) was similar, or “slightly lighter” than the vowels, that it was generally shorter 
that the vowels, and that it was difficult to visually distinguish the “d” from the preceding and following 
vowels. These descriptions correspond to the approximant-like productions. 
(2) a. What are the visual characteristics of the Spanish speaker’s  “d”? 
 b. Is it darker or lighter than the sounds around it? 
 c. Is it easy or hard to distinguish from the sounds around it? 
 
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 180 
 
Figure 2. Sample spectrogram of the token comido (‘eaten’) produced by a native Spanish speaker. 
Participants compared their own visual production with that of the native Spanish speaker and 
hypothesized about the auditory differences between the two productions (Example 3). Generally, 
participants noted their own stop productions were much easier to differentiate from the surrounding 
vowels than the native Spanish speakers and describe their own “d” as being more “closed”, “harder”, or 
less “connected” to the vowels than that produced by the native Spanish speaker. With respect to the 
auditory characteristics, participants hypothesized that the native Spanish speaker’s “d” was “noisier” and 
that there was “no silence”. These responses highlight the difference between the stop and approximant 
realizations of the target segment.  
(3) a. Describe the visual difference between your “d” and the “d” produced by a native Spanish 
speaker. 
 b. What do you think the auditory difference is between your “d” and the “d” produced by the 
native speaker? 
Finally, participants were given a series of pairs of spectrograms (Figure 3), each consisting of one 
produced by a native Spanish speaker and one produced by a native English speaker. Participants were 
asked to choose the one that was produced by the native English speaker.  
 
Figure 3. Pair of spectrograms: the left image corresponds to vivido (‘lived’) produced by a native 
Spanish speaker and the right image corresponds to vivido produced by a native English speaker. 
Practice and Re-recording 
Following the VFP, participants were instructed to re-record the list of target words and stimuli, which 
were subsequently provided to the investigator for analysis. Participants were encouraged to record and 
visually examine their spectrograms before submitting their final recordings. 
Measurements 
As an index of pronunciation accuracy for the intervocalic segment, and as an approximation of the 
degree of closure, each token was analyzed with respect to intensity-ratio. The intensity-ratio is defined as 
the minimum intensity (dB) of the target phone divided by the maximum intensity (dB) of the preceding 
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 181 
vowel (e.g., Ortega-Llebaria, 2004). To calculate the intensity-ratio, the investigator delimited the bounds 
of each token by hand, using PRAAT (Boersma & Weenink, 2011). Special attention was given to the 
second vowel formant in determining the bounds of the vowel, and by extension, the target segment. To 
standardize the measurement process, a script was used to automatically compute the intensity-ratio of 
each production. The intensity-ratio provides a measure of oral closure, with 1 representing a fully open, 
vowel-like consonant, and 0 representing a fully closed, silent stop.6 
RESULTS 
Words in Isolation 
A univariate ANOVA was performed on the dependent variable of intensity-ratio, with main factors of 
session and group.7 Session was defined as the specific recording session. For the experimental group, 
session refers to each VFP activity (i.e., pre-test, VFP 1, VFP 2, VFP 3, delayed post-test). For the control 
group, session refers to the corresponding recording of the target utterances. Given that Session 3 was the 
final recording activity, it is considered to be a post-test. Group consisted of the control or experimental 
group. Initial results revealed a significant effect of both session (F(4, 2271) = 18.72, p < .001, ηp2 = .022) 
and group (F(1, 2271) = 20.78, p < .001, ηp2 = .010), as well as a significant interaction between the two 
(session × group, F(3, 2271) = 3.77, p = .010, ηp2 = .005). 
A Tukey post-hoc analysis, with respect to the comparison between the control and experimental groups, 
demonstrates that there was no significant difference between the groups at the time of the pre-test (diff. = 
.014, p = .653), demonstrating that the two groups were originally homogeneous with respect to the 
production of intervocalic stops in Spanish. Illustrating the impact of the training on the experimental 
group, the post-hoc comparison of the two groups following Session 3 (i.e., post-test) reveals a significant 
difference between the two groups (diff. = .042, p < .001, d = .485). Analysis of the mean intensity-ratio 
shows that the productions of the experimental group are more native-like, with intensity-ratio values 
closer to 1 (M = .836, SD = .095) than the control group (M = .794, SD =.098). As such, the analysis 
reveals that the experimental group improved with respect to the control group. 
A second layer of analysis focused on the improvement within each group, specifically a comparison of 
the pre-test and Session 3. The analysis (Tukey) showed no significant difference between the intensity-
ratios of the control group at the pre-test and Session 3 (diff. = -.009, p = .942). However, similar analysis 
for the experimental group returned distinct results, with significant differences found between the 
intensity-ratios at the pre-test (M = .799, SD = .071) and Session 3 (M = .836, SD = .095) (diff. = .037, p 
<.001, d = .446). Also worth noting, is that for the experimental group, the effects of the training lasted 
into the delayed post-test, with no significant difference between Session 3 and the delayed post-test (diff. 
= .018, p = .790). 
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 182 
 
Figure 4a. Mean intensity-ratio over time for the experimental group by segment. Error bars represent +/- 
1 SE. 
 
Figure 4b. Mean intensity-ratio over time for the control group by segment. Error bars represent +/- 1 SE. 
Figures 4a and 4b illustrate the mean intensity-ratios for each group during the pre-test, Session 1, 
Session 2 and Session 3. The graph also includes the performance of the experimental group during the 
delayed post-test. Visual analysis shows a clear positive trend for the experimental group, with 
successively greater intensity-ratios produced over time, while the control group shows overall little 
variation. In sum, for words in isolation, while both groups performed similarly during the pre-test 
recording, the experimental group evidenced significant increases in their intensity-ratios for intervocalic 
stops, while the control group showed no differences in performance over the duration of the study. 
Generalizability 
The second goal of this paper is to address the issue of the generalizability of the training paradigm. 
Specifically, generalizability was assessed both at the segmental level (i.e., improvement for non-target 
phones during VFP) and the utterance level (i.e., improvements on productions in connected speech 
resulting from training on isolated words). Each issue is addressed here in turn. 
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 183 
Segmental Generalizability 
To address the question of whether improvement occurs only during a VFP focused on a particular 
segment or if such training may extend to other segments in the same phonetic environment, a post-hoc 
analysis was used to investigate the effect of visual feedback on the target phone. Specifically, the 
analysis focused on the difference in performance for each phone ([β], [ð], [ɣ]) in the recording 
immediately prior to and immediately following the visual feedback activity focused on that segment. For 
example, as the alveolar [ð] was the subject of training during VFP 1, analysis focused on a comparison 
of the intensity-ratio of [ð] in the pre-test and VFP 1. Analysis, using a non-paired t-test with unequal 
variance on collapsed data for all three phones immediately prior to and following the VFP focused on 
that phone (VFP 1- [ð]; VFP 2- [ɣ]; VFP 3- [β]) revealed no significant effect of training (t(422) = -1.337, 
p = .182). 
Subsequent analysis focused on differences in performance either before the visual feedback paradigm 
focused on a given segment or after. Exemplifying the analysis of a phone prior to the visual feedback 
paradigm, as the labial [β] was the focus of the training in VFP 3, analysis centers on changes in intensity-
ratio for [β] between the pre-test and VFP 2. Analysis of the effects after training would be 
correspondingly exemplified by the difference in performance on the alveolar [ð], the focus of the training 
in VFP 1, following VFP 1 and VFP 3. While analysis for segments prior to training revealed no effect 
(t(239) = .363, p =. 716), there was a significant effect on intensity ratio after training (t(235) = -2.617, p 
= .009, d = .224). 
Figure 5 illustrates the pre- and post- collapsed mean intensity-ratio for all three phones: (a) prior to the 
visual feedback activity focused on the given segment; (b) during the visual feedback activity; and (c) 
after the visual feedback activity for a given segment. Visual inspection confirms the above findings. 
While production did not improve until the VFP focused on a given segment, there was a trend towards 
improvement during the activity, and significant improvement during subsequent VFPs focused on other 
segments.  Given the overall improvements found for the experimental group, we can conclude that the 
marginal gains made during, coupled with greater gains after the visual feedback activity, combined to 
create statistically significant gains. 
 
Figure 5. Mean intensity ratio, collapsed for all segments: (a) Prior to the VFP for a given phoneme (i.e., 
during VFPs focused on other target segments); (b) During the VFP; (c) Following the VFP for a given 
segment. Error bars represent +/- 1 SE. 
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 184 
Utterance-level Generalizability 
The final analysis focused on the effect of training on student productions in a ‘more difficult’ context. 
Specifically, while training focused solely on words in isolation, the question remained if such gains 
would carry over to novel words, not included in the words-in-isolation training, embedded in utterances. 
Paralleling the analysis performed for the words in isolation, a similar ANOVA was conducted with main 
factors of session and group, revealing a significant effect of both session (F(4, 1366) = 7.13, p < .001, 
ηp
2 = .018) and group (F(1, 1366) = 8.11, p = .004, ηp2 = .009), but no interaction between the two 
(session × group, F(3, 1366) = .97, p = .404). Overall, as illustrated in Figure 6, there was a general 
increase in the intensity-ratios over time for the experimental group. Worth noting, post hoc testing 
(Tukey) revealed that while this effect was not statistically significant following Session 3 (pre-test vs. 
Session 3, p = .417), it was significant at the time of the delayed post-test (pre-test vs. post-test, diff. = 
.043, p = .045, d = .400).  
 
 
Figure 6. Mean intensity ratio over time for novel tokens embedded in utterances. Error bars represent +/- 
1 SE. 
DISCUSSION 
The current study answers previous calls in the literature for both controlled investigations of the effects 
of a visual feedback paradigm at the segmental level and empirical evidence for the pedagogical 
effectiveness of VFP in the L2 classroom. Results demonstrated the potential effectiveness of a visual 
feedback paradigm in the L2 classroom for the teaching of a segmental feature. Comparisons between the 
experimental and control groups, as well as the pre- and post-tests of the experimental group, 
demonstrated that the visual feedback paradigm results in significantly improved, more native-like, 
productions of the intervocalic stops for L1 English learners of Spanish. Furthermore, this study suggests 
that while a single 20-minute iteration of a VFP may create marginal gains, significant gains occur as the 
result of incremental gains both during and after the VFP focusing on a given target. Lastly, results with 
respect to the generalizability to connected speech are promising, but warrant further investigation.  
As a first contribution, the current paradigm shows that VFP can be successful at the segmental level, 
answering previous calls for visual feedback beyond the prosodic level (Chun, 2007). At the segmental 
level, previous research has focused predominately on vowel production (Carey, 2004; Okuno, 2013; 
Ruellot, 2011; Saito, 2007; for geminates: Motohashi-Saigo & Hardison, 2009), potentially owing to the 
effect of vowel production on accentedness and intelligibility. The current study represents one of the first 
investigations of the effect of visual feedback on consonant production. While previous results concerning 
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 185 
the effectiveness of a VFP on vowel production have yielded mixed results, the current results for 
intervocalic stops suggest the potential of this technology for segmental instruction.  
As a whole, research on the effectiveness of the VFP has produced generally positive results for 
suprasegmental instruction. At the segmental level, while results have been less consistent, the current 
study showed significant effects for intervocalic stop production. Attempting to account for these 
differences (i.e., positive vs. inconsistent results), it is worth mentioning the potential difference in the 
intuitive nature of visual interpretation of suprasegmentals, vowels, and consonants. Specifically, 
intonation contours may have the benefit of being intuitively understandable to novice learners (Léon & 
Martin, 1972), with variations in the contour relating directly to variations in pitch. In contrast, it is not 
clear that vowel features, like correlation between formants and tongue position, can be considered as 
intuitive. Without some additional training, perhaps more suited for a pronunciation or phonetics course 
(Lord, 2010; Ruellot, 2011), the use of spectrograms for visual feedback may be constrained by what can 
be intuitively understood by learners. Consonants, varying widely in the relevant features visible on a 
spectrogram, may represent a middle ground. While some features, like intensity and duration, may be 
easily perceived and understood, others such as nasality or rhoticity, may be less intuitive. For researchers 
and instructors, it is worth considering which features are most likely to be successful within a visual 
feedback framework. 
Addressing the pedagogical need, the results of the current study suggest that the VFP, historically the 
focus of laboratory-based training or incorporated within a larger phonetic course, is potentially suitable 
for the general skills L2 classroom. The VFP implemented here, based largely on that suggested by Olson 
(2014), required no special access to technology during the class itself, and relegated much of the 
pronunciation practice as homework. That is, not only can such a VFP produce quantifiable benefits for 
learners, it allows for practical integration into the L2 general skills classroom without any special 
modifications or large amounts of in-class time.  
Lastly, it is worth considering not only how the VFP presented here and elsewhere is successful, but also 
potentially why it may be successful. As noted by Derwing and Munro (2005), just as in the domains of 
syntax and morphology, learners often need help “noticing what they are doing” (p. 387). As suggested 
by Schmidt (1990), noticing is an important step in processing the relevant input, applicable at all levels 
of language learning (c.f. acquisition), including the lexicon, syntax, and phonology (see also Gattegno, 
1987). This point echoes the findings of the effect of perceptual training on phonetic production (e.g., 
Bradlow et al., 1997), with the ability to distinguish two sounds having a positive effect on production 
accuracy. Within the classroom, listening and repeating is one of the most common methods for teaching 
pronunciation, but learners may not notice the differences with this method, unless explicitly directed to 
do so by the instructor (Miller, 2012). Moreover, auditory perception is limited by the phonotactic 
constraints of the L1 (e.g., Flege & Wang, 1989), such that phonetic distinctions not relevant to the L1 
may be collapsed into a single perceptual category, impeding perceptual distinction in the L2. As such, 
the effectiveness of the visual feedback paradigm may lie in its ability to allow learners to notice the 
differences between their own productions and those of a native speaker. Visual perception may provide a 
second modality to facilitate noticing, particularly relevant for cases in which auditory perception is 
limited. Thus, the benefits of the VFP evident through empirical research, may be explained within the 
framework of noticing and discrimination. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
The current study has attempted to address both the lack of systematic pedagogical tools for 
pronunciation instruction and the gap between laboratory and classroom research by presenting a visual 
feedback paradigm for pronunciation instruction in the lower-level general skills classroom. The results 
demonstrated that a VFP is more effective at segmental pronunciation instruction than the traditional ad-
hoc approach. In addition, the findings suggest that a VFP results in incremental gains both at the time of 
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 186 
the intervention, as well as following the intervention. Furthermore, gains may be potentially 
generalizable from isolated word training to connected speech production. 
Moving forward, subsequent research should compare the effectiveness of a VFP with various 
methodologies (e.g., ad-hoc approach, explicit articulatory instruction, metalinguistic explanation, etc.) in 
order to maximize pronunciation gains. In addition, although the commonly mispronounced segment 
under focus in the current study provides a good test case for the VFP, it should be acknowledged that 
while it may impact the degree of accentedness, it is not clear that this subphonemic phenomenon would 
impact either comprehensibility or intelligibility (Derwing, Munro, & Wiebe, 1998). In light of this 
limitation, focus should be turned to segments and suprasegmentals shown to most impact intelligibility 
(Chun, 2007; Munro & Derwing, 1995). Finally, the current study used only one of many possible 
pedagogical implementations of the VFP. Future creativity on the part of instructors and investigation by 
researchers will serve to improve the methods presented here. While the visual feedback paradigm shows 
great promise in the L2 classroom, much work remains to be done to implement this technology in a 
systematic way that maximally benefits students. 
 
APPENDIX A: Stimuli: Words in Isolation 
[β] [ð] [ɣ] 
escribo  I write comida  food digo  I say 
debo  I should queda  he remains llega  he arrives 
sabe  he knows cansado  tired paga  he pays 
escoba  broom todo  everything ahogo  he drowns 
subo  I go up ayudo  I help jugo  juice 
Note: Spanish target tokens are indicated in italics. English translations are provided here for convenience 
APPENDIX B: Stimuli: Novel Words in Utterances 
Visual Feedback Paradigm 1 
Target Segment Utterance 
[β] Mi habitación está arriba de la cocina. 
 Siempre le daba dinero a mi sobrino para navidad. 
 La suegra siempre tira papel en el cubo de basura. 
[ð] María va con su marido al Festival de la Calle Ocho. 
 Tú tienes dudas sobre nuestras vacaciones en Cozumel. 
 El hermano de mi esposo es mi cuñado favorito. 
[ɣ] Cuando se porta mal, la madre castiga al niño. 
 Una ensalada tiene lechuga y tomate. 
 Mi padre va al lago para pescar. 
Note: Target sounds indicated in bold. 
 
 
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 187 
Visual Feedback Paradigm 2 
Target Segment Utterance 
[β] Cuando mi hermano hace una torre con bloques, yo derribo la torre. 
 Cuando buceas, es importante que subas al superficie en una hora. 
 Mis compañeros tiraban la pelota mucho en su tiempo libre.  
[ð] Mi madre ha cosido muchos guantes. 
 Mi padre es muy peludo con mucho pelo en la espalda. 
 Mi hermana siempre es muy callada y tonta. 
[ɣ] Mi compañero liga con muchas chicas porque es estrella de fútbol. 
 Me gusta comer pechuga de pollo en un restaurante cerca del Parque Chapultepec. 
 Vamos a tomar un trago un el bar y ver la lucha libre en la televisión. 
Note: Target sounds indicated in bold. 
Visual Feedback Paradigm 3 
Target Segment Utterance 
[β] No creo que recibas una A en la clase de arquitectura. 
 Quiero que subas al tercer piso donde tenemos otro baño. 
 No sé usar la máquina porque mi madre siempre lavaba mi ropa. 
[ð] Una vez en mi vida quiero visitar la Casa Batilló de Gaudí. 
 No quiero que estés tan testarudo conmigo.  
 Siempre he cortado el césped los domingos. 
[ɣ] Deja de tomar cerveza, no quiero que tengas una barriga grande. 
 La piscina tiene una fuga y por eso llamé a la plomera. 
 Por favor, apaga la chimenea. 
Note: Target sounds indicated in bold. 
Post-test 
Target Segment Utterance 
[β] No estoy seguro que mi novio escriba un poema para mi. 
 Cuando vamos a la playa, espero que no haya nubes en el cielo. 
 Mi madre siempre cocinaba pollo con ajo. 
[ð] Me gusta comer batidos con fresa y plátano. 
 Celebrando el Día de Garífuna en Honduras, bailo y sudo mucho. 
 Me gusta comer la carne asada con salsa en pupusas.  
[ɣ] Es importante que diga la verdad. 
 En pocos países se come sopa de tortuga como un plato tradicional. 
 No creo que el cocinero haga flan. 
Note: Target sounds indicated in bold. 
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 188 
NOTES 
1. As with most classroom research, assignment of participants to the Experimental and control groups is 
only quasi-random. To further validate the homogeneity of the two groups, comparisons of pre-test 
performance were conducted (see Results), demonstrating no difference between the groups with 
respect to the target features. 
2. The approximant allophones are represented here as [β, ð, ɣ] following conventions used in both 
Hualde (2005) and Hammond (2001). As a point of comparison with English, Hualde (2005) notes that 
the Spanish variants can be realized with very little constriction and no frication, as opposed to the 
English [ð], which is a true fricative. As noted by one reviewer, the corresponding status of the English 
[ð] may explain the superior performance on this segment in Spanish relative to [β, ɣ], which have no 
English counterparts. 
3. The total number of tokens analyzed was impacted by a number of limitations of classroom research 
including participants missing treatments and poor (at-home) recording quality. In total, 21.4% of the 
data was missing (control: 17.9%; experimental: 25.5%). 
4. While the design of the classes themselves may have been identical, it should be noted that, owing to 
external factors (e.g., student personalities and motivation), no two classes are ever identical. 
5. While the order of phones addressed was determined randomly, given classroom constraints, it was not 
possible to counterbalance the ordering of the VFP. 
6. Given that none of the recordings took place in a sound-dampened environment, intensity 
measurements may have been impacted. However, any background noise would effectively raise the 
intensity for the consonant, creating an artificially elevated, more native-like, intensity-ratio. As such, 
the current study may actually underestimate the effect of the VFP on segmental production. 
7. While the initial experimental design lends itself to a repeated measures ANOVA, missing recordings 
for several students, resulted in an unbalanced data set that precluded the use of a repeated measures 
ANOVA. While a repeated measures ANOVA would account for the between-subjects variation, by 
including such variation a standard ANOVA may underestimate significance. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank Heather Offerman for her dedicated efforts on this project, three anonymous 
reviewers for their comments, as well as all of the participants for their collaboration. All errors, of 
course, remain my own. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Daniel J. Olson is an Assistant Professor of Spanish and Linguistics at Purdue University. His research 
interests include experimental approaches to bilingual phonetics, in both early and late bilinguals, the 
storage and acquisition of distinct phonetic inventories, and code-switching. 
E-mail: danielolson@purdue.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Anderson-Hseih, J. (1992). Using electronic visual feedback to teach suprasegmentals. System, 20, 51–62. 
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 189 
Anderson-Hseih, J. (1994). Interpreting visual feedback on suprasegmentals in computer assisted 
pronunciation instruction. CALICO Journal, 11(4), 5–22.   
Archibald, J. (1998). Second language phonology. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins.  
Arteaga, D. (2000). Articulatory phonetics in the first-year classroom. The Modern Language Journal, 84, 
339–354. 
Boersma, P., & Weenink, D. (2011). Praat: Doing phonetics by computer (version 5.2.16) [computer 
software]. Available from www.praat.org. 
Bradlow, A., Pisoni, D., Akahane-Yamada, R., & Tohkura, Y. (1997). Training Japanese listeners to 
identify English /r/ and /l/: Long-term retention of learning in perception and production. Perception & 
Psychophysics, 61(5), 977–985. 
Breitkreutz, J., Derwing, T., & Rossiter, M. (2002). Pronunciation teaching practices in Canada. TESL 
Canada Journal, 19, 51–61. 
Burgess, J., & Spencer, S. (2000). Phonology and pronunciation in integrated language teaching and 
teacher education. System, 28, 191–215. 
Burns, A. (2006). Integrating research and professional development on pronunciation teaching in a 
national adult ESL program. TESL Reporter, 39, 34–41. 
Castino, J. (1996). Impact of a phonetics course on FL learners’ acquisition of Spanish phonology. 
Selecta: Journal of the Pacific Northwest Council on Foreign Languages, 17, 55–58. 
Carey, M. (2004). CALL Visual feedback for pronunciation of vowels: Kay Sona-Match. CALICO 
Journal, 21(3), 1–32. 
Chun, D. (1989). Teaching tone with microcomputers. CALICO Journal, 7(1), 21–47. 
Chun, D. (1998). Signal analysis software for teaching discourse intonation. Language Learning & 
Technology, 2(1), 61–77. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num1/article4/index.html 
Chun, D. (2002). Discourse intonation in L2: From theory and research to practice. Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Chun, D. (2007). Come ride the wave: But where is it taking us? CALICO Journal, 24(2), 239–252. 
Couper, G. (2003). The value of an explicit pronunciation syllabus in ESOL teaching. Prospect, 18, 53–
70. 
Darcy, I., Ewert, D., & Lidster, R. (2012). Bringing pronunciation instruction back into the classroom: An 
ESL teachers’ pronunciation “toolbox”. In J. Levis & K. LeVelle (Eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd 
Pronunciation in Second Language Learning and Teaching Conference (pp. 93–108). Ames, IA: Iowa 
State University.  
Deng, J., Holtby, A., Howden-Weaver, L., Nessim, L., Nicholas, B., Nickle, K., Pannekoek, C., Stephan, 
S., & Sun, M. (2009). English pronunciation research: The neglected orphan of second language 
acquisition studies? Edmonton, AB: Prairie Metropolis Centre. 
Derwing, T. (2010). Utopian goals for pronunciation teaching. In J. Levis & K. LeVelle (Eds.), 
Proceedings of the 1st Pronunciation in Second Language Learning and Teaching Conference (pp. 24–
37). Ames, IA: Iowa State University. 
Derwing, T., Diepenbroek, L. & Foote, J. (2012). How well do general-skills ESL textbooks address 
pronunciation? TESL Canada Journal, 30(1), 22–44. 
Derwing, T., & Munro, M. (2005). Second language accent and pronunciation teaching: A research-based 
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 190 
approach. TESOL Quarterly, 39, 379–397. 
Derwing, T., Munro, M., & Wiebe, G. (1997). Pronunciation instruction for fossilized learners: Can it 
help? Applied Language Learning, 8, 185–203. 
Derwing, T., Munro, M., & Wiebe, G. (1998). Evidence in favor of a broad framework for pronunciation 
instruction. Language Learning, 48(3), 393–410. 
Derwing, T., & Rossiter, M. (2003). The effects of pronunciation instruction on the accuracy, fluency, 
and complexity of L2 accented speech. Applied Language Learning, 13, 1–17. 
de Bot, K. (1980). Evaluation of intonation acquisition: A comparison of methods. International Journal 
of Psycholinguistics, 7, 81–92. 
de Bot, K. (1983). Visual feedback of intonation: Effectiveness and induced practice behavior. Language 
and Speech, 26, 331–350. 
de Bot, K., & Mailfert, K. (1982). The teaching of intonation: Fundamental research and classroom 
applications. TESOL Quarterly, 16, 71–77. 
Eckman, F. (2008). Typological markedness and second language phonology. In J. Hansen Edwards & 
M. L. Zampini (Eds.), Phonology and second language acquisition (pp. 95 –116). Philadelphia, PA: John 
Benjamins. 
Elliott, R. (1995). Foreign language phonology: Field independence, attitude, and the success of formal 
instruction in Spanish pronunciation. Modern Language Journal, 79, 530–542. 
Elliot, R. (1999). On the teaching and acquisition of pronunciation within a communicative approach. 
Hispania, 80(1), 95–108. 
Flege, J. & Wang, C. (1989). Native language phonotactic constraints affect how well Chinese subjects 
perceive the word-final English /t/-/d/ contrast. Journal of Phonetics, 17, 299–315. 
Foote, J., Holtby, A., & Derwing, T. (2011). 2010 survey of pronunciation teaching in adult ESL 
programs in Canada. TESL Canada Journal, 29(1), 1–22. 
Foote, J., Trofimovich, P., Collins, L., & Soler Urzúa, F. (2013). Pronunciation teaching practices in 
communicative second language classes. The Language Learning Journal, 1–16. 
Gattegno, C. (1987). The science of education. Part I: Theoretical considerations. New York, NY: 
Educational Solutions. 
González-Bueno, M. (1997). The effects of formal instruction on the acquisition of Spanish stop 
consonants. In W. Glass & A. T. Perez-Leroux (Eds.), Contemporary perspectives on the acquisition of 
Spanish, Vol. 2: Production, processing, and comprehension (pp. 57–75). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla. 
Hammond, R. (2001). The sounds of Spanish: Analysis and application. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla. 
Hardison, D. (2004). Generalization of computer assisted prosody training: Quantitative and qualitative 
findings. Language Learning and Technology, 8(1), 34–52. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num1/hardison/default.html 
Hincks, R., & Edlund, J. (2009). Promoting increased pitch variation in oral presentation with transient 
visual feedback. Language Learning and Technology, 13(3), 32–50. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num3/hincksedlund.pdf 
Hualde, J. I. (2005). The sounds of Spanish. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Kay Elemetrics. (1986). Visi-Pitch/Apple applications manual. Pine Brook, NJ: Kay Elemetrics. 
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 191 
Lambacher, S. (1999). A CALL tool for improving second language acquisition of English consonants by 
Japanese learners. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 12(2), 137–156. 
Leather, J. (2000). Second-language speech research: An introduction. Language Learning, 49, 
Supplement 1, 1–56. 
Léon, P., & Martin, P. (1972). Applied linguistics and the teaching of intonation. The Modern Language 
Journal, 56(3), 139–144. 
Levis, J. (1999). Intonation in theory and practice, revisited. TESOL Quarterly, 33, 37–63.  
Levis, J., & Grant, L. (2003). Integrating pronunciation into ESL/EFL classrooms. TESOL Journal, 12(2), 
13–20. 
Levis, J., & Pickering, L. (2004). Teaching intonation in discourse using speech visualization technology. 
System, 32, 505–524.  
Lord, G. (2005). (How) can we teach foreign language pronunciation? On the effects of a Spanish 
phonetics course. Hispania, 88(3), 557–567. 
Lord, G. (2010). The combined effects of instruction and immersion on second language pronunciation. 
Foreign Language Annals, 43(4), 488–503. 
Lyster, R. & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learner uptake: Negotiation of form in 
communicative classrooms. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 16(1), 37–66. 
MacDonald, S. (2002). Pronunciation: Views and practices of reluctant teachers. Prospect, 17(3), 3–18. 
Major, R. (1998). Interlanguage phonetics and phonology: An introduction. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 20(1), 131–37. 
Miller, J. S. (2012). Teaching pronunciation with phonetics in a beginner French course: Impact of sound 
perception. In. J. Levis & K. LeVelle (Eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd Pronunciation in Second Language 
Learning and Teaching Conference (pp. 109–123). Ames, IA: Iowa State University.  
Molholt, G. (1988). Computer assisted instruction in pronunciation for Chinese speakers of American 
English. TESOL Quarterly, 22(1), 91–111. 
Motohashi-Saigo, M., & Hardison, D. (2009). Acquisition of L2 Japanese geminates training with 
waveform displays. Language Learning & Technology, 13(2), 29–47. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num2/motohashisaigohardison.pdf 
Munro, M., & Derwing, T. (1995). Foreign accent, comprehensibility and intelligibility in the speech of 
second language learners. Language Learning, 45, 73–97. 
Murphy, D. (2011). An investigation of English pronunciation teaching in Ireland. English Today, 27(4), 
10–18. 
Okuno, T. (2013). Acquisition of L2 vowel duration in Japanese by native English speakers. 
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI. 
Olson, D. (2014). Phonetics and technology in the classroom: A practical approach to using speech 
analysis software in L2 pronunciation instruction. Hispania, 97(1), 1–25. 
Ortega-Llebaria, M. (2004). Interplay between phonetic and inventory constraints in the degree of 
spirantization of voiced stops: Comparing intervocalic /b/ and intervocalic /g/. In T. Face (Ed.), 
Laboratory Approaches to Spanish Phonology (pp. 237–253). Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Pennington, M., & Ellis, N. (2000). Cantonese speakers’ memory for English sentences with prosodic 
cues. The Modern Language Journal, 84(3), 372–389. 
Daniel J. Olson Benefits of Visual Feedback on Segmental Production 
 
Language Learning & Technology 192 
Ruellot, V. (2011). Computer-assisted pronunciation learning of French /u/ and /y/ at the intermediate 
level. In J. Levis & K. LeVelle (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2nd Pronunciation in Second Language 
Learning and Teaching Conference (pp. 199–213). Ames, IA: Iowa State University. 
Saito, K. (2007). The influence of explicit phonetic instruction on pronunciation teaching in EFL settings: 
The case of English vowels and Japanese learners of English. The Linguistics Journal, 3(3), 16–40. 
Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 11(2), 
129–159. 
Seferoğlu, G. (2005). Improving students’ pronunciation through accent reduction software. British 
Journal of Educational Technology, 36(2), 303–316. 
Setter, J., & Jenkins, J. (2005). State of the art review: Pronunciation. Language Teaching, 38, 1–17. 
Simões, A. (1996). Assessing the contribution of instructional technology in the teaching of 
pronunciation. Proceedings of the International Conference on Spoken Language Processing (pp. 1461–
1464). Philadelphia, PA. 
Suter, R. (1976). Predictors of pronunciation accuracy in second language learning. Language Learning, 
26, 233–253. 
Thomson, R. (2012). Improving L2 listeners’ perception of English vowels: A computer mediated 
approach. Language Learning, 64(4), 1231–1258. 
Wang, X., & Munro, M. (2004). Computer-based training for learning English vowel contrasts. System, 
32, 539–552. 
Weltens, B., & de Bot, K. (1984). The visualization of pitch contours: Some aspects of its effectiveness in 
teaching foreign intonation. Speech Communication, 3(2), 157–163. 
Zampini, M. (1996). Voiced stop spirantization in the ESL speech of native speakers of Spanish. Applied 
Psycholinguistics, 17, 335–354. 
