Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/news.pdf 
October 2014, Volume 18, Number 3 
pp. 35–37 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 35 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC) 
 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
4TH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON LANGUAGE DOCUMENTATION 
& CONSERVATION (ICLDC) 
February 26-March 1, 2015 • Honolulu, HI 
The Department of Linguistics and the National Foreign Language Resource Center at the University of 
Hawaiʻi at Mānoa are pleased to host the 4th ICLDC. The conference program will feature two keynote 
talks, an integrated series of Master Class workshops, and four Special Sessions on Pedagogy in 
Language Conservation. An optional Hilo Field Study (on the Big Island of Hawaiʻi) to visit Hawaiian 
language revitalization programs in action will immediately follow the conference (March 2-3). 
The theme of the 4th ICLDC, “Enriching Theory, Practice, and Application,” highlights the need to 
strengthen the links between language documentation (practice), deep understanding of grammatical 
structure (theory), and methods for teaching endangered languages (application). At this conference, we 
intend to focus on language documentation as the investigation of grammar and linguistic structure, on 
the one hand, and the development of that investigation into sound pedagogy for endangered languages, 
on the other. 
We aim to build on the strong momentum created by the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd ICLDCs to discuss research 
and revitalization approaches yielding rich records that can benefit both the field of language 
documentation and speech communities. We hope you will join us. 
Call for Proposals deadlines are May 31, 2014 (Special Sessions on Pedagogy in Language Conservation) 
and August 31, 2014 (general papers, posters, and electronic posters). See the conference website for 
more information: http://icldc4.icldc-hawaii.org 
STAY IN TOUCH WITH SOCIAL MEDIA 
Did you know that the NFLRC has its own Facebook page with over 2,100 fans? It’s one of the best ways 
to hear about the latest news, publications, conferences, workshops, and resources we offer. Just click on 
the “Like” button to become a fan. For those who prefer getting up-to-the-minute “tweets,” you can 
follow us on our Twitter page. Finally, NFLRC has its own YouTube channel with a growing collection 
of free language learning and teaching videos for your perusal. Subscribe today! 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology      36 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
 
NFLRC maintains a large searchable archive of  free language research and teaching materials which 
currently contains over 350 items. These items include foreign language teaching materials in print, 
audio, and video, as well as language acquisition research papers, and collections of conference materials. 
Check out our many other publications. 
Save the trees! Check out our other two online journals: 
  
Language Documentation & Conservation is a 
refereed, open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC 
and published by University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to 
language documentation and conservation, as well 
as book reviews, hardware and software reviews, 
and notes from the field. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed 
international journal of issues in foreign language 
reading and literacy, published twice yearly on the 
World Wide Web and sponsored by NFLRC and 
the University of Hawai‘i College of Languages, 
Linguistics, and Literature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology      37 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
  
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language research. 
GRANT COMPETITION 
CLEAR completed its fifth funding cycle in August 2014. We submitted a new proposal for the 2014–18 
funding competition in July, along with many other fine institutions and centers. We anticipate hearing 
this fall about funding decisions for the upcoming cycle and hope that we will have the opportunity to 
continue serving the language education community for another four years. 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We enjoyed seeing many of you at the 
annual conference of the Computer-Assisted Language Instruction Consortium (CALICO) in Athens, 
Ohio this spring, and look forward to seeing even more in San Antonio for the ACTFL conference in 
November. Please stop by our booth to say hello! 
BETA TESTERS NEEDED 
In the coming months, we plan to launch a newly designed RIA home page with improved user interface 
and documentation. If you are interested in helping us beta test the new environment and provide 
feedback, we would love to hear from you. Please email clear@msu.edu and let us know if you’re willing 
to be a technology guinea pig!  
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/. 
