Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/abuseileekabualshar.pdf 
February 2014, Volume 18, Number 1 
pp. 76-95 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 76 
USING PEER COMPUTER-MEDIATED CORRECTIVE FEEDBACK TO 
SUPPORT EFL LEARNERS’ WRITING 
Ali AbuSeileek, Al al-Bayt University 
Awatif Abualsha’r, Al al-Bayt University 
This study investigated the effect of using computer-mediated corrective feedback on EFL 
learners' performance in writing. Sixty-four intermediate-level learners were randomly 
assigned to either a no-feedback control condition or a corrective feedback, including three 
treatment conditions. The first is the “track changes” feature of Microsoft Word 2010 
which double strikes through deletions and marks insertions in a different color. The 
second is recast feedback while the third is metalinguistic feedback. Over the course of 
eight weeks, each student was required to provide corrective feedback on drafts written by 
another group member and to discuss it with the group members. The study yielded three 
major findings. First, students who received computer-mediated corrective feedback while 
writing achieved better results in their overall test scores than students in the control 
condition who did not receive feedback. Second, there was a significant effect for the track 
changes made in the corrective-feedback type when compared with that made in the recast 
and metalinguistic feedback types. Students in the recast treatment condition also obtained 
higher significant mean scores than those who received metalinguistic corrective feedback. 
The study concluded with suggestions for further research and pedagogical implications. 
Keywords: Corrective feedback, foreign language writing, computer-mediated 
communication, peer review, error type. 
APA Citation:. AbuSeileek, A., & Abualsha’r, A. (2014) Using peer computer-mediated 
corrective feedback to support EFL learners’ writing. Language Learning & Technology 
18(1), 76–95. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/abuseileekabualshar.pdf 
Received: May 1, 2012; Accepted: March 29, 2013; Published: February 1, 2014 
Copyright: © Ali AbuSeileek, Awatif Abualsha’r 
INTRODUCTION 
Corrective feedback is one of the major tools used for enhancing English language learning and teaching 
by providing students with feedback to correct their errors. It may support learners with explicit or 
implicit feedback that may be useful in developing writing. Although corrective feedback has been used 
for a long time in traditional classrooms, computer-mediated corrective feedback has been introduced 
only recently. The user may have access to different types of computer-based facilities that may help in 
providing corrective feedback for students regarding their errors and mistakes. According to Yeha and 
Lob (2009), corrective feedback or error correction provided via written computer-mediated 
communication could play an important role in developing learners’ metalinguistic awareness, especially 
marking up text with colored annotations and focusing the learners’ attention on limited information. This 
makes corrective feedback an efficient way to draw learners’ attention to the error and the feedback about 
it in the written text. As the use of computer-mediated corrective-feedback method has become more 
common in writing classes, different studies have looked for more innovative ways to aid learners in 
developing their writing abilities (Hyland & Hyland, 2006), and called for a test of the effectiveness of 
new technologies on teaching learners how to write (Ware & Warschauer, 2006). Moreover, as "the 
computer is a pedagogical tool that needs to be carefully used, evaluated, and explored by pedagogues 
and researchers alike" (Caws, 2006, p. 20), there is a need to search for more helpful computer-mediated 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
corrective-feedback methods and techniques that may support students when receiving peer-corrective 
feedback in a manner that may aid them more in the development of their writing performance. Despite 
the fact that some studies were conducted on the effectiveness of computer-mediated corrective feedback 
on learners' writing performance, the present study is based on introducing new computer-mediated 
corrective-feedback types for learning and teaching writing, including track changes and its effect on 
developing learners' performance in seven writing aspects: content, structural organization (text level), 
structural organization (sentence level), grammatical accuracy, lexical appropriateness, punctuation, and 
spelling. 
Corrective Feedback and Language Learning 
Some studies focused on providing feedback only on grammar (Bitchener, Young, & Cameron, 2005 & 
Ferris, 2006), content (Ferris, 2004 & Hendrickson, 1978), or on both (Arnold, Ducate & Kost, 2009; De 
Jong, & Kuiken, 2012; O’Donnell, 2007; Sheppard, 1992; Van Beuningen, 2010; Vyatkina, 2011). 
Though the term "corrective feedback” is generally used for errors on form not content, it may mean 
different things for the readers. Corrective feedback in this study refers to both feedback on linguistic 
forms and content (e.g., rhetorical aspects of writing) in the computer-based written form. Corrective 
feedback or error correction may aid learners’ writing development and can act as a functional method for 
language learning. Van Beuningen (2010) reports that it fosters language learning and develops accuracy 
as it offers learners opportunities to notice the gaps in their linguistic systems, testing interlanguage 
hypotheses, and engaging in metalinguistic reflection. The accuracy of students who received written 
corrective feedback in the immediate post-test outperformed those in the control group, and this level of 
performance was retained two months later (Bitchener, 2008).  
Many studies, particularly by Truscott (1996, 2009), raised objections to corrective feedback use and 
pointed out that corrective feedback is unhelpful or even harmful for students' writing development 
(Truscott & Hsu, 2008). In conclusion, the usefulness of written corrective feedback is a topic of 
considerable debate (Ferris, 2004, 2010, 2012; Truscott, 2007, 2009). According to Guénette (2007), there 
has been considerable controversy among theorists and researchers about the usefulness of the process of 
corrective feedback in language learning and teaching. He added,  
The debate continues between those who believe in giving corrective feedback to students 
to improve their written accuracy and those who do not. Indeed, the results of the many 
experimental studies on written corrective feedback carried out over the last 20 years have 
been so contradictory that second language teachers looking to support their pedagogical 
choice to correct, or not to correct, the grammar of their students' written production are 
left in the midst of controversy. (p. 40) 
For the researchers who believe in the effect of corrective feedback on students' writing, different types of 
corrective feedback can be used to aid students' writing development including explicit error correction, 
metalinguistic feedback, elicitations, repetitions, recasts, translations, clarification requests (Lyster & 
Ranta, 1997), and reformulation of correcting error types (Santos, López-Serrano, & Manchón, 2010). 
Other studies (Ellis, 2004; DeKeyser, 1998; Sauro, 2009) referred to two types of corrective feedback, 
including explicit and implicit or conscious knowledge about error vs. procedural knowledge. Another 
classification is based on conceptualizing the feedback types as indirect or direct feedback (Ferris, 2003, 
2006; Truscott & Hsu, 2008) where "direct CF [corrective feedback] consists of an indication of the error 
and the corresponding correct linguistic form, [while] indirect CF only indicates that an error has been 
made" (Van Beuningen, 2010, p. 12). There are also other subcategorizations of these major types. For 
instance, indirect corrective feedback is divided into underlining and codes (Chandler, 2003; Ferris & 
Roberts, 2001), while the effect of direct feedback is examined as direct corrective feedback with or 
without written metalinguistic explanations (Bitchener, 2008; Bitchener & Knoch, 2009).  
In this study, three types of corrective feedback are used, namely track changes, recast, and metalinguistic. 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
Table 1 illustrates these types. The examples are based on the sentence: They speaks English fluently. The 
definitions for the terms recast and metalinguistic feedback and the categorization of the characteristics of 
these corrective-feedback types are based on the model introduced by Lyster and Ranta (1997) and Sauro 
(2009). However, the definitions are operationalized and adapted to suit this study.  
Table 1. Characteristics of Corrective-Feedback Types in Microsoft Word 2010 
Feedback type Definition Location 
in text 
Example Nature of 
error 
indicated 
Target-like 
reformulation 
provided 
Elicited 
output 
Track changes It is a computer-mediated 
method for providing 
corrective feedback that can 
be used in an implicit or 
explicit manner. It is based 
on reformulation of the error 
where the program strikes 
through deletions and marks 
insertions in a different 
color. 
Inline  They 
speaks 
speak 
English 
fluently. 
Provided 
indirectly 
Yes Error is 
identified 
and 
reform-
ulated 
Recast It is a computer-mediated 
method used for providing 
feedback. The error is 
always reformulated without 
providing any metalinguistic 
information about it.  
Marginal 
comment 
displayed 
inline  
They 
speak 
English 
fluently. 
Yes  Reformulation 
provided 
Repeti-
tion of 
the error 
in the 
correct 
form 
Metalinguistic 
feedback  
It is a computer-mediated 
method based on providing 
metalinguistic information 
or comment about the error 
without reformulating it.  
Marginal 
comment 
displayed 
inline  
Subject-
verb 
agree-
ment 
Yes  
  
Provided 
indirectly  
 
Refor-
mulation 
of error 
  
On the other hand, the location in text characteristics of feedback types represent an attempt made in this 
study to specify where and how the note is displayed in the text. Figure 1 also provides an illustrative 
example about computer-mediated corrective-feedback types. 
 
Figure 1. A screenshot for computer-mediated corrective-feedback types. Here, marginal comments are 
used for clarification to the reader, but they were displayed in line for students. 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
Peer written Corrective Feedback 
The peer-written corrective feedback is based on the Vygotsky's (1978) sociocultural theory. That is, the 
computer-mediated environment helps learners to provide corrective feedback about writing errors where 
one can achieve more when they interact with peers than when they work alone. Wells (1999) also 
demonstrated that the cooperative context helps the learners to receive help from their peers in the 
cooperative activity. It is a learner-centered approach based on learners' interactions to correct their errors. 
The learning process is considered as collaborative and cooperative (Oskoz & Elola, 2011). Therefore, 
peer-written corrective feedback is based on the communicative approach which is different from the 
traditional method that focuses on teaching isolated linguistic features and grammatical rules. It aims at 
developing learners' ability to use language in meaningful communication where they help each other to 
develop their linguistic competence while interacting. Inspired by the theory of communicative 
competence introduced by Canale and Swain (1980), this study focused on creating opportunities for 
asynchronous peer written interaction and meaningful communication. It is based on providing peer 
written corrective feedback where each student reads essays written by other classmates and provides 
written corrective feedback about their errors.  
The major goal of peer-written corrective feedback is to foster an atmosphere of reciprocal learning 
between learners based on the communicative approach to language teaching (Savignon, 2002). Ho and 
Savignon (2007) also reported that numerous studies have explored aspects of peer-review activities, 
including learners’ reactions and negotiation patterns, the effects of peer response on learners’ writing, 
and learners’ attitudes and affective benefits. Studies conducted to identify the effect of peer-written 
corrective feedback on learners' writing abilities (Elola & Oskoz, 2010; Ho & Savignon, 2007; Ware & 
O’Dowd, 2008) reported that it is quite helpful for learners to focus more on structure and organization, 
as well as content because they work collectively to address different types of errors in a cooperative 
environment. Finally, this study focused on the effect of asynchronous, computer-mediated, peer-writing 
corrective feedback. "One main benefit of CMC in asynchronous writing environments is that it promotes 
collaboration amongst students and reduces inhibition towards communication" (Caws, 2006, p. 20).  
Other studies made comparisons between presenting computer-mediated corrective feedback 
cooperatively and individually. For example, Elola and Oskoz (2010) made a comparison between 
learners’ peer-writing performance and individual writing performance using wikis and chats. Findings 
showed that there were no statistically significant differences in terms of complexity, accuracy, and 
fluency when comparing the individual and collaborative assignments. Finally, another study (Arnold, 
Ducate, & Kost, 2012) compared students' revisions only (cooperation) and their revision for the essays as 
a whole (collaboration). The results indicated that learners used both cooperative and collaborative 
strategies to revise for form. However, they were more cooperative when they made content revision. 
Finally, peer-revision computer-based collaborative writing created an environment which helped learners 
to state their views and to reorganize their essays (Oskoz & Elola, 2011), to contribute to autonomy 
through providing opportunities for practicing language (Kessler, 2009), and to develop their writing 
skills (Lee, 2010). 
Error Type 
There are two major different error types that address both content and form, including focused and 
unfocused (Ellis, Sheen, Murakami, & Takashima, 2008), treatable or rule governed (e.g., article use) and 
untreatable (e.g. lexical use) (Ferris, 2002), or targeted and untargeted (Storch, 2010) error types. 
According to Van Beuningen (2010, p. 11), focused corrective feedback "targets a (number of) specific 
linguistic feature(s) only" while unfocused corrective feedback "involves correction of all errors in a 
learner’s text, irrespective of their error category." Despite the fact that some studies (Sheppard, 1992) 
focused on classifying error types into global vs. local, other studies (Arnold, Ducate & Kost, 2009; 
O’Donnell, 2007; Vyatkina, 2011) provided more detailed types, including content, structural 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
organization (text level), structural organization (sentence level), grammatical accuracy, lexical 
appropriateness, punctuation, and spelling. Moreover, research has also explored the effect of corrective 
feedback on separate error types. Ferris (2006), for example, discerned between five major error types 
related to verb, noun, article, lexicon, and sentence, while Bitchener, Young, and Cameron (2005) 
distinguished between three error types (past simple tense, articles, and prepositions).  
Research about the effectiveness of corrective feedback proposes focusing on global error types rather 
than local errors since they impair communication (Hendrickson, 1978). However, other studies 
recommended focusing on both content and form, and different types of feedback should be used to 
address both content and form (Ferris, 2003, 2006; Hyland & Hyland, 2006; Lee, 2010; Sheppard, 1992; 
Vyatkina, 2011). This may help learners focus on both local error correction and global revision related to 
different writing aspects, including content, organization, and form. Thus, based on these studies, the 
evidence in support of writing corrective feedback on a limited number of error types is not very strong. 
Moreover, research did not generally support conducting studies based on a limited number of errors. For 
example, Ferris (2010) noted that the purpose of error correction is to improve writing accuracy in general 
and not just to use one grammatical structure, though exploring the effect of focused error types might not 
be functional in improving learners' performance in writing from a practical perspective. Similarly, Storch 
(2010) demonstrated among other things that it is questionable whether we can draw generalizations 
about the efficacy of writing corrective feedback based on the evidence from such a limited range of 
structures. She added, "Studies which provide feedback on one type of error and only on one piece of 
writing and in controlled environments are unlikely to be relevant to language teachers" (p. 43). Other 
studies (Storch, 2010; Van Beuningen, 2010;) recommended provision of feedback within a realistic 
writing context to enable valid assessment of the role of corrective feedback in language-learners’ 
written-accuracy development. That is, learners provide corrective feedback on different error types as 
they learn how to write. 
Studies (DeKeyser, 2007; Ferris, 2004) suggested that the administration of extensive and sustained 
meaningful exposure and practice is effective in language learning and recommended the incorporation of 
feedback on content even at earlier stages of language instruction. This study is concerned with this issue. 
It provides a writing context in which students' writing performance was investigated over eight weeks to 
enable a valid assessment of the role of corrective feedback in language-learners’ written-accuracy 
development and in which the writing aspect was mainly developed by computer-mediated corrective 
feedback. The marking scale used by Vyatkina (2011, p. 73) related to the seven writing aspects was 
adopted. Appendix A contains this study’s operational definitions for each of the seven writing aspects, 
examples about them, metalinguistic feedback, and reformulation of the error. 
Computer-mediated Corrective Feedback 
Though many studies have face-to-face comparison for certain types of corrective feedback over others 
(Russell & Spada, 2006), there is a limited number of outcome-based studies on peer-writing corrective 
feedback in computer-mediated communication (CMC) tools like using wikis and chats (Elola & Oskoz, 
2010), and Word (AbuSeileek, 2006). Some studies (Caws, 2006; Duff & Li, 2009; Ho & Savignon, 
2007,) have focused on investigating the effect of computer-mediated corrective-feedback method using 
WebCT, email and Word on participants' attitudes, and reported that it was quite helpful for the 
development of students' writing. Lee (2005) also demonstrated that web-based learning reinforced 
learners' communication skills and writing, and actively involved them in being responsible for their 
learning. Other studies (Ho & Savignon, 2007; Savignon & Roithmeier, 2004) found that computer-
mediated peer review based on online-text discussion offers flexibility for learners as it reduces 
psychological pressure on learners who do not like to give feedback in face-to-face situations because it 
allows them to offer remote feedback asynchronously at the learners' convenience. 
Furthermore, other researchers compared between computer-mediated corrective feedback and traditional 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
feedback. For example, Yeha and Lob (2009) developed an online corrective feedback and error analysis 
system called Online Annotator for EFL Writing. The system consisted of five facilities: Document 
Maker, Annotation Editor, Composer, Error Analyzer, and Viewer. The findings indicated that students' 
corrective feedback revealed significantly better performance in the experimental group on recognizing 
writing errors. Moreover, Liu and Sadler (2003) also explored whether differences in both modes of 
commenting (Microsoft Word) and interaction (MOO) were more effective than traditional instruction in 
writing. The findings show that the overall number of comments, the percentage of revision-oriented 
comments, and consequently the overall number of revisions made by the technology-enhanced group 
were larger than those made by the traditional group. However, the study suggested using Microsoft Word 
2010 for editing in an electronic peer review mode, combined with face-to-face interaction in the 
traditional peer-review mode, for effective peer-review activities in L2 writing classrooms. Moreover, 
wikis were found to be an effective educational tool that encouraged the revision behavior and 
collaborative writing skills, and collaborative electronic writing may enhance more revisions (Arnold, 
Ducate, & Kost, 2009).  
In conclusion, the number of computer-mediated studies examining the effect of corrective-feedback 
types was too limited to argue for the advantage of this method compared with the traditional method or 
type of corrective feedback, though many studies showed that CMC was very helpful for developing 
learners' performance in writing (AbuSeileek, 2012; Sotillo, 2000; Ware & Warschauer, 2006). The 
present study aims to introduce a new corrective-feedback type of track changes that may be different 
from the other types used in previous studies. Using this method, the learner can strike through deletions 
and mark new insertions in the text in a different color where the error is identified indirectly and 
reformulated. This makes using track changes a combination of both implicit and explicit corrective-
feedback types. Furthermore, the study used different feedback types to address both content and form, 
including focused and unfocused error types. It sought to determine the effect of corrective-feedback type 
on EFL learners' performance in different writing aspects, including content, structural organization (text 
level), structural organization (sentence level), grammatical accuracy, lexical appropriateness, 
punctuation, and spelling. It seemed that no studies have investigated its effect on developing learners' 
proficiency in different writing aspects, including correcting local and global errors over a long period 
using the track changes method. Consequently, this was a major goal of this study.  
THIS STUDY 
1. This study investigated the effect of using peer-generated computer-mediated corrective 
feedback on EFL learners' performance in writing. It also explored how three types of 
computer-mediated corrective feedback (track changes, metalinguistic, and recast) support EFL 
writing. More specifically, it sought to answer the following three research questions: 
2. Do learners who receive computer-mediated corrective feedback from their peers perform 
significantly better when writing post-tests than those who do not receive feedback?  
3. Which type of computer-mediated corrective feedback (track changes, recast, or metalinguistic) 
is more effective for EFL learners' writing performance? 
4. Which writing aspect (content, structural organization (text level), structural organization 
(sentence level), grammatical accuracy, lexical appropriateness, punctuation, and spelling) is 
mainly developed by computer-mediated corrective feedback (track changes, recast, or 
metalinguistic)?  
Participants and Design 
Sixty-four undergraduate participants were enrolled in a writing course in a university. The course aimed 
at improving students’ written English communication. This included improving learners' ability to 
generate, organize, compare, contrast, and develop ideas supported by examples or evidence. Students in 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
this class were freshmen in the Department of English. A survey was done for their age, gender, and 
language capabilities. Their age range was 18.3–19.1 years. The sample consisted of 48 females and 16 
males. However, the four study groups were balanced in their composition with twelve females and four 
males assigned to each group. 
A score range between 68 and 75/100 in the university’s English Placement Test is considered as an 
intermediate level and is roughly equal to level 5 on the IELTS, FCE, and CCSE, level 2 on the 
Cambridge exams, AP according to the ARELS exams, and OP according to the Oxford exams. Based on 
their scores, the 64 participants were placed in the intermediate linguistic level. They were randomly 
assigned into four groups (one control and three experimental) of sixteen students each. The MANOVA 
which was run on pre-test scores found no statistically significant difference between the computer-
mediated groups (N = 48; mean = 24.19; standard deviation = 1.93) and the control group (N = 16; mean 
= 23.63; standard deviation = 1.79); F(1,63) = 1.06, p =.31. The MANOVA test also showed that there 
was no significant effect for computer-mediated corrective-feedback type, F(2,47) = 1.06, p =.31, on the 
writing pre-test for all groups: track changes (N = 16; mean = 24.19; standard deviation = 2.26), recast (N 
= 16; mean = 24.38; standard deviation = 1.82), and metalinguistic (N = 16; mean = 24.00; standard 
deviation = 1.79). This indicates that all four groups began with similar levels of writing ability.  
The same instructor taught all of the participants in this study. Moreover, all students studied the same 
material and wrote eight essays over the same period: eight sessions over eight weeks. Students were 
informed that they were participating in a study that was being conducted solely for academic purposes. 
They were also informed that their participation in the study would not affect their evaluation in the 
course. To reduce the possibility of students' sharing what they were doing in each group, they had access 
to the materials and used the computer-mediated techniques only during the lessons. Due to the absence 
of some students, the instructor was forced to postpone two lessons (one for the track changes group and 
the other for the metalinguistic group) in order to enable all students in different groups to participate in 
the discussions. 
Test 
For the purposes of this study, a test was designed by the researchers to gauge the effect of the corrective 
feedback-type on EFL learners' writing abilities. It aimed at measuring students' ability to write correctly 
in English, including the ability to generate, organize, compare, contrast, and develop ideas, and to 
support those ideas with examples or evidence. Two raters, a native speaker and an EFL instructor, who 
were applied linguists, validated the test with regard to the clarity of instructions and the suitability of the 
questions to the goals and content of the course. They presented several suggestions such as changing the 
marking scale. Their suggestions and comments were taken into consideration. The test consisted of two 
main questions.  
The first question required students to write an essay of 150–200 words within a 30-minute time limit. 
For this question, the marking scale included the following seven writing aspects: content, structural 
organization (text level), structural organization (sentence-level), grammatical accuracy, lexical 
appropriateness, punctuation, and spelling. Each writing aspect received ten points, with a maximum 
question score of 70 (Table 2). 
Table 2. Writing Scoring Rubrics 
Question Writing aspect Number of errors Points 
1. Write an essay  Content  10 
Structural organization (text level)   10 
 Structural organization (sentence level)  10 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
 Grammatical accuracy  10 
 Punctuation  10 
 Lexical appropriateness  10 
 Spelling   10 
 Total  70 
2. Underline and    
correct errors  
Content 5 10 
Structural organization (text level)  5 10 
Structural organization (sentence level) 5 10 
Grammatical accuracy 5 10 
Punctuation 5 10 
Lexical appropriateness 5 10 
Spelling  5 10 
 Total 35 70 
The second question required each student to search and correct, also in 30 minutes, a writing sample that 
had 35 errors covering the seven writing aspects. Each writing aspect received ten points, two points for 
each error, with a maximum question score of 70 (Table 2). Each student was required to underline the 
error and identify the type. The test re-test technique was used to establish the reliability of the test. The 
test was administered twice to a pilot study of twenty students within a two-week period between the two 
tests. The reliability coefficient of the test was .83, which is statistically acceptable for the purposes of the 
study. Before the test, students were briefed about its components and the criteria to be used in assessing 
their work. Each essay was scored by the same two raters who jointly assessed five of the essays and 
discussed points of disagreement until a consensus was obtained. Each essay was then rated 
independently by the two raters. Neither of them knew the rating assigned by the other. The inter-rater 
reliability between them was .86, which was statistically acceptable for the purposes of this study. It 
should be noted that the research questions in this study were addressed through the writing pre- and post-
tests. However, students’ essays were analyzed only to address the extent to which corrective feedback 
was delivered for each writing aspect and corrective-feedback type.   
Description of Procedures and Instructional Treatment 
Students were surveyed about personal information. They were then assigned into four treatment groups 
of 16 students each. Each of them was also randomly assigned into four small cooperative groups of four 
students each. All the writing tasks, including providing the corrective feedback, were conducted in the 
computer laboratory using Microsoft Word 2010 under the supervision of the instructor. Each student was 
set in front of a computer. They had to write an essay of 150–200 words about a specific topic. The topics 
included describing a person, describing a place, the similarities/differences between two things, hobbies, 
how to spend spare time, telling a story, a journey, and the Internet. Each student then submitted their 
work to the instructor. To reduce students' anxiety about making mistakes and errors, they were instructed 
not to write their names on the drafts; numbers were used instead. Each student in the small cooperative 
groups wrote one essay in each session. The teacher then assigned each student in the group one essay to 
be corrected. Each of them worked individually to provide corrective feedback related to the seven 
writing aspects in the draft written by another student from the group. Each group then had face-to-face 
discussion about the corrective feedback provided by each of its members about the errors in the draft 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
he/she had checked. This step was adopted to help them trust the corrective feedback from their peers 
who were still developing their own writing proficiency (Paulus, 1999). Students did not directly receive 
teacher corrective feedback about their errors. However, each group then checked the corrective feedback 
they provided about the errors in the drafts with their instructor as an additional step to instill confidence 
in the feedback. Finally, the essays with corrective feedback were brought back to the instructor who sent 
each student his/her essay, a procedure that ensured confidentiality. Then each student worked alone to 
revise and rewrite his/her draft, considering the corrective feedback he/she had received. 
The instructor familiarized the participants in all groups with the target writing aspects. He also trained 
them to provide different types of corrective feedback as well as strategies to avoid when providing their 
own corrective feedback about the writing aspects. Four instructional treatments were included in the 
present study: track changes, recast, metalinguistic, and no feedback. In the first treatment, students 
commented on their peers’ writing by using the track changes feature of Microsoft Word 2010. From the 
Review menu, the student used the option Track Changes. It allowed the learner to double-strike through 
deletions and to insert changes and mark them in red without providing metalinguistic information. In the 
second treatment, recast feedback, the student used the option New Comment from the Review menu. 
Comments were displayed inline through the option "Show All Revisions Inline" which can be reached 
through Show Markup and then Balloons in the Review menu in Microsoft Word 2010. Students had to 
reformulate learners' errors related to the seven writing aspects without providing any metalinguistic 
information about the error. The third group used the same comment format; however, each student in this 
group had to provide metalinguistic information related to the seven writing aspects without 
reformulating the error. Finally, the fourth treatment was the control group in which no corrective 
feedback was provided by peers or the instructor. Each student worked alone on the writing task. 
However, students in this group received feedback once the study was finished because it was a long time 
for them not to receive feedback. All participants were post-tested, and their writing mean scores were 
analyzed per the study variables. Table 3 shows the extent to which corrective feedback was delivered for 
each writing aspect and corrective-feedback type. Based on the table, the amount of corrective feedback 
each group received was comparable as there were no statistical differences in the mean error between the 
corrective-feedback types as well as the writing aspects for each group (F(2,47) = 0.07); p = .13.  
Table 3. Total Errors and Mean Errors for Corrective-feedback Types and Writing Aspects 
Writing aspect Corrective feedback type Total 
 Track changes Recast Explicit  
 Total 
errors 
Mean 
error 
Total 
errors 
Mean 
error 
Total 
errors 
Mean 
error 
Total 
errors 
Mean 
error 
Content 68 4.25 73 4.56 72 4.5 213 13.31 
Structural organization (text level)  58 3.63 49 3.06 62 3.88 169 10.57 
Structural organization (sentence level) 152 9.50 147 9.19 157 9.81 456 28.50 
Grammatical accuracy 186 11.63 195 12.19 190 11.88 571 35.70 
Punctuation 167 10.44 154 9.63 168 10.50 489 30.57 
Lexical appropriateness 81 5.06 86 5.38 79 4.94 246 15.38 
Spelling  164 10.25 174 10.88 170 10.63 508 31.76 
Total 876 54.76 878 54.89 898 56.14 2652 165.79 
Statistical Analysis  
Means and standard deviations were calculated for either a no-feedback control condition or a corrective-
feedback treatment including one of the three types: track changes, metalinguistic, or recast. To find the 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
presence or absence of any effect of computer-mediated corrective feedback on EFL learners' 
performance in writing, and explore how the three types of computer-mediated corrective feedback 
supported EFL writing, a MANOVA test was administered to the overall scores of students who 
participated in this study. Scheffe post-hoc tests were also conducted to compare any differences among 
the different groups in corrective-feedback types. Descriptive statistics, including mean scores and 
standard deviations, and the MANOVA test, relating to the seven writng aspects in the third question of 
the study, were calculated. Post-hoc Scheffe multiple comparisons were calculated to find the effect of 
corrective-feedback type on the seven writing aspects. The corrective-feedback types were the 
independent variables, and the students’ mean scores on the ‘writing post-test’ and ‘writing aspects’ were 
the dependent variables. 
RESULTS 
Corrective Feedback Types 
Question number one sought to determine whether learners who received computer-mediated corrective 
feedback from their peers while writing performed significantly better on the writing post-test than those 
who did not receive feedback. Table 4 lists the means and standard deviations of the students' scores on 
the post-test comparison of those means (F values). The data in Table 4 show that the overall mean of 
students' scores in the experimental condition was significantly higher than that of the students' scores in 
the control group on the writing post-test (F(1,63) = 27.65, p = 0.00). In other words, the MANOVA test 
showed that the computer-mediated groups had significantly higher mean scores than the control group 
who did not receive corrective feedback from their peers about their writing errors. Moreover, the 
standard deviation is double in the group that received feedback, indicating that students in this group did 
not receive homogeneous mean scores on the writing post-test. As the instructor worked to ensure that all 
students had the same opportunity to participate in the writing sessions, except getting or not getting peer 
corrective feedback, the main significant effect for corrective-feedback type in this study may be 
attributed to receiving and giving computer-mediated corrective feedback by the sample while learning to 
write (Table 4). 
Table 4. MANOVA of Students’ Scores on the Post-test for Corrective-feedback Types 
Corrective feedback  N Mean Standard 
deviation 
F 
Computer-mediated feedback 48 49.04 4.37 27.65* 
Control 16 41.44 1.93 
Note: * p < 0.05. 
Computer-mediated Corrective-feedback Types 
Question number two required students to indicate which type of computer-mediated corrective feedback 
(track changes, recast, or metalinguistic) was more effective for EFL learners' performance on the writing 
post-test. Table 5 presents the results of a MANOVA of students’ post-test scores for the three computer-
mediated corrective-feedback types.  
According to the table, there was a significant effect for the computer-mediated corrective-feedback type 
on the students' scores on the writing post-test (F(2,47) = 127.10, p = 0.00). Post-hoc comparison 
(Scheffe test) shows that the track-changes treatment group significantly outperformed the other groups. 
The recast group also significantly outperformed the metalinguistic group (p = 0.01) (Table 6). These 
findings show the following order of the effect of computer-mediated corrective-feedback type on EFL 
learners' writing performance on the post-test from strongest to weakest: track changes > recast > 
metalinguistic. As the three treatment groups had the same treatment conditions and opportunities for 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
participation and commenting, except the different computer-mediated corrective-feedback type, it can be 
concluded that the main significant effect here could be attributed to the feedback type. That is, the track 
changes feedback type tends to have the most significant positive effect on EFL students’ writing, 
followed by recast feedback, and then metalinguistic feedback type. 
Table 5. MANOVA of Students’ Scores for the 
Computer-mediated Corrective-feedback Type on 
the Writing Post-test 
Feedback 
type 
N Mean 
Standard 
deviation 
F 
Track 
changes 
16 54.00 2.16 
127.10* Recast  16 48.89 1.63 
Metalinguistic  16 44.26 1.29 
Total 48 49.04 4.37 
Note: * p < 0.05 
 Table 6. Results of Scheffe Test for 
Computer-mediated Corrective-feedback 
Type on the Writing Post-test 
Feedback 
type 
Recast Metalinguistic 
MD Sig. MD Sig. 
Track 
changes 
4.19* 0.00 7.94* 0.00 
Recast   3.57* 0.00 
Note: * p < .05. 
 
Effect of Corrective-feedback Types on Writing Aspects 
The third question sought to determine which writing aspects the computer-mediated corrective feedback 
(track changes, recast, or metalinguistic) developed the most. Table 7 shows the means and standard 
deviations for the writing aspect by computer-mediated corrective-feedback type on the writing post-test.  
Table 7. MANOVA of Students’ Scores for Computer-Mediated Corrective-Feedback Type on the Post-
Test in Writing Aspects 
Writing aspect** Corrective feedback type F* 
Track changes Recast Metalinguistic 
M SD M SD M SD 
Content 8.06 0.93 7.00 0.73 6.25 0.58 23.02* 
Structural organization (text level)  8.25 0.77 7.38 0.89 6.19 0.75 26.44* 
Structural organization (sentence level) 8.25 0.86 7.06 0.68 6.13 0.62 34.47* 
Grammatical accuracy 8.38 0.62 7.31 0.95 6.31 1.01 22.12* 
Punctuation 8.38 0.62 7.50 1.10 6.38 0.62 24.53* 
Lexical appropriateness 6.06 1.24 6.50 0.52 6.56 0.51 1.73 
Spelling  6.63 0.50 6.13 0.81 6.44 0.63 2.36 
Total 54.00 2.16 48.89 1.63 44.26 1.29 127.10* 
Note: * p < 0.05; ** The maximum score for each writing aspect is 10. 
According to the table, the MANOVA test revealed that students in the track-changes group obtained 
more mean scores in all writing aspects except two, lexical appropriateness and spelling, at the p < .05 
level. A post-hoc Scheffe test also indicated that there was a significant effect for writing aspect between 
the track-changes group and the other two groups (recast and metalinguistic) in favor of the track-changes 
group in all writing aspects, except lexical appropriateness and spelling (Table 8). This seems to indicate 
that the track-changes feedback was more effective for learning the five writing aspects than the other 
feedback types (recast and metalinguistic) on the writing post-test in the present study. However, the 
Scheffe Test shows that there were no significant differences between corrective-feedback types (track 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
changes, recast, and metalinguistic) in lexical appropriateness and spelling (p = 0.01), indicating that 
students in the three computer-mediated corrective-feedback groups in this study could develop the two 
writing aspects (lexical appropriateness and spelling) in the same way in the writing post-test. The post-
hoc comparison (Scheffe Test) also shows that the recast group significantly outperformed the 
metalinguistic group in all writing aspects except lexical appropriateness and spelling at the p = .01 
(Table 8). This appears to suggest that the recast corrective-feedback type is more helpful for the 
participants in learning the writing aspects than the metalinguistic corrective-feedback type. As the 
instructor worked to ensure that participants in all treatment conditions had similar opportunities to locate 
errors and to correct them except the different corrective-feedback types, it can be concluded that the 
main significant effect related to the writing aspects could be attributed to the corrective-feedback type 
from track changes.  
Table 8. Results of Scheffe Test for Writing Aspect by Computer-mediated Corrective-feedback Type on 
the Writing Post-test 
Writing aspect Recast  Metalinguistic 
MD* Sig.  MD* Sig. 
Content 1.06* 0.00  1.81* 0.00 
   0.75* 0.03 
Structural organization (text level)  0.88* 0.01  2.06* 0.00 
   1.19* 0.00 
Structural organization (sentence 
level) 
1.19* 0.00  2.13* 0.00 
   0.94* 0.00 
Grammatical accuracy 1.06* 0.01  2.06* 0.00 
   0.94* 0.00 
Punctuation .88* 0.01  1.13* 0.00 
   1.13* 0.00 
Lexical appropriateness -0.44 0.34  -0.50 0.24 
   -0.06 0.98 
Spelling 0.50 0.11  0.19 0.72 
   -0.31 0.41 
Note: * The mean difference is significant at the 0.05 level. 
DISCUSSION 
Corrective Feedback Types 
The findings of this study affirm that learners who received corrective feedback delivered via computer 
about error types while writing essays performed significantly better than those who did not receive 
corrective feedback. Providing computer-mediated corrective feedback by peers seemed to have enhanced 
students' writing performance. This finding may be attributed to two reasons. The first is that the sample 
of the study may need more help than other groups of learners, such as advanced learners or native 
speakers, as it consisted of intermediate level EFL learners. Second, students in the treatment conditions 
used the computer to provide corrective feedback about errors in their classmates' essays. Most likely, the 
computer might support them to improve their writing performance. This finding has been supported by 
other studies conducted to identify the effect of computer-mediated corrective feedback on both form and 
content (Arnold, Ducate, & Kost, 2009; Liu & Sadler, 2003; Yeha & Lob, 2009). They found that the 
corrective feedback delivered via computer was quite useful for the development of students' writing 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
abilities on post-tests. Similarly, Savignon and Roithmeier (2004) and Ho and Savignon (2007) found that 
computer-mediated written corrective feedback has the ability to foster language learning and to help 
learners in finding errors and correcting them.  
The present study also lasted over eight weeks and included different writing aspects, focusing on both 
content and form. Studies that explored the effect of corrective feedback on students' writing development 
(Ferris, 2003, 2006; Hyland & Hyland, 2006; Lee, 2010) supported the findings of this study. They 
recommended focusing on both the local and the global, or organization, grammar, and mechanics on the 
one hand and content on the other. Vyatkina (2011) was also in agreement with this finding. She reported 
that the majority of the participants felt that providing foreign language programs with corrective 
feedback on different writing aspects, including both content and appropriateness and grammatical 
accuracy, was quite useful; using wikis and chats in collaborative writing also allowed learners to 
concentrate more on different writing components (Elola & Oskoz, 2010). Oskoz and Elola (2011) also 
reported that computer-mediated communication facilities helped learners in refining the organization of 
their essays, thus becoming better writers. 
Computer-mediated Corrective-feedback Types 
This study also investigated the effect of computer-mediated corrective-feedback type (track changes, 
recast, and metalinguistic) on EFL learners' performance in writing. The findings of this study showed 
that students who received recast feedback significantly outperformed those who received metalinguistic 
feedback. Moreover, the results of this study revealed that students who received track-changes 
corrective-feedback type obtained the highest mean scores compared with the other groups, indicating 
that it is the most useful computer-mediated corrective-feedback type for developing learners' writing 
performance on the post-test. This finding was supported by the research carried out to identify the effect 
of track changes on the development of students' writing abilities. Ho and Savignon (2007), for instance, 
concluded that most participants think that the track-changes technique is very convenient for providing 
feedback about writing and facilitates the editing process. Caws (2006) also found that students felt that 
using track changes in the written evaluations helped them to identify and analyze their errors. 
This finding may be attributed to several reasons. First, track-changes corrective feedback has certain 
advantages as it reformulates the ill-formed text, sentence, phrase, or word through double-striking 
deletions without providing metalinguistic information about the incorrect form. It also marks insertions 
in a red color, which reformulates the error and provides the correct form of the problematic 
word/phrase/sentence. According to Ho and Savignon (2007), the major function of track changes is to 
record any change in a written text, including notes, questions, insertions, and deletions. This may attract 
the user's attention to the error. Furthermore, track changes is actually different than either the recast or 
metalinguistic corrective-feedback types. It is different from the metalinguistic feedback which provides 
the learner with metalinguistic information or comments about the error explaining the nature of the error 
indicated and providing a reformulation indirectly. Track changes does not provide metalinguistic 
feedback about the error; however, it allows for a direct reformulation of the error. Track changes also 
differs from recast feedback in that the error is always repeated in the correct form and in the 
reformulation. However, track changes allows for error identification and provides target-like 
reformulation. The original ill-form produced by the learner was preserved so that he/she could make a 
cognitive comparison and notice the difference between the error and the suggested correct form. 
However, the same could not be said for recast corrective-feedback type because the learner's original 
output (error) was deleted and no longer available. This made it not possible for him/her to make a 
cognitive comparison. All of this makes track changes a unique corrective-feedback type; it has 
distinctive characteristics making it different from other corrective-feedback types.   
Finally, this study concludes that using the track-changes corrective-feedback type may narrow the gap 
between explicit and implicit feedback. Many researchers think that there is a connection between 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
implicit and explicit knowledge bases (DeKeyser, 1998; Hulstijn, 1995), while others (Doughty & 
Williams, 1998; Long & Robinson, 1998) see implicit and explicit knowledge as being separated and 
adhere to an intermediate position between these two types. Track-changes corrective feedback can be 
used in both manners: implicitly and explicitly. That is, there is no direct or metalinguistic feedback 
showing that an overt error has been committed, so it is implicit. However, the error is identified 
indirectly and reformulated, so it is explicit. Therefore, it is a learning/teaching method that is different 
from both explicit and implicit feedback, having unique characteristics and advantages. This may explain 
the high significant mean scores obtained by students who received feedback using this method. Thus, the 
use of this method, which is based on technological innovations, may have prospective opportunities for 
language learning in general and in the area of providing corrective feedback about errors while writing in 
a more specific way. 
Effect of the Corrective-feedback Types on the Writing Aspects 
Students in the track-changes group significantly outperformed participants in other conditions in most 
writing aspects related to both form and content on the writing post-test. Some studies supported this 
finding. For example, Vyatkina (2011) found that most respondents provided feedback to intermediate-
level learners on certain writing aspects, including content, lexical appropriateness, grammatical accuracy, 
organization, spelling, and punctuation. Students might find an opportunity in the corrective feedback 
they received from other peers to find their errors and correct them. This finding also entails that 
corrective feedback should cover comprehensive writing aspects, including content, organization, and 
form. Restricting corrective feedback to include error correction related to treatable or focused errors may 
be less helpful in aiding the development of learners' writing abilities. In this way, corrective feedback is 
not provided in a real writing context, which focuses on developing all writing aspects concurrently. Van 
Beuningen (2010) and Storch (2010) demonstrated that students might find it confusing when they 
observe that some of their errors have been corrected while others have not been.  
The findings of this study also showed that there was a significant effect in all writing aspects on the post-
test except for two: lexical appropriateness and spelling. Students also obtained the lowest means in these 
aspects. This finding was not expected. Despite the fact that students in the three treatment conditions 
(track changes, recast, and metalinguistic) had the same opportunities to study the seven writing aspects 
in the same way during the writing course, they obtained lower mean scores in these two writing aspects. 
However, this finding may be attributed to the nature of errors related to these writing aspects that 
students had to find and correct. Most likely, these error types were not focused. That is, students learned 
to use certain lexical items, but this did not ensure that they learned to use other items because they were 
different and had different lexical usages. Similarly, spelling errors were generally unfocused 
(untreatable). Participants might learn the spelling of a number of words. However, this does not 
necessarily show that they have learned the spelling of other new words compared to other learning 
focused (treatable) grammatical aspects, such as the definite or indefinite article. The findings in the 
tables indicated that there was actually an improvement in all students' mean scores on the writing post-
test in lexical appropriateness and spelling. However, this does not show an established level of 
significant effect among the three groups for these writing aspects. 
CONCLUSIONS, LIMITATIONS, AND IMPLICATIONS 
This study’s unique contribution is to look at asynchronous peer-generated computer-mediated corrective 
feedback and represents a bridge between computer-assisted language learning (CALL) or computer-
mediated teaching methods and work being carried out on corrective feedback in language writing. It 
yielded several major findings. First, students who received computer-mediated corrective feedback while 
writing achieved better results in their overall test scores than the control subjects who did not receive 
corrective feedback. Second, there was a significant effect for the track-changes feedback type when 
compared with the recast feedback and metalinguistic feedback types. Third, students in the track-changes 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
group significantly outperformed those in the recast and metalinguistic group in most writing aspects. As 
this may be the first study which has investigated the effect of track changes as a corrective-feedback type 
while teaching writing, it is still early to claim that it is the best corrective-feedback type to be used by 
learners, as the issue of how the different types of corrective feedback contribute to language learning 
“has been and still remains one of the most controversial issues in language pedagogy” (Ellis, 2005, p. 
214). Therefore, future research may be conducted using track changes to verify or refute the findings of 
this study.  
Even though providing feedback is still a controversial issue, corrective feedback is commonly used in the 
classroom. Therefore, it is essential to continue investigating whether or not technology has further 
implications for the creation of more efficient feedback because the increased use of technology for 
feedback purposes has been less explored. Track changes is a computer-mediated corrective-feedback 
type which has its distinguished features and can be described as both partially implicit and explicit, and 
somewhat metalinguistic and recast in usage. It is a unique method as it is based on error identification 
and reformulation in which the nature of error is provided indirectly without providing an overt indicator 
about the error. Therefore, there is a need for conducting more studies related to using different computer-
mediated corrective-feedback techniques and which also facilitates the integration of the track-changes 
feedback type in the teaching and learning of writing, including different modes of commenting and 
tracking such as Reviewing Panel, Balloons, and Show Markup, and Track Changes Options. It is also 
essential to continue investigating whether or not technology is providing benefits when compared to the 
absence of corrective feedback. As the current study has revealed that the presence of certain techniques 
delivered via computer are more useful in supporting learners' writing performance than the absence of 
corrective feedback, researchers and pedagogues may think of conducting more studies using other 
computer-mediated corrective-feedback methods and techniques.  
Another implication is related to studies about the effectiveness of corrective feedback using paper-and-
pencil. Researchers may think of conducting these studies differently. The need arises to compare 
between the effectiveness of track changes and paper-and-pencil corrective feedback to find whether it 
may aid learners in getting more efficient corrective feedback. Researchers may also think of using 
computer-mediated corrective-feedback methods that focus on both content and form over several 
sessions. The findings of this study may raise a question about the validity of the methodology and 
findings of studies that have tested the effectiveness of corrective feedback about focused-error types, or 
did not provide corrective feedback on unfocused-error types (see, for more information, DeKeyser, 2007; 
Ferris, 2004, 2010; Storch, 2010; Van Beuningen, 2010). Such studies might not be conducted in a real 
classroom context where students did not learn how to write; they just examined the effect of corrective 
feedback on certain error types and ignored others. According to Van Beuningen (2010), conflicting 
findings on the effect of corrective feedback on developing-learners' writing abilities could be due to 
methodological issues and study design. Furthermore, in light of the push towards more distance 
education and the use of online peer and group work in writing courses, this study may present a practical 
model that can be used as guidance for instruction on the use of peer feedback in language-learning 
contexts. Finally, this study was based on giving and receiving peer-generated corrective feedback. A 
future study may compare between the act of giving versus receiving feedback and which of these is 
responsible for the learning differences observed.  
The findings of this study should be interpreted with caution for the following reasons. Firstly, the results 
are limited to using a specific word processor: Microsoft Word 2010. Further studies are needed using 
other word processors, including their different modes of commenting and tracking changes. Secondly, 
the study was conducted on a limited sample (sixty-four learners) over a limited period (eight weeks) on 
certain feedback types (track changes, recast and metalinguistic) in a particular situation. Therefore, there 
is a need for other studies to be conducted on a greater number of students over longer periods and tracing 
error type over time. Thirdly, the analysis was restricted to seven major writing aspects. Other studies 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
may be devised to measure different error types, such as local vs. global, or focused vs. non-focused, and 
their subcategories using different corrective feedback types in the computer-mediated corrective-
feedback environment. Finally, both the experimental and control groups were taught by one of the 
researchers, which does not make it an ideal situation because the involvement of the researcher in the 
teaching could introduce bias.  
 
APPENDIX. Vyatkina's (2011) Classification for Writing Aspects and their Operational Definitions 
 Writing aspect Definition Example Metalinguisti
c feedback 
Reformulation 
1 Content It includes irrelevance 
content, long sections, 
unsuitable examples, 
redundancy, missing 
content, senseless ideas 
(illogical information), and 
unbalanced discussion. 
English 
language 
includes four 
basic skills: 
reading, 
writing, and 
listening.  
Missing 
content 
English language 
includes four 
basic skills: 
reading, writing, 
speaking, and 
listening.  
2 Structural 
organization 
(text level)  
Ideas follow each other in 
a logical, coherent order at 
the text level to make 
sense to the reader. Errors 
include the wrong use of 
transitions, main sentence 
in the essay, main sentence 
in each paragraph, and 
consistency between them 
and other sentences, and 
correct paragraph 
transition.  
English is very 
important to 
study in 
schools and 
universities. 
Since you 
have to speak 
English well 
these days if 
you want to 
get ahead in 
your study.  
Wrong use of 
transition 
English is very 
important to 
study in schools 
and universities. 
Since Therefore, 
you have to 
speak English 
well these days if 
you want to get 
ahead in your 
study. 
3 Structural 
organization 
(sentence 
level)  
Ideas follow each other in 
a logical order at the 
sentence level to make 
sense to the reader. Errors 
include the wrong use of 
transitions, and connection 
between words and 
phrases, and ideas at the 
sentence level.  
I think you 
have a nice but 
very nice 
future if you 
have good 
English. 
Wrong use of 
transition 
I think you have 
a nice but very 
nice future if you 
have good 
English. 
4 Grammatical 
accuracy 
It includes incorrect word 
form or word order.  
English are the 
mother 
language of 
the world.  
Subject-verb 
agreement 
English are is the 
mother language 
of the world. 
5 Punctuation This is restricted to the 
wrong use of punctuation 
marks.  
Finally I think 
you have a 
very nice 
future if you 
have good 
English. 
Use a comma 
after the 
transition  
Finally Finally, I 
think you have a 
nice but very 
nice future if you 
have good 
English. 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
6 Lexical 
appropriatenes
s 
It refers to using 
inappropriate use of lexical 
items. 
You must 
speak English 
well if you 
want to get 
ahead in your 
business. 
Use should 
to express 
advice 
You must should 
speak English 
well if you want 
to get ahead in 
your business. 
7 Spelling  It is related to using wrong 
spelling of words. 
English 
Language is 
very important 
in our life 
these days. 
Capitalizatio
n 
English 
Language 
language is very 
important in our 
life these days. 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Dr. Ali Farhan AbuSeileek is an associate professor at Al al-Bayt University. He has published papers and 
designed several CALL programs for EFL learners. His major research interest is CALL and its 
application in EFL teaching and testing, machine translation, and CALL program development.  
E-mail: alifarhan@aabu.edu.jo 
Awatif Abu-al-Sha'r is an associate professor in TEFL, the Dean of the Faculty of Education at Al-Al-
Bayt University, Jordan. Her main concern is in the fields of TEFL; e-Translation, Curricula and Quality 
Insurance Standards, CALL, and Language Corpora. 
E-mail: awatifabualshar@yahoo.com 
 
REFERENCES 
AbuSeileek, A. (2006). The use of word processor for teaching writing to EFL learners in King Saud 
University. Journal of King Saud University, 19(2), 1–15. 
AbuSeileek, A. (2012). The effect of computer assisted cooperative learning method and group size on 
EFL learners' achievement in communication skills. Computers & Education, 58(1), 231–239.  
Arnold, N., Ducate, L., & Kost, C. (2009). Collaborative writing in wikis: Insights from culture projects 
in intermediate German classes. In L. Lomicka & G. Lord (Eds.), The next generation: Social networking 
and online collaboration in foreign language learning (pp. 115–144). San Marcos, TX: CALICO.  
Arnold, N., Ducate, L., & Kost, C. (2012). Collaboration or cooperation? Analyzing group dynamics and 
revision processes in wikis. CALICO Journal, 29(3), 431–448. 
Bitchener, J. (2008). Evidence in support of written corrective feedback. Journal of Second Language 
Writing, 17(2), 102–118.  
Bitchener, J., & Knoch, U. (2009). The relative effectiveness of different types of direct written corrective 
feedback. System, 37(2), 322–329. 
Bitchener, J., Young, S., & Cameron, D. (2005). The effect of different types of corrective feedback on 
ESL student writing. Journal of Second Language Writing 14(3), 227–258.  
Canale, M. & Swain, M. (1980). Theoretical bases of communicative approaches to second language 
teaching and testing". Applied Linguistics, 1, 1–47. 
Caws, C. (2006). Assessing group interactions online: Students’ perspectives. Journal of Learning Design, 
1(3), 19–28. 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
Chandler, J. (2003). The efficacy of various kinds of error feedback for improvement in the accuracy and 
fluency of L2 student writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12, 267–96.  
DeKeyser, R. (1998). Beyond focus on form: Cognitive perspectives on learning and practicing second 
language grammar. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language 
acquisition (pp. 42–63). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
DeKeyser, R. (2007). Skill acquisition theory. In B. VanPatten & J. Wiliams (Eds.), Theories in second 
language acquisition (pp. 97–113). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  
Doughty, C., & Williams, J. (1998). Pedagogical choices in focus on form. In C. J. Doughty & J. 
Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 197–261). Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Duff, P., & Li, D. (2009). Issues in Mandarin language instruction: Theory, research, and practice. System, 
32(3), 443–456. 
Ellis, R. (2004). The definition and measurement of L2 explicit knowledge. Language Learning 54(2), 
227–275. 
Ellis, R. (2005). Principles of instructed language learning. System 33(2), 209–224.  
Ellis, R. Sheen, Y. Murakami, M., & Takashima, H. (2008). The effects of focused and unfocused written 
corrective feedback in an English as a foreign language context. System, 36, 353–371. 
Elola, I., & Oskoz, A. (2010). Collaborative writing: fostering foreign language and writing conventions 
development. Language Learning & Technology, 14(3), 51–71. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2010/elolaoskoz.pdf 
Ferris, D. (2002). Treatment of error in second language student writing. Ann Arbor, MI: The University 
of Michigan Press. 
Ferris, D. (2003). Response to student writing: Implications for second language students. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Ferris, D. (2004). The "grammar correction" debate in L2 writing: Where are we, and where do we go 
from here? (and what do we do in the meantime?). Journal of Second Language Writing 13(1), 49–62.  
Ferris, D. (2006). Does error feedback help student writers? New evidence on the short- and longterm 
effects of written error correction. In K. Hyland & F. Hyland (Eds.), Feedback in second language 
writing: Contexts and issues (pp. 81–104). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Ferris, D. (2010). Second language writing research and written corrective feedback in SLA. Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 32(2), 181–201. 
Ferris, D. (2012). Written corrective feedback in second language acquisition and writing studies. 
Language Teaching, 45(4), 446–459.  
Ferris, D., & Roberts, B. (2001). Error feedback in L2 writing classes: How explicit does it need to be? 
Journal of Second Language Writing, 10, 161–184.  
Guénette, D. (2007). Is feedback pedagogically correct?: Research design issues in studies of feedback on 
writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 16(1), 40–53. 
Hendrickson, J. M. (1978). Error correction in foreign language teaching: Recent theory, research and 
practice. Modern Language Journal, 62(8), 387–398. 
Ho, M., & Savignon, S. (2007). Face-to-face and computer-mediated peer review in EFL writing. 
CALICO Journal, 24(2), 269–290. 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
Hulstijn, J. H. (1995). Not all grammar rules are equal: giving grammar instruction its proper place in 
foreign language teaching. In R. Schmidt (Ed.), Attention and awareness in foreign language learning (pp. 
359–386). Honolulu, HI: University of Hawaii. 
Hyland, K., & Hyland, F. (2006). Contexts and issues in feedback on L2 writing: An introduction. In K. 
Hyland & F. Hyland (Eds.), Feedback in second language writing: Contexts and issues (pp. 1–19). 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Kessler, G. (2009). Student-initiated attention to form in wiki-based collaborative writing. Language 
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 79–95. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/kessler.pdf 
Lee, L. (2005). Using Web-based instruction to promote active learning: Learners' perspectives. CALICO 
Journal, 23(1), 139–156.  
Lee, L. (2010). Exploring wiki-media collaborative writing: A Case Study in an Elementary Spanish 
Course. CALICO Journal, 27(2), 260–276.  
Liu, J., & Sadler, R. (2003). The effects and affect of peer review in electronic versus traditional modes 
on L2 writing. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2, 193–227.  
Long, M. H., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research, and practice. In C. Doughty & J. 
Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in second language acquisition (pp.15–41). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Lyster, R., & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learner uptake: Negotiation of form in 
communicative classrooms. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 37–66.  
O’Donnell, M. (2007). Policies and practices in foreign language writing at the college level: Survey 
results and implications. Foreign Language Annals, 40, 650–671.  
Oskoz, A., & Elola, I. (2011). Meeting at the wiki: The new arena for collaborative writing in foreign 
language Courses. In M. J. W. Lee & C. Mcloughlin (Eds.), Web 2.0-based E-learning: Applying social 
informatics for tertiary teaching (pp. 209–227). Hershey, PA: IGI Global 
Paulus, T. M. (1999). The effect of peer and teacher feedback on student writing. Journal of Second 
Language Writing, 8(3), 265–289.  
Russell, J., & Spada, N. (2006). The effectiveness of corrective feedback for the acquisition of L2 
grammar: A meta-analysis of the research. In J. Norris & L. Ortega (Eds.), Synthesizing research on 
language learning and teaching (pp. 133–164). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins Publishing.  
Santos, M., López-Serrano, S., & Manchón, R. (2010). The differential effect of two types of direct 
written corrective feedback on noticing and uptake: Reformulation vs. error correction. International 
Journal of English Studies, 10(1), 131–154.  
Savignon, S. J. (Ed.). (2002). Interpreting communicative language teaching. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.  
Sauro, S. (2009). Computer-mediated corrective feedback and the development of l2 grammar. Language 
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 96–120. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/sauro.pdf 
Sheppard, K. (1992). Two feedback types: do they make a difference? RELC Journal, 23, 103–l10. 
Sotillo, S. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous 
communication. Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 82–119. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/sotillo/default.html 
Storch. N. (2010). Critical feedback on written corrective feedback research. International Journal of 
English Studies, 10(2), 29–46. 
Ali AbuSeileek and Awatif Abualsha’r  Peer CMC Feedback to Support EFL Learners' Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
Truscott, J. (1996). The case against grammar correction in L2 writing classes. Language Learning, 46, 
327–369.  
Truscott, J. (2007). The effect of error correction on learners’ ability to write accurately. Journal of 
Second Language Writing, 16(4), 255–272.  
Truscott, J. (2009). Arguments and appearances: A response to Chandler. Journal of Second Language 
Writing, 19(1), 59–60.  
Truscott, J., & Hsu, A.Y.-P. (2008). Error correction, revision, and learning. Journal of Second Language 
Writing, 17, 292–305.  
Van Beuningen, C. (2010). Corrective feedback in L2 writing: Theoretical perspectives, empirical 
insights, and future directions. International Journal of English Studies, 10(2), 1–27. 
Van Beuningen, C., De Jong, N., & Kuiken, F. (2012). Evidence on the effectiveness of comprehensive 
error correction in second language writing. Language Learning, 62(1), 1–41. 
Vyatkina, N. (2011). Writing instruction and policies for written corrective feedback in the basic language 
sequence. L2 Journal, 3, 63–92.  
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
Ware, P. D., & O’Dowd, R. (2008). Peer feedback on language form in tellecollaboration. Language 
Learning & Technology, 12(1), 43–63. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/wareodowd/default.html 
Ware, P. D., & Warschauer, M. (2006). Electronic feedback and second language writing. In K. Hyland & 
F. Hyland (Eds.), Feedback in second language writing: Contexts and issues (pp. 105–122). Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Wells, G. (1999). Dialogic inquiry: Toward a sociocultural practice and theory of education. 
Cambridge,UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Yeha, Sh., & Lob, J. (2009). Using online annotations to support error correction and corrective feedback. 
Computers & Education, 52(4), 882–892.  
