Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/call.pdf 
June 2014, Volume 18, Number 2 
p. 175 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 175 
CALL for Papers:  Special Issue 20(2): LLT 20th Anniversary Special 
Issue of Special Issues 
Special issue editors: Phil Hubbard, Greg Kessler, and Paige Ware 
In 2016 Language Learning & Technology will be celebrating its 20th year of publication. In 
honor of that event, we are planning an anniversary “special issue of special issues,” revisiting 
the most popular special issue themes from the past two decades. We triangulated data from a public poll in April, a 
poll of the editorial board, and the log of downloads from 2013 to arrive at the following themes: 
• The Role of Computer Technology in Second Language Acquisition Research (January 2000 & May 2000) 
• Computer-Assisted Language Testing (May 2001) 
• Learner Autonomy and New Learning Environments (October 2011) 
• Technology and the Four Skills (combined theme) 
o Technology and Oral Language Development (September 2005) 
o Technology and Listening Comprehension (February 2007) 
o Technology and Learning to Read (October 2007) 
o Technology and Learning to Write (June 2008) 
The issue, currently scheduled for June 2016, will include two types of contributions for each of the four themes: a 
review article by an invited expert and a research article selected through the normal peer review process for a total of 
eight articles. Please see the call for contributions below. In each case we have included links to the original call for 
proposals as a starting point. 
The Role of Computer Technology in Second Language Acquisition Research. Read the original call from 1998 
here. This is a broad area that encompasses both the use of technology to improve our understanding of second language 
acquisition processes and the impact of technology as a mediator in those processes.  
Computer-Assisted Language Testing. Read the original call from 1999 here. We are looking for papers based on 
contemporary implementations of the topics listed in that call as well as new ones such as automated scoring of spoken 
or written language assessments. 
Learner Autonomy and New Learning Environments. Read the original call from 2010 here. As this is a more recent 
collection, all those topics remain relevant for the purposes of the anniversary issue. We are open to considering other 
ones as well.  
Technology and the Four Skills. This was originally a set of different calls for proposals from 2003-2006 for special 
issues on each of the four skills: oral communication, listening, reading, and writing. Each of these was a well-supported 
theme during our polls, and rather than select one over the other three, we decided to include all of them. Specifically we 
are seeking research papers that focus on technology and language learning synthesizing two or more of these skills (e.g., 
listening and speaking, reading and writing, speaking and listening, or other combinations). 
Please consult the LLT Website for general guidelines on submission (http://llt.msu.edu/contrib.html) and research 
(http://llt.msu.edu/resguide.html).  
Send a title and 250-word abstract by October 1, 2014 to llt@hawaii.edu. Be sure to specify clearly which of the four 
themes you are proposing your paper for. We will invite a maximum of five papers for each theme, and these will go 
through the standard blind peer review process. Note that only the paper that the editors judge the best for each theme 
will be included in the anniversary issue. Others meeting LLT publication standards will be published in subsequent 
issues. 
Publication timeline:  
• October 1, 2014: Submission deadline for abstracts 
• October 15, 2014: Invitation to authors to submit a manuscript 
• March 1, 2015: Submission deadline for manuscripts 
• June 2, 2016: Publication of special issue 
 
