Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/review1.pdf 
June 2014, Volume 18, Number 2 
pp. 61–64 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 61 
REVIEW OF ONLINE TEACHING AND LEARNING: SOCIOCULTURAL 
PERSPECTIVES 
Online Teaching and Learning: Sociocultural 
Perspectives 
Carla Meskill (Ed.) 
2013 
ISBN: 9781441159458  
US $140.00 
256 pp. 
Bloomsbury Academic 
London 
 
Review by Emily A. Hellmich, University of California, Berkeley 
Meskill's 2013 edited volume, Online Teaching and Learning: Sociocultural Perspectives, brings together 
research that explores a sociocultural orientation to teaching, learning, and living language in online 
spaces. Meskill situates the volume as bringing a sociocultural conceptual lens to an area that she suggests 
has primarily held a social constructivist orientation to online interaction; in doing so, she provides a 
welcome and refreshing perspective that includes a more socially-oriented alternative to understanding 
and researching language learning in these spaces.  
The book is offered as a resource for both beginning and established practitioners and researchers. First, 
the volume provides a straight-forward overview of sociocultural orientations to learning, and their 
relevance to language learning in particular, that is ideal for anyone interested in becoming familiar with 
this theoretical framing and its affordances. Second, practitioners of any age and experience level can 
benefit from many of the chapters that provide models for the integration of different technologies, 
practices, and participatory structures into online or digital educational endeavors (e.g., Chapters 2, 3, & 
4); several of the chapters that focus on teachers are likely to spark important reflection on the part of 
instructors (e.g., Chapters 2, 7, & 10). Many of the chapters also offer valuable methodological models 
for conducting research into online language learning and teaching from a sociocultural angle (e.g., 
Chapters 1, 5, & 11); these chapters would be of particular use to graduate students, young professionals, 
and established scholars who are framing their work from a sociocultural perspective.  
The volume is divided into four parts preceded by an introductory chapter. Meskill uses this introductory 
chapter to review the conceptual underpinnings of the sociocultural perspective that informs the edited 
volume. Within a sociocultural perspective, learners are understood to be agentive and inextricable from 
the contexts in which they interact with others; in other words, it is no longer tenable to see learners as 
passive recipients of instructor knowledge, nor to separate learners from learning contexts. In addition, 
this learning is seen as rooted in the assistance of more experienced and capable others, occurring first on 
Emily A. Hellmich                           Review of Online Teaching and Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  62 
a social plane before its appropriation by the individual via language. Learning from a sociocultural 
perspective is not confined to the classroom but is seen as a fundamental and innate human disposition 
that expands learning spaces to all spaces in which individuals interact. Lastly, the learning process and 
the identity development that accompanies it are both seen as dynamic processes. 
These underlying assumptions are clearly reflected in the eleven chapters that comprise the four sections 
of the book. Part 1, Diversity/Identity Online, explores what a sociocultural perspective can afford the 
diversity of teachers and learners who are brought together in online spaces. In Chapter 1, Sadykova 
examines how one graduate student, Cathy, navigated her native Chinese educational discourse systems 
with American educational discourse contexts in online and face-to-face American courses. This study 
reveals not only the complicated processes of encountering and navigating new discourses, but also the 
new ways of thinking, being, and behaving in online environments that engage learners in opportunities 
for growth. 
In Chapter 2, Samburskiy shifts the analytical attention to teachers and uses Critical Discourse Analysis 
to look at how they construct their identities in relation to their students in an online telecollaboration. He 
identifies presentational strategies used by five instructors based on their introductory overtures posted to 
their students at the beginning of the course, as well as the student responses engendered by such 
overtures. This analysis leads to suggested guidelines for practitioners in their own self-presentation so as 
to promote equitable online learning cultures. 
Part 2 moves from issues of identity and diversity to issues of practice with chapters that examine how we 
can come to understand the transformational impact of online environments on pedagogical practice. 
Varli begins the second section of the book with an exploration of practices and perceptions of ESL/EFL 
teachers in the virtual world Second Life (SL). Varli’s work reveals that teacher practices in SL are in line 
with sociocultural components of language teaching, such as assisted activity (Vygotsky, 1978), 
participation in a community of practice (Pavlenko & Lantolf, 2000), collaborative dialogue (Swain, 
2000), and engagement with authentic tasks (Felix, 2002).  He advocates for professional training in the 
potential of virtual worlds for both language learning and language learners.  
Lund continues the discussion of practice in Chapter 4 through a detailed look at collaboration via wiki 
technologies in two Norwegian high schools. Lund distills his work into four primary lessons for 
integrating collaboration via online technologies into classrooms that are useful to both practitioners and 
researchers: 1) the need to match tasks with available cultural tools; 2) the need to align individual and 
collaborative contributions; 3) the need to create tasks that combine learning goals with learners’ 
backgrounds; and 4) the need to conceptualize teacher and learner roles as overlapping rather than 
discrete entities. He concludes that we cannot forget the importance of teachers and intentional 
pedagogical design when considering technological tools.  
This thread of teacher training is picked up in the final piece in this section by Kozlova and Zundel who 
investigate the factors that influence five foreign language teachers’ uses of multimodal tools in online 
language learning platforms. Of note, Kozlova and Zundel found that the use of multimodal features 
online largely reflected instructors' underlying theoretical perspectives on learning and teaching language. 
For example, one instructor who saw language learning as a collaborative effort used pictures and written 
textual hints to support student discussion of German dormitories; rather than providing immediate 
correction or answers, the instructor utilized different modalities to support the students in their collective 
exploration of the topic. Like Lund, Kozlova and Zundel advocate for special attention to be paid to 
training teachers to use and reflect on online tools.  
Moving beyond shifts in practice, Part 3 examines this shift in relation to participation by interrogating 
how online learning spaces are shaping student-teacher and student-student interactions. In chapter 6, 
Uzuner Smith and Mehta explore the pivotal role of meaningful dialogue to sociocultural perspectives in 
fully online courses. The authors not only found evidence of educationally valuable talk in the threaded 
Emily A. Hellmich                           Review of Online Teaching and Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  63 
discussions analyzed, but they also calculated that in all three modules, over 80% of the coded talk was 
educationally valuable. While practitioners would benefit from the model they provide for purposes of 
integrating and cultivating quality talk into online discussions, the study also provides support for the 
importance of quality dialogue in meaningful learning. 
Shifting from a focus on students, Dooly investigates what it means for pre-service foreign language 
teachers to interact in an international telecollaboration. By tracking and analyzing one trainee teacher's 
online activity over the course of the program, Dooly documents how interactions with peers lead the 
teacher to develop what had been, at the beginning, vague and superficial understandings of central topics 
into what later became co-constructed and deeply-rooted conceptualizations of the collaboration project. 
Dooly suggests that this analysis foregrounds the need to reconceptualize how we think about community, 
communities of practice, and the integration of technology into teacher training programs in a globalized, 
interconnected era. 
Anthony looks at how humor, what she views as an advantageous component of face-to-face language 
instruction and participation, is represented in oral synchronous online environments. Using data archived 
from online interactions among secondary and post-secondary Russian classes, as well as interviews with 
Russian educators and their students, Anthony found that humor played an important role in relieving 
stress, presenting cultural information, engaging students, establishing and maintaining social 
connections, and holding student attention. She did not, however, find sufficient evidence to suggest that 
humor played a role in memory aid (mnemonic role) or in focusing student attention on form (linguistic 
role). Anthony's work suggest that many of the benefits of humor can be found in online spaces, but her 
work also stands as a call for more research into this area. 
In the last chapter in this section, Vickers compares the different affordances and participatory structures 
inherent in face-to-face and asynchronous email-based writing tutorials for English language learners. 
Vickers found that in the drafting process, the online asynchronous exchange allowed for more 
streamlined and focused discussions of the topic at hand, whereas the face-to-face tutorial was less 
focused. Conversely, the email tutorial did not allow for any monitoring of student understanding during 
the editing phase, which was a valuable affordance of the constant interaction inherent in face-to-face 
encounters. Vickers' nuanced study points to the importance of understanding the advantages and 
disadvantages of participatory shifts that are possible via online and digital technologies. 
In the final section of the volume, Part 4: Informal Online Learning, two authors explore the language 
learning that can take place outside the classroom through platforms such as social networks. In Chapter 
10, Gonzalez explores the potential of L2 socialization in the social network site of Livemocha and 
focuses specifically on rapport management. Through conversation analysis, Gonzalez tracks the online 
interactions of one student, Vincent, who was particularly successful at building and maintaining 
relationships in Livemocha, and she found that he relied on laughter, humor, emoticons, and small talk to 
develop and maintain rapport. Gonzalez outlines some possible ways for classroom teachers to use 
Livemocha to target pragmatics, but leaves the question open as to whether other types of informal online 
learning should be harnessed for classroom use.  
Lamy concludes the section and the book by suggesting that this last question—of how and whether to 
harness online informal learning opportunities in the traditional classroom—may not be the right one to 
ask. In a mixed-methods study of beginner Chinese language learners in the Open University, Lamy 
examines the use of social networking features—re-use, openness, network effects, and link display—in 
four spaces; two of these spaces are within the Open University: one centered around a general "café-like" 
environment, and one focused on discussions of culture. The other two spaces are on Facebook: one 
public group and one private group. Her analysis suggests that institutional attempts to integrate social 
network features are highly influenced by their framing and by the institutional culture. Lamy suggests 
that a more productive question to guide future research may be how students' past learning sets the stage 
Emily A. Hellmich                           Review of Online Teaching and Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  64 
for their use of the different features present in social networking sites, whether such sites are used in 
informal or formal settings. 
While the volume would have benefited from transitional introductions to each section as a way to tie the 
book together and to make salient for readers the links to overarching themes and questions, it does an 
overall good job of revealing interesting insights into understanding language learning and research in 
online spaces, and it identifies new and fruitful questions and areas of research. Rather than being the 
definitive volume on sociocultural orientations to online language learning and teaching, this volume 
provides an important and necessary foray into the application of such an orientation to online spaces that 
will likely inspire additional work and practice. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Emily A. Hellmich is a third-year doctoral student at the University of California, Berkeley, in the 
Language, Literacy, and Culture program. Her work focuses on how technology is instantiated into 
second and foreign language classrooms and what impact this integration has on student and teacher 
perceptions of language and language use.  
E-mail: eahellmich@berkeley.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Felix, U. (2002). The web as a vehicle for constructivist approaches in language teaching. ReCall, (14)1, 
2–15.  
Pavlenko, A., & Lantolf, J. (2000). Second language learning as participation and the (re)construction of 
selves. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 155–178). Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press.  
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond: mediating acquisition through collaborative 
dialogue. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 97–114). Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press.  
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.  
