Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/review1.pdf 
February 2014, Volume 18, Number 1 
pp. 42–45 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 42 
REVIEW OF RESEARCHING ONLINE FOREIGN LANGUAGE 
INTERACTION AND EXCHANGE: THEORIES, METHODS, AND 
CHALLENGES 
Researching Online Foreign Language Interaction and 
Exchange: Theories, Methods and Challenges 
Melinda Dooly & Robert O’Dowd (Eds.) 
2012 
ISBN:  978-3034311557 
US   
347 pp. 
Peter Lang 
New York, US 
 
 
Review by Linda Bradley,  Chalmers University of Technology 
Researching Online Foreign Language Interaction and Exchange, edited by Melinda Dooly and Robert 
O’Dowd, is the third book in a series by Peter Lang on telecollaboration in education. This third edited 
volume maps out topical aspects of computer-mediated communication (CMC) in online exchange 
research in three sections: theoretical approaches, key areas of research, and research methods. The three 
sections consist of chapters authored by specialists in each field. The book provides overviews of topical 
areas of interest for telecollaboration research, and it serves as valuable input for anyone interested in 
research in online foreign language interaction and exchange environments. 
In this time, when online interaction and exchange in foreign language (FL) education has increased, 
researchers are faced with a range of decisions to make regarding research frameworks, methods, task 
designs, and ethical issues, as well as with conceptual questions related to defining constructs such as 
intercultural competence and multimodality. This volume provides insights into prevailing theoretical 
approaches, together with key areas of research and many of the methods used to investigate FL 
interaction and exchange in online environments. This area is relatively new within the field of CALL due 
to what Dooly and O’Dowd describe as a combination of various developments. These developments are 
related to technical aspects, such as the increase in user-friendly technologies in educational contexts, 
cheaper computer hardware, and widespread access to internet connections, but other reasons also factor 
into recent growth. They outline the first reason as the importance of acknowledging culture in FL 
learning, particularly in cases in which online intercultural interaction plays an important role. A second 
reason is the growth of the sociocultural processes whereby learning is understood as the meaningful use 
of language in interaction. The third reason they attribute to both the growing importance of online 
technologies in shaping the ways we work and learn in global networks, and to how FL competence and 
e-literacies have emerged as components within the new set of skills required of individuals in response to 
changing labor markets.  
Linda Bradley             Review of Researching Online Foreign Language Interaction and Exchange 
 
Language Learning & Technology  43 
The book provides a comprehensive historical overview of the research to date on online language 
learning. Dooly and O’Dowd describe this history as first appearing as collections of accounts of 
classroom practice and anecdotal research, but then moving to more in-depth empirical studies. They 
describe three general categories of online interaction and exchange for the purpose of FL learning. The 
first category is in-class interaction, which refers to online networks for students to interact in one 
particular class through synchronous communication in chats, MOOs and local area networks. Many of 
these in-class interaction studies focus on the interactionist perspective to FL education and 
psycholinguistic theories of SLA. The second category, class-to-class interaction, often termed 
telecollaboration, came with improved online connectivity. Both asynchronous communication tools 
evolved such as discussion forums, blogs, wikis, synchronous oral communication, and multimodal 
technologies. With these studies, the sociocultural perspective of learning plays a predominant theoretical 
framing role. The third category of class-to-world interaction describes contexts in which learners enter 
into contact with others globally, but not in communication organized formally by the instructor. Rather, 
learners collaborate in specialized interest communities or environments outside of the classroom context, 
which opens up a blurring of boundaries of the traditional classroom with other communicative 
environments.  
Section I. Theoretical Approaches to Researching Online Exchange 
In the first of three chapters in this section, Jonathon Reinhardt gives an overview over the function of the 
interactionist approach and socio-cognitive perspectives. These two frameworks are examined by 
focusing on methodological approaches and the areas of overlap they share, including the concept of 
interaction and negotiation of meaning. He offers examples of key findings from each approach to 
illustrate the underlying concepts and to discuss critiques of these approaches. As a response to some of 
the issues in this debate, Reinhardt examines the ecological approach that can offer new insights into 
SLA. He elaborates on the discussions of acquisition and learning within applied linguistics and foreign 
language acquisition and development. He emphasizes that interaction must be understood broadly since 
negotiation of meaning is not bound to an input-interactionist framework. One way forward is adopting an 
ecological approach for understanding learning. Such an approach transcends our most recent 
conceptualizations of technology from originating in mainframes and social processing units but also in 
the individual use of personal computers as among the many tools available in today’s distributed, 
networked, and ubiquitous gadgets.  
In the next chapter, Introducing Cultural Historical Activity Theory (CHAT) for Research CMC in 
Foreign Language Education, Françoise Blin gives an overview of CHAT and discusses the basic 
concepts and principles by drawing on examples from studies with a connection to CMC. Activity theory 
aims to understand human beings in their everyday life circumstances, seeing individuals as context-
bound.  The chapter brings up activity theory, built on interconnected relationships in the form of 
triangles that display the relationships between students (subjects), the object that they are engaged in, 
and the larger context of community. All connections are made by tools and artifacts, rules and division 
of labour. Blin suggests that we have reached the third generation of activity theory. In this chapter, 
activity systems are illustrated with examples of how telecollaboration transforms activity systems and 
provides ethnographic data.  
In the final chapter of the first section, Paige Ware and Brenna Rivas investigate mixed methods 
approaches to analyzing data. They suggest a combination of qualitative and quantitative data approaches 
to investigating learning and show that much of the research on telecollaboration has been examined with 
a qualitative lens that, appropriately, relies on close contextualization of such projects. They suggest that 
mixed methods might offer a unique way to examine online exchanges in the particular context of 
secondary education where different types of institutional constraints are in place. They illustrate the 
unique challenges of the secondary context in the final part of their chapter through a case study of a 
Linda Bradley             Review of Researching Online Foreign Language Interaction and Exchange 
 
Language Learning & Technology  44 
telecollaboration between adolescent learners in Spain and the US.  
Section II. Key Areas of Research: Tasks, Culture, Multimodality, and Virtual Worlds 
In the first chapter out of four in this section, Melinda Dooly and Mirjam Hauck emphasize the need to 
embrace multimodal communicative competence (MCC) in telecollaborative language learning research. 
The central question for researchers is deciding what may be considered researchable in multimodal data. 
For example, they show how exchanges can rely on a variety of constellations of asynchronous and 
synchronous online tools. Interestingly, in analyzing such data, they argue that written and spoken 
language are still the two most prominent areas of interest, whereas modalities such as intonation and 
gestures are more often described in relation to spoken and written language and not as separate meaning 
making and communication modes in their own right. According to Dooly and Hauck, exploring the 
MCC field is challenging but promising “for future researchers willing to explore expanding parameters 
of communication that is opening up, exponentially, with each new generation of language learners” (p. 
154). The chapter discusses the complexity involved in multimodal data collection and analysis and the 
challenges of achieving transparency in the research process. 
In the second chapter of this section, The Classroom-Based Action Research Paradigm in 
Telecollaboration, Andreas Müller-Hartman gives an account of action research and activity theory 
connected to telecollaboration. His focus is on teachers’ competence development within telecollaborative 
projects, such as their development of Intercultural Communicative Competence (ICC), multimodal 
competence, and teaching competence. Since telecollaborative studies are mostly conducted by 
researchers who are also practitioners, the case study approach is suggested as a frame for the research 
context. In such situations, instructors do not come to the contexts as outsiders. Such approaches allow 
studies to consist of complex interrelations of environments and their agents. For the case study approach, 
he argues that activity theory can help researchers to understand the complex processes taking place and 
to gain the perspectives of the participants. He illustrates three different forms of competence: 
multiliteracy competences, task-based language teaching competences (TBLT), and intercultural 
communicative competences (ICC) by drawing on a sample case study.  
The next chapter, by Luisa Panichi and Mats Deutschmann, gives a balanced review of learning in virtual 
worlds. They argue that virtual worlds can be used in telecollaborative activities as environments for 
explorations because the synchronous aspects of virtual worlds resemble face-to-face meetings. This real-
time effect also affects such aspects as designing and monitoring tasks. They outline the affordances for 
communication offered by virtual environments and tackle one of the main challenges of 
telecollaboration, that of designing meaningful activities. They show how it is possible to build virtual 
environments and to use avatars to communicate through non-verbal cues. They discuss the complexity of 
this new type of environment with a focus on the emergence of new ethical and copyright issues. 
In the final chapter of this section, Intercultural Competence in Computer-Mediated-Communication: An 
Analysis of Research Methods, Martina Möllering and Mike Levy offer insight specifically into the 
intercultural side of online communication. They provide an overview of what the intercultural turn has 
meant for research and outline themes that emerge from selected studies that use sociocultural theory to 
frame ICC. They explore underlying constructs of culture, including dimensions such as elemental, group 
membership, contested, and individual. They claim that research in ICC is multifaceted because the 
concept of culture itself is quite complex.  
Section III. Research Methods for Online Interaction and Exchange 
In the first chapter out of the two in this last section describing methodological challenges and potentials, 
Nina Vyatkina shows how corpus analysis methods and tools can be used when examining 
telecollaborative discourse in her chapter: Applying the Methodology of Learner Corpus Analysis of 
Linda Bradley             Review of Researching Online Foreign Language Interaction and Exchange 
 
Language Learning & Technology  45 
Telecollaborative Discourse. Using CMC learner corpora in telecollaborative studies implies accessing 
data that is automatically saved and thus immediately available for research. In addition, native-speaker 
and non-native speaker contrasts are built into the corpus for further elaboration. The researcher can 
thereby easily get an insider view on the study context, which enriches the ethnographic dimension. This 
added information enhances the ecological validity of the learner corpus as well as the findings based on 
its data. Vyatkina also emphasizes the advantage of telecollaboration corpora in offering a wide array of 
discourse types and linguistic features. Her chapter highlights an example of the application of the 
Telekorp corpus that is based on exchanged emails and chats, and she explores the use of German modal 
particles as used by both learners and by native speakers of German. Her conclusion discusses analytical 
tools for telecollaboration corpus research design, including both proprietary corpus software as well as 
open source corpus software. 
In the final chapter of the book, Using Eye-Tracking to Investigate Gaze Behaviour in Synchronous 
Computer-Mediated Communication for Language Learning, Breffni O’Rourke brings up the relatively 
new research area in the application of eye-tracking to synchronous, text-based computer-mediated 
communication for language learning. In this chapter, three different analyses of eye-tracking devices are 
reported in which native speakers of English were learning a foreign language by interacting in a text-
based virtual environment. As eye-tracking tools become more accessible and easier to use, he argues that 
it is likely that they will be used more for telecollaboration research.    
In Researching Online Foreign Language Interaction and Exchange, Dooly and O’Dowd present some of 
the most topical theoretical and methodological research trends within telecollaboration in education. This 
book contributes with its insights into applications of approaches for both initiated researchers but also for 
novices in the field of CALL. It maps out existing research as well as suggestions of where the field is 
heading. The interaction and exchange aspects of online studies are increasing since mobility is spreading. 
Although there is no specific chapter attributed to mobile learning in the book, this topic comes up in 
some of the chapters. The two previous books in the series have focused on more specific areas of 
telecollaboration: Guth and Helm discussing the concept of telecollaboration 2.0 and Sadler examining 
virtual worlds. Dooly and O’Dowd’s book offers a comprehensive overview of contemporary notions of 
the most recent practices in telecollaboration. In sum, this book attracts anyone interested in research in 
online foreign language learning interactions and exchanges. It offers valuable input regarding current 
aspects of CMC and telecollaboration.  
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Linda Bradley recently finished her PhD within the area of web-based technology and learning at the 
University of Gothenburg in Sweden. Her research interests include investigating student collaboration, 
communication and intercultural learning in digital environments in language learning and specifically 
within English for Specific Purposes (ESP) in higher education.  
E-mail: linda.bradley@chalmers.se  
