Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/chenyang.pdf 
February 2014, Volume 18, Number 1 
pp. 57–75 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 57 
FOSTERING FOREIGN LANGUAGE LEARNING THROUGH 
TECHNOLOGY-ENHANCED INTERCULTURAL PROJECTS 
Jen Jun Chen, National Sun Yat-sen University 
Shu Ching Yang, National Sun Yat-sen University 
The main aim of learning English as an international language is to effectively 
communicate with people from other cultures. In Taiwan, learners have few opportunities 
to experience cross-cultural communication in English. To create an authentic EFL 
classroom, this one-year action research study carried out three collaborative intercultural 
projects using web-based tools (online forums, weblogs, Skype, and email) in a 7th grade 
EFL class. The projects were designed to improve students’ language skills and 
intercultural communicative competence (ICC). To triangulate the findings, qualitative 
and quantitative methods were used to collect the data; specifically, questionnaires, 
interviews, and document analyses were used to investigate the learners’ responses and 
learning processes. The results revealed that the participants had strong positive attitudes 
towards technology-enhanced intercultural language learning (TEILI), which enabled the 
learners to experience authentic language learning that fostered linguistic competence and 
ICC. The findings suggest that TEILI approximates real-life learning contexts by allowing 
students to use a language for the same purposes that they will use it outside school.  
Keywords: Culture; Web-Based Instruction; Video 
APA Citation:. Chen, J. J., & Yang, S. C. (2014). Fostering foreign language learning 
through technology-enhanced intercultural projects. Language Learning & Technology 
18(1), 57–75. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/chenyang.pdf 
Received: December 27, 2012; Accepted: March 7, 2013; Published: February 1, 2014  
Copyright: © Jen Jun Chen & Shu Ching Yang  
INTRODUCTION 
Globalization and the rapid spread of English have challenged traditional notions of Standard English and 
language education practices (Shomoossi & Ketabi, 2008). Modern English language learners use English 
to communicate with native speakers and, increasingly, with non-native speakers. The main aim of 
learning English as an international language is to effectively communicate with those from other 
cultures. English should therefore be taught as a means of cross-cultural communication (Erling, 2005; 
Jenkins, 2006; Kilickaya, 2009; McKay, 2003).  
One of the fundamental difficulties Taiwanese students of English as a foreign language (EFL) encounter 
is the lack of opportunities to experience interactive cross-cultural communication in English (Liu, 2005; 
Su, 2008). In classroom settings, non-native English-speaking teachers, often teaching in Chinese, 
typically struggle to teach pragmatic competence. Lacking extensive knowledge of the English pragmatic 
system, these teachers often focus their teaching on textbooks to help students perform well on their 
exams. However, content analyses of the English textbooks used in junior high schools revealed that these 
textbooks provide inadequate cultural information about Anglo-American cultures (Chen, 2007). In other 
words, the inauthenticity of Taiwanese English language education cannot fulfill the demands for English 
language competency in a globalized world.  
Studies indicate that technology plays an important role in creating authentic language learning 
environments (Thorne, 2005). O’Dowd provided evidence that “telecollaborative activities have the 
potential to support the development of students’ intercultural communicative competence (ICC) in a way 
that traditional culture learning materials would not be able to achieve” (2007, p. 146). To address 
Jen June Chen and Shu Ching Yang  Technology-Enhanced Intercultural Projects 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
language-learning problems in the Taiwanese context, this action research study carried out three 
technology-enhanced, collaborative intercultural projects. The aim of the projects was to demonstrate that 
technology-enhanced, cross-cultural tasks could provide a larger and more realistic context of 
communication for language learners, which is rarely possible to achieve with other instructional models. 
Below, the relationships among the role of culture, the use of technology, and language teaching will be 
discussed to elucidate the theoretical and practical frameworks of the instructional design.  
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The Role of Culture in Language Education   
Language and culture are closely linked. Although linguistic accuracy is necessary for language users to 
communicate effectively, when language “is used in contexts of communication, it is bound up with 
culture in multiple and complex ways” (Kramsch, 1998, p. 3). Traditionally, English language education 
has involved learning how English is used in native English-speaking countries. However, “[t]he global 
spread of English into diverse multilingual contexts has brought with it the development of many varieties 
of English” (McKay & Bokhorst-Heng, 2008). To increase authenticity in the teaching of English as an 
international language (EIL), instructors need to “re-emphasize the context of use, to re-define the 
participants, and to reconsider the nature of EIL” (Shomoossi & Ketabi, 2008, p. 182). English education 
should consider the status of English in all of its varieties and functional ranges throughout the world, 
prepare students to communicate across cultures, and create linguistic awareness through exposure to 
different varieties of English.  
In their standards for FL learning, the American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages (ACTFL, 
1996) advocated for application of the ‘‘five Cs’’ of language learning: communication, culture, 
connection, comparison, and community. Communication is the heart of language learning. 
Understanding the cultural context of both the target language and the learners’ native language leads to 
greater awareness of the interdependent relationship between languages and cultures. Connection refers to 
interdisciplinary instruction, which provides learners with detailed information about the FL and its 
cultures from multiple disciplinary perspectives. Comparison refers to increasing awareness of linguistic 
elements and cultural concepts by comparing and contrasting the studied language and the native 
language. Finally, community suggests that learners can use the language in an international setting and 
actively participate in multilingual communities beyond the classroom. Clearly, the sociocultural 
component is a significant feature of FL education (FLE). Students are expected to gain insight into and 
awareness of cultural interactions in communication settings. 
Recently, intercultural competence has been the central concern for instructors in EFL classrooms (Liaw, 
2006). Intercultural communication is not just an encounter between cultures; it should “be viewed and 
analyzed as a complex process” (Stire, 2006, p. 5). A range of intercultural communicative education 
models have been proposed by researchers worldwide (Byram, 1997; Deardorff, 2006; Spitzberg, 2000; 
Spitzberg & Changnon, 2009; Stier, 2006). The most exhaustive and influential is that of Michael Byram, 
whose model incorporates holistic linguistic and intercultural competence and has clear, practical, and 
ethical objectives (Byram, 1997). According to Byram, the aims of intercultural language teaching are:  
to give learners intercultural competence as well as linguistic competence; to prepare them for 
interaction with people of other cultures; to enable them to understand and accept people from 
other cultures as individuals with other distinctive perspectives, values and behaviors; and to help 
them to see that such interaction is an enriching experience (Byram, Gribkova, & Starkey, 2002, 
p. 10). 
Byram’s model consists of five factors (see Figure 1). Critical cultural awareness is positioned centrally in 
relation to the other four: knowledge, intercultural attitudes, interpreting and relating skills, and discovery 
and interaction skills. Byram (2012, p. 9) insists that critical cultural awareness “embodies the educational 
Jen June Chen and Shu Ching Yang  Technology-Enhanced Intercultural Projects 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
dimension of language teaching” and that “skills, attitudes and knowledge, both linguistic and cultural,” 
should be centered on the dimension of critical awareness (p. 6).  
 Interpreting and relating skills 
Ability to interpret a document or 
event from another culture, explain it, 
and relate it to one’s own culture. 
 
Knowledge 
Knowledge of one’s own culture, 
that of one’s interlocutor, and of 
the general processes of societal 
and individual interaction. 
Critical cultural awareness 
Ability to evaluate, both critically and 
on the basis of explicit criteria, the 
perspectives, practices, and products 
of one’s own culture and those of 
other cultures and countries. 
Intercultural attitudes 
Curiosity and openness, readiness to 
suspend preconceptions about other 
cultures and one’s own. 
 
 Discovery and interaction skills 
Ability to acquire new knowledge of a 
culture and cultural practices and the 
ability to implement knowledge, 
attitudes, and skills under the 
constraints of real-time 
communication and interaction. 
 
Figure 1. Byram’s model of intercultural communicative competence (Byram, 1997, 2012 & Byram et 
al., 2002)  
Teaching Intercultural Communication in the Digital Age 
As noted above, authentic language teaching with an intercultural dimension helps students acquire the 
linguistic and intercultural competence needed for communication. What matters most in this complex 
interactive process is what teachers do to reach these goals. Byram’s model only provides a link between 
intercultural communication and FL teaching; teachers must formulate the best teaching strategies for 
their own contexts (Byram, 1997 & Byram et al., 2002).  
Traditionally, cultural learning in the classroom has been decontextualized and has borne minimal 
resemblance to actual communication scenarios. Through telecommunications, the limitations of the 
classroom can be overcome through the use of web-based tools to bring authentic texts and real 
intercultural communication experiences into the classroom (Byram, 1997 & Byram et al., 2002). Web 
2.0 technologies (blogs, Skype, and social networking sites) facilitate online practices that allow a 
classroom to connect with the world (Peters, 2009). Additionally, online education communities, such as 
the ePals Global Community and the International Education and Resource Network (iEARN), provide 
collaborative projects that enable teachers and students to build authentic cross-cultural communication 
pathways.  
Studies show that by integrating technology into their curriculum, teachers enable students to experience 
varied cultures and cultivate their language skills through meaningful learning situations relevant to real-
life communicative events (Cunningham, Fagersten, & Holmsten, 2010; Cziko, 2004; Greenfield, 2003; 
Kilimci, 2010; Lee, 2007; Richards, 2010; Smith, 2000; Wu & Marek, 2010; Wu, Yen, & Marek, 2011). 
This allows learners to “develop meaningful relationships with one another and to use the language they 
are studying to do so” (Thorne, 2005). 
 
Research Questions  
Based on the evidence presented above, this study designed 3 web-based projects to promote cross-
Jen June Chen and Shu Ching Yang  Technology-Enhanced Intercultural Projects 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
cultural communication and expose students to various English language contexts. The umbrella term 
“technology-enhanced intercultural language instruction” (hereafter TEILI) is used in this study to 
describe a cross-cultural FL instruction model mediated by technology tools. The study aims to illustrate 
the possibilities and problems associated with TEILI, evaluate the influence of TEILI on FLE, and 
examine the instructional challenges of TEILI by soliciting teaching reflections. The research questions of 
this study are as follows: 
1. How do learners respond to TEILI? 
2. What benefits and challenges did the learners experience during TEILI? 
3. What teaching-related challenges are associated with TEILI? 
METHODOLOGY 
Participants 
The 15 participants were 7th grade students in a pull-out bilingual program. Students were removed from 
their regular classes ten class periods per week to receive specialized instruction in Chinese and English. 
These participants had to pass language tests in both Chinese and English before enrolling. Compared to 
their classmates, these students were advanced learners with stronger language skills. A beginning-of-
semester survey revealed that all of the students agreed that English is an important tool for connecting 
with the world. Nine of them had studied English in cram schools for over 6 years, and 4 had previously 
used the Internet to learn English.  
In the 2011 academic year, the first author taught a one-year English course in this pull-out program, 
meeting with the students regularly for 45 minutes per week. The research comprised the records and 
analyses of the classroom activities in which students were engaged throughout the course.  
Instructional design 
The one-year English course utilized TEILI to create a realistic language-learning environment. Three 
projects were conducted in the course: Folk tales/storytelling: past and present in the first semester (16 
weeks) and, in the second semester, Video conference: storytelling and cross-cultural discussion and E-
pal project (8 weeks each) (see Table 1). Since none of the participants had ever been exposed to TEILI, 
the first two projects consisted of group work to allow students to become more comfortable with this 
mode of instruction. The final project focused on one-on-one communication. At the beginning of the 
course, participants were asked to complete a questionnaire that evaluated their language learning 
experience. At the end of each project, a reflective questionnaire was administered to encourage students 
to reflect upon their learning. Finally, a questionnaire was given at the end of the course to analyze the 
participants’ perceptions and to obtain course evaluations. The students’ learning journals were 
systematically collected and examined, and the curriculum and teaching was adjusted according to 
students’ feedback. The project activities are detailed in the following sections. 
Table 1. Theoretical and Procedural Framework of the Three Projects  
Projects Description Learning focus ICT tools 
1st semester 
1st project 
 
Folk tales/ 
storytelling:  
Past and present   
 
Beginning-of-semester survey about students’ language learning backgrounds 
Small-group learning: 16 weeks 
Participants shared 
traditional folk tales and 
creative stories in an 
online forum.  
 
Language skills: Reading English stories; 
writing traditional folk tales and creative 
stories. 
Intercultural communication: Exchanging 
ideas and feedback on stories with Dubai 
Weblog 
Online 
forum 
Jen June Chen and Shu Ching Yang  Technology-Enhanced Intercultural Projects 
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
students. 
Mid-term survey analyzing students’ perceptions of the project 
2nd semester 
2nd project 
 
Videoconference: 
Storytelling and 
cross-cultural 
discussion 
  
Small-group learning: 8 weeks 
Participants told 
traditional stories in a 
puppet show and then 
discussed customs and 
daily life via 
videoconferencing.   
 
Language skills: Listening and speaking to 
non-native speakers via video 
conferencing; writing scripts for the puppet 
show. 
Intercultural communication: Live 
discussion with Pakistani students about 
folk tales and cultural similarities and 
differences. 
Weblog 
Skype 
3rd project 
E-pal project 
 
Individual learning: 8 weeks 
Participants exchanged 
weekly emails through 
ePals. 
Language skills: Reading and writing 
emails. 
Intercultural communication 
Exchanging information about daily life 
with American key pals. 
Weblog 
E-mail 
 
End-of-term survey analyzing students’ perceptions of the whole course 
A class weblog (see Figure 2) was set up to facilitate teaching and learning in the course. The blog 
contained a collection of information and learning resources that gave step-by-step support to students as 
they completed their project tasks. Each group had its own individual blog within the class blog in which 
students wrote their project drafts and did peer-corrections. The researcher also answered students’ 
questions and commented on students’ work through the class weblog.  
 
Figure 2. Screenshot of the class weblog 
Folk tales/storytelling: past and present 
Folk tales/storytelling: past and present is an iEARN project in which students from different parts of the 
Jen June Chen and Shu Ching Yang  Technology-Enhanced Intercultural Projects 
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
world share stories through their preferred digital forum. iEARN, founded in 1988, is the world's largest 
non-profit educational network, and each iEARN project has its own project forum that provides a safe 
and structured online discussion environment. Our project partner was a class from Dubai containing 10 
students who had been learning English for more than 8 years. We began with a preliminary project plan 
that became more defined through experience with each school’s schedule and the students’ English 
language abilities. Figure 3 illustrates the 5-phase procedural framework of the project conducted in 
Taiwan. Before the project, 2 technology lessons were offered to familiarize the students with the iEARN 
forums and web-based tools that would be used in the project. During the interactive process, students 
visited the project forum to read stories from other countries and exchange ideas with project participants. 
Figure 4 shows the intensive interaction between the students and their foreign partners in the project 
forum. 
 
Figure 3. The procedural framework of the Folk tales/storytelling: past and present project 
Jen June Chen and Shu Ching Yang  Technology-Enhanced Intercultural Projects 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
 
Figure 4. Screenshot of the folk tales project online forum  
Video conference: storytelling and cross-cultural discussion 
In the second semester, we had two 45-minute videoconferences via Skype. This was an extension 
activity of the Folk tales project and involved sharing folk tales with two Pakistani partners. For this 
activity, the students turned their stories into a puppet show. They worked collaboratively to adapt their 
stories into scripts, practice reading the scripts aloud, make paper puppets, and draw the story 
background. Along with these tales, the students introduced their partners to traditional customs and food. 
Furthermore, to build intercultural awareness, the students were asked to read a book about a Taiwanese 
woman’s experience in Pakistan, and a class discussion was held. Then, in the videoconference, the 
participants asked each other questions to learn about the similarities and differences between their 
cultures. 
E-pal project: email exchange 
After the first two collaborative projects, the E-pal project was used to build students’ independent 
English language skills and to offer them opportunities to develop autonomous language learning skills. 
Our partner class was American. Each student had his or her own American key pal, with whom they 
exchanged weekly emails through ePals webmail. The students learned email formatting and netiquette 
before the exchanges began. To relieve students’ anxieties and enhance their confidence in writing, this 
was a free language exchange. Students could write about anything that they were interested in and 
worked on their email-writing independently during class time. The instructor gave advice to help the 
students decide upon their writing topics and solve their language problems.  
Data collection 
The research utilized both qualitative and quantitative methods of data collection and analysis, including 
questionnaires, interviews, and document analysis. Five separate questionnaires were administered: 
1. Beginning-of-course survey 
The beginning-of-course questionnaire contained 6 questions relating to students’ language learning 
background and self-evaluation on their language skills. The findings from the survey helped the 
researchers to understand the participants and create an appropriate instructional design. 
List of posts 
showing 
participants’ 
nationalities  
Jen June Chen and Shu Ching Yang  Technology-Enhanced Intercultural Projects 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
2. Mid-term survey 
The mid-term survey, conducted at the end of the first semester, allowed students to make comments and 
suggestions; it was helpful in evaluating the first-semester course and adjusting the curriculum in the 
following semester. The first part of the questionnaire comprised 14 5-point Likert scale measuring the 
students’ attitudes towards the project and the instructional design. In the second part, the students were 
asked to express their thoughts about the course and their own learning process.  
3. Two reflective surveys 
At the end of projects two and three, reflective questionnaires were used to encourage students to reflect 
upon their English language learning. Each reflective questionnaire contained two parts. The first part 
solicited responses about learning attitudes, teaching activities, and learning results in a 5-point Likert-
style format. The second part, which employed open-ended questions, required students to report their 
difficulties and learning gains in the project.   
4. End-of-term survey 
The final questionnaire, which had 5 open-ended questions, was created to provide an overview of 
participants’ experiences in, perceptions of, and attitudes towards the whole course.  
FINDINGS 
Students’ attitudes towards TEILI  
The one-year course utilized 3 projects with different language activities to enhance English language 
learning and cross-cultural communication. Table 2 shows that the participants had strong positive 
reactions towards TEILI. The learners enjoyed studying English through these intercultural projects and 
especially enjoyed the E-pal project (M = 4.80). The students affirmed that the projects helped them to 
learn English in an authentic learning context. In the interviews conducted at the end of the Folk tales 
project, all of the learners but one said that they would like to have had more intercultural language 
learning activities. Table 2 reveals the same responses at the end of the videoconference (M = 4.33) and e-
pal exchanges (M = 4.40).  
We utilized a weblog-assisted teaching model and a collaborative learning method to overcome the 
students’ lack of experience with intercultural projects. In the mid-term survey, over 93% of the students 
affirmed that the weblog-assisted teaching model was helpful for their projects. Table 2 shows that 
collaborative activities can reduce learning pressure in the Folk tales (M = 4.60) and Video conference (M 
= 4.00) projects. The instruction conducted during the projects was acceptable to the learners. The 
learning tasks were not beyond the learners’ language abilities, and the E-pal project was considered the 
easiest (M = 4.40).  
Table 2. Learners’ Attitudes Towards TEILI and its Instructional Design 
Learner’s attitudes  Folk tales Video 
conference 
E-pal 
project 
M (SD) M (SD) M (SD) 
I like this new type of learning activity involving 
communication with foreign students. 4.26 (.79) 4.27 (.88) 4.80 (.41) 
The project enables us to use English in realistic situations. 4.33 (.61) 4.40 (.82) 4.33 (.72) 
I hope that in the future I can keep participating in this type 
of learning activity.    4.33 (1.04) 4.40 (.63) 
 
I appreciated the teacher’s instruction during the project; it 
 
4.66 
 
(.72) 
 
4.60 
 
(.63) 
 
4.73 
 
(.50) 
Jen June Chen and Shu Ching Yang  Technology-Enhanced Intercultural Projects 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
was clear and helpful. 
Learning through collaboration can reduce learning 
pressure.  4.60 (.63) 4.00 (1.00)   
The learning activities in the projects were not difficult for 
me. 4.00 (1.19) 4.00 (.85) 4.40 (.63) 
In the end-of-term survey, all of the participants preferred TEILI to traditional classroom-based 
instruction. The primary reason was because TEILI provided authentic, lively, practical, and interesting 
learning experiences. In describing the benefits of TEILI, many of the participants criticized the limits of 
traditional instruction in Taiwanese English classrooms, in which rote memorization of language 
knowledge is emphasized over language use; two students used the term “dead English” to describe 
learning in traditional classroom-based instruction (S2, S5) and preferred the “living” English of TEILI.       
With traditional classroom teaching, I don’t know how to use the English that I have learned in 
real life. With TEILI, I can communicate with foreigners. I have more opportunities to use the 
English that I have learned. (S6) 
With traditional instruction, it takes us a lot of time to memorize vocabulary and grammar rules, 
but my mind goes completely blank when I need to speak English. With TEILI, I can 
communicate directly with English speakers. It is a more real experience and is more helpful. 
(S7) 
I prefer TEILI because it makes English class more interesting, vivid, and lively. With traditional 
teaching, we only read textbooks. With TEILI, we can use English in a natural environment, just 
as we use Chinese. (S13) 
The above comments indicate that traditional instruction could not satisfy students’ learning needs. The 
students were aware of the aim of learning English via TEILI and were eager to learn in a realistic 
communicative context.  
Students’ evaluations of TEILI  
To improve the instructional design, students were asked to provide feedback about the curriculum and its 
implementation in the end-of-term survey. All of the students expressed positive attitudes towards the 
researcher’s instruction. They commented that the instructional practices were helpful and sufficient, with 
no need for improvement (S1, S2, S5).  
Interestingly, the students and the instructor differed in their views of the teacher’s role in TEILE. While 
the instructor viewed herself as a facilitator, some students felt that the course instructor was strict 
because the students were asked to complete each task on time. Students who could not meet the 
deadlines had individual meetings to discuss their problems. Some students had positive attitudes towards 
the requirements. One student commented, “Teacher, keep your strict education, and then students will 
learn they should work hard on their project tasks” (S13). 
Given that students bring differing perspectives to language learning, learners with passive orientations 
require careful guidance and intervention from pedagogical applications to this approach. Strict 
supervision can ensure that projects go smoothly and can help students gain awareness that learning 
English through TEILI demands new learning strategies and self-directed learning. Strict project 
management also assures successful interactive experiences, which is beneficial for building students’ 
communicative confidence in cross-cultural projects. 
Table 3 presents the students’ evaluation of the projects; the project that 66.7% of the students liked best 
was the E-pal project. This was also the project that 80% of the students chose as the one with the easiest 
Jen June Chen and Shu Ching Yang  Technology-Enhanced Intercultural Projects 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
writing tasks, consistent with the earlier analysis of the students’ attitudes toward TEILI, shown in Table 
2. Unlike the other two projects, E-pal was a free writing exchange and also a one-on-one communication 
project. This gave students a sense of novelty and motivated them to communicate. The students 
commented that they were looking forward to having a pen pal (S1), enjoyed writing about anything they 
liked to their foreign friends, and gained more knowledge about foreign life (S6, S10).  
Table 3. Learners’ Attitudes Towards the Projects 
The project… Folk tales 
project 
Video 
conference 
E-pal project 
…I liked most 1 6.7% 4 26.7% 10 66.7% 
…I liked least 12 80% 2 13.3% 1 6.7% 
…with the hardest writing tasks 7 46.7% 6 40% 2 3.3% 
…with the easiest writing tasks 3 20%   12 80% 
Most of the students shared information about their everyday lives in their emails. For students, writing 
about their personal experiences was easier than writing traditional stories. The students said that the E-
pal project allowed them to write about daily life as if they were chatting and without pressure, and it was 
therefore easy to write a lot in a short time (S3, S8, S10).   
There is one positive comment especially worthy of notice. A student mentioned the benefit of 
asynchronous communication:  
• We don’t have to write back to the key pals right away. I have enough time to think carefully 
before writing. (S11) 
S11 is a quiet, shy boy and group discussions and synchronous activities, such as video conferencing, put 
him under pressure. In asynchronous activities, he was able to take time to think and work at his own 
pace. His example reminds us that students have unique personalities and learning styles. Teachers need 
to consider the advantages and disadvantages of technology-enhanced learning activities and provide 
multiple tasks to support learners’ diverse learning needs.  
In contrast, the project most students did not enjoy was the Folk tales project (n = 12, 80%), which was 
also chosen as the project with the most difficult writing tasks (n = 7, 46.7%). The students enjoyed the 
collaborative writing in the Folk tales project and Video conference; however, creative writing proved to 
be a challenge for students with little English writing experience. The students made the following 
comments: 
• Group writing relaxes my writing pressure, so I don’t think it is hard to write stories. However, 
it is a challenge to modernize traditional stories or adapt stories to scripts. (S4) 
• When writing a story, we have to pay attention to a lot of elements, such as vocabulary, 
grammar, and even dialogues between characters. We need imagination and creativity. It is not 
easy. (S8)  
In addition, students also mentioned that they expected to have multi-aspect exchanges instead of 
focusing exclusively on exchanges of traditional stories. S8 mentioned that there was less direct 
communication with foreign partners in the Folk tales project than in the other two projects. The students 
expected to have more interactions that would help them “understand different cultures and foreign life 
more deeply” (S3). 
Students’ learning benefits from TEILI 
The students reported in their reflections and interviews that they received many learning benefits from 
Jen June Chen and Shu Ching Yang  Technology-Enhanced Intercultural Projects 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
TEILI, including increased understanding their own and other cultures, increased English vocabulary, 
improved language skills, experience using technology learning tools, experience with intercultural 
communication, and improved collaboration skills. Table 4 shows that cultural understanding was the 
main learning benefit reported for all three projects. The reflective surveys for the Video conference and 
E-pal project also showed the students’ positive attitudes towards cultural learning; both the Video 
conference (M = 4.20, SD = .86) and E-pal project (M = 4.20, SD = 1.01) improved students’ cultural 
understanding, but the E-pal project, with its close individual interaction, provided the participants the 
most opportunities to explain their own culture (M video = 3.93, SD = .70; M e-pal = 4.20, SD = .86).  
Table 4. Students’ Learning Benefits from TEILI 
Folk tales/storytelling 
Improving language 
ability (vocabulary and 
writing skills) 
I forgot a lot of English vocabulary that I had memorized before, but now I know these 
words again because I have to use them in my writing. I learned more vocabulary. (S4) 
I learned how to respond to messages and interact with foreign students on the forum. 
At first, I had to think about the feedback content for a long time. Now, I can reply 
faster. (S6) 
During the project, I felt that I was making progress in writing. Now, I can write a 
longer forum message than before, without just using a lot of emoticons. (S7) 
Improving technology 
ability 
I learned a new way, iEARN, to communicate with foreign students through the 
Internet. I know more about the world. (S8) 
During the writing process, ...I also learned how to use online dictionaries in learning 
English. (S3) 
I learned more technology tools, and now I can type faster in English. (S9) 
Developing 
collaboration skills 
I learned how to work collaboratively with others. (S11, S12) 
Understanding 
different cultures 
I learned more about our own folk tales and also learned about other countries’ folk 
tales. (S3) 
Video conference 
Understanding 
different cultures 
We shared our stories, food, and festivals; they also shared their culture...I learned a lot 
and understood that others’ lives are not the same. (S2) 
…I touched a very different culture. I saw that the clothes they wore were so different 
from ours. Every country has its own unique culture. (S5) 
…I knew about Pakistani students’ school life. Their school life is similar to ours. They 
wear school uniforms, and they also have PE classes. (S8) 
E-pal project 
Understanding 
different cultures 
Their school schedules are very different from ours. Their school starts later, but they 
go home earlier than us. (S8) 
 American students like sports very much. They play many outdoor sports. They also 
have field trips (over 3 or 4 days). They have to do reports after the trips. (S7) 
 They don’t have to wear uniforms, and they don’t always have the same subjects. For 
example, some choose to study Spanish, and some study French. We all have the same 
subjects and only study English. They are freer and have more choices. (S10) 
 
The Whole Program 
Improving language 
ability 
My largest gain is that I have learned a lot of vocabulary. To write articles and emails 
correctly, I looked up words and made sure their usages, so I learned a lot of new 
words. (S2) 
Jen June Chen and Shu Ching Yang  Technology-Enhanced Intercultural Projects 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
 Through the communicative process, I understand my learning problems. The projects 
improve our English ability and let us learn new vocabulary. (S9) 
Improving technology 
ability 
I have better technology skills than before. I didn’t know we can use these tools to learn 
English before. The Internet has a lot of learning resources and I learn knowledge 
beyond textbooks, (S11) 
Understanding 
different cultures 
I understand different countries and cultures deeply. I also understand the differences 
between us and foreign students. (S6) 
The students agreed that TEILI created opportunities for learning about cultures, including their own and 
their interlocutors’. Based on Byram’s model, we found that, through TEILI, the students developed their 
ICC skills in four dimensions (see Table 5): knowledge of their own and their interlocutors’ cultures, 
open attitudes towards intercultural exchanges, skills for interacting with interlocutors, and a critical 
cultural awareness necessary to evaluating cultures.  
Due to the interlocutors’ diverse cultural backgrounds, the students’ reflections indicated that their 
knowledge about cultures was largely acquired through the process of interaction, which is one of the 
main advantages of the TEILI model. The students introduced their own culture and learned about life in 
Dubai, Pakistan, and the USA through their communications. They developed cultural awareness of both 
their home culture and the cultures of their interlocutors.  
Students reported that most of their critical cultural awareness was developed in the E-pal project. Unlike 
the group interactions, the students experienced an intensive compare/contrast process in the individual 
interactions of the E-pal project. They learned facts about American school life, gave responses to their 
interlocutors, and shared their own experiences of attending school in Taiwan. In every email exchange, 
the students familiarized themselves with the use of comparison and contrast to view cultures critically. 
Table 5. Students’ Development of Intercultural Communication 
Dimensions  Students’ descriptions 
Knowledge: 
 
…of one’s own culture 
and the interlocutors’ 
culture 
• For me, these learning experiences broaden 
my vision! I learn foreign cultures, customs, 
and traditions. (S6) 
• I not only learn other cultures but know more 
about my own culture. (S7) 
Intercultural 
attitudes:  
 
Curiosity and openness to 
learn about one’s own 
culture and the 
interlocutors’ culture 
• I hope to have more opportunities to 
communicate with    foreign students; then, I 
can practice intercultural communicative 
skills and know about the world. (S7) 
• I hope we can keep working with other 
countries on new projects. (S5) 
Discovery and 
interaction skills: 
 
The ability to acquire 
new knowledge of a 
culture through 
synchronous interaction 
• I learn different cultures by using English and 
Internet tools in real communication. (S6) 
• I learn how to exchange ideas with foreign 
students. (S10) 
Critical cultural 
awareness: 
The ability to evaluate a 
culture 
 
• They don’t have to wear school uniforms, and 
they have a monthly dance. Their school life 
seems more colorful, with fewer restrictions 
than ours. (S10) 
• They also have exams like us, but only at the 
Jen June Chen and Shu Ching Yang  Technology-Enhanced Intercultural Projects 
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
beginning and the end of the semester...It 
seems that we pay more attention to studying. 
They have more time to play sports, but we 
don’t. American students seem freer, with less 
pressure. (S13) 
Students’ self-perceived challenges with TEILI 
Though students showed positive attitudes towards the new teaching model, several of them still had 
difficulty interacting. Table 6 reveals that low vocabulary knowledge was the major barrier for students in 
their projects. Due to their limited vocabulary, the students did not know which words to use to express 
their ideas well. Such challenges may be unavoidable in the Taiwanese EFL context. These problems also 
reflect the value of the course: building language ability through realistic communication. Students are 
able to enlarge their vocabularies as they experience cross-cultural communication challenges.  
To solve their vocabulary deficiencies, students usually used online tools to look up words or directly 
asked the instructor for help. However, some relied on online translation tools to translate entire 
messages. This was convenient, but improper. These translation tools may work well for words or simple 
sentences, but they always almost translate complex descriptions incorrectly. Using improper tools may 
create other learning problems and cause confusion and misunderstanding. The result indicates that it is 
necessary to teach students how to use technology tools correctly and in ways that will benefit their 
language learning.  
Accents were another challenge. Because American English was taught in their school, the Taiwanese 
students were only familiar with American English pronunciation. With few opportunities to listen to 
other accents, it was not easy for students to immediately become involved in real language situations 
during the videoconferences. For these students, an unfamiliar accent sounded like a different language. 
However, this provided an opportunity for students to realize the variety of authenticity within the 
English-speaking community. One of the students commented,  
• I understand our accent is not always correct. There are different accents in the world. We 
should try to understand and accept others’ accents. (S10) 
From the following student’s feedback, we can infer that if students are exposed to this authentic oral 
interaction for a longer period of time, they may accept the accent more and understand it better: 
• At first, I totally couldn’t understand what they said, but as we spoke to the second school, it 
became better. The accent was not so strange to me. I could understand more. (S1) 
Table 6. Students’ Learning Challenges with TEILI 
Folk tales/storytelling 
Lack of language skills  
(vocabulary) 
• When I read Dubai information on the English website, there were a lot of words I 
didn’t know. I tried to use online dictionaries or the Google translator, but some 
English words were still difficult to understand. (S4) 
• My writing was a big problem. I need more vocabulary and to learn to write good 
sentences. (S6) 
• I had difficulty finding the right words to clearly express the meaning I wanted. (S12) 
Problems of within-
group cooperation 
• Sometimes I thought the story we wrote was very strange. Though the group worked 
together, members usually had different ideas. We didn’t know which one was better, 
so it usually took us a long time to discuss the story plot. (S6) 
Video conference 
Jen June Chen and Shu Ching Yang  Technology-Enhanced Intercultural Projects 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
Lack of language skills  
(accent, vocabulary, 
grammar) 
• Because of the accents, I had to listen to their words very carefully. However, I still 
couldn’t understand all their words. Sometimes they spoke fast; then it was even more 
difficult to understand what they meant. (S8) 
• Because of the accents, I couldn’t hear clearly. I often misheard what they said or 
misunderstood the meaning. It seemed we spoke different languages. (S9) 
• I feel that writing the script is the most difficult part. I have problems in vocabulary, 
grammar, etc. I usually think in Chinese, and then have trouble in writing it in 
English. (S10) 
• As I wrote the script, my problem was that I didn’t have enough vocabulary to 
express the meaning. I depended on the Internet dictionary to look up the words. (S7) 
Language anxiety • Though I had prepared in advance, I was very nervous and forgot what to say. (S11) 
• I was nervous during the VC. When I was nervous, I started to stutter and didn’t 
know what to say. (S14) 
E-pal project 
Lack of language skills  
(vocabulary, grammar) 
• There were no serious problems; only some problems with vocabulary or grammar. 
(S5) 
• There were no big problems or difficulties. My problem is with vocabulary. I should 
learn more English words. (S10) 
The students’ feedback reveals the disadvantages of Taiwan’s English language learning environment. 
Typically, English is taught in decontextualized forms; students learn the correct forms of the language 
and are able to use English in a structured situation. However, the authentic context is unstructured, ill 
defined, and interactive. If students cannot transfer their knowledge into functional use, they will not be 
able to use the language actively outside the class. 
Teaching reflections on TEILI  
Though research, including this action study, has verified the positive effects of TEILI, the 
implementation of TEILI in classrooms is a challenge for teachers. Unlike traditional, static, classroom-
based instruction, TEILI is a dynamic process based on interactions among participants. The differences 
in educational systems and participants’ backgrounds create many uncertain features in the interactive 
process. The teacher, as a project manager, must connect all of the elements of the TEILI program and 
consider not only instructional tasks but also project arrangements. The teacher must also resolve 
unexpected problems in the interactive process. It is important for teachers of partner classes to work 
closely to create suitable and realistic project plans in advance. Then, during the project process, they 
must remain in close communication with each other to ensure that the whole TEILI program advances 
smoothly and successfully.  
Since instructors must exchange ideas frequently, TEILI builds authentic intercultural communication not 
only for learners but also for instructors in the EFL community. Teaching is learning; collaborating with 
other foreign educators will enable instructors to use the language that they teach, establish pragmatic 
competence, and gain professional development from real experience. This course instructor benefited 
greatly from interacting with the partner teachers, and especially from their instructional designs for the 
project activities. The Dubai teacher shared his method for inspiring his students to discuss different types 
of folk tales before writing; the American teacher worked with his colleagues to integrate issues of 
globalization into the email exchanges. They demonstrated creativity in the teaching designs and 
prompted the course instructor to think about teaching and learning from a different perspective.  
Though it takes much time and effort to develop a TEILI course, the students’ positive feedback during 
this study was encouraging. The students always rushed into the classroom, eager to learn and 
communicate with their foreign partners. I did not have to struggle with classroom discipline or urge the 
Jen June Chen and Shu Ching Yang  Technology-Enhanced Intercultural Projects 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
students to work hard because their foreign partners were the best stimuli for motivating language 
learning. As they heard the Pakistani students’ fluency in English, they were shocked, and the students 
commented that the “Pakistani students were so active, and their English was so good. It seemed English 
is easy for them. They could say what they want to say. I should work hard on my English” (S9). “Though 
I couldn’t understand all their English, their English ability shocked me. If I have another opportunity, I 
will avoid the problems and improve my English” (S13). The comments reveal that students can reflect on 
their own language learning through TEILI and find the motivation to become active learners. The 
instructor’s challenge is to provide the context, direct the process of learning, and foster students’ abilities 
to understand the changing world around them. 
DISCUSSION  
The participants’ responses to TEILI and its instructional design validated the pedagogical benefit of 
extending the learning context outside the classroom to provide authentic and meaningful language 
learning. The result agrees with the current research on technology-enhanced learning (Warschauer, 1997; 
Kern, Ware, & Warschauer, 2008). The findings are discussed in terms of what we can learn about 
language learning and instructional design from TEILI.  
Language learning  
The analysis of the learning process showed that a lack of FL skill was the students’ main barrier during 
the intercultural projects (see Table 6). In the process of intercultural interaction, the participants were 
aware of their language difficulties. The students described the obstacles presented by vocabulary, 
grammar, writing and accents. Leow (2000; 2001) found that awareness plays a critical role in second 
language learning. Gilakjani (2011) also concluded from previous studies that conscious awareness of 
language is necessary for second language acquisition. As Gilakjani (2011) comments, “Both 
consciousness and language are inextricably connected like two sides of a coin”. TEILI, which recreates 
authentic situations, provides opportunities for social interactions that evoke learners’ conscious 
awareness of the target language system. This helps learners to use language correctly and appropriately 
in later tasks. The findings confirmed that the students perceived their language skills to be improved 
through the project tasks (see Table 4). From the instructor’s perspective, the students’ language 
challenges brought about their learning benefits.  
The first two projects of this action study focused on the same topic: folk tales. Multimodal projects 
integrating multiple semiotic modes, such as written words and imagery, were expected to enable students 
to transform the mode of communication and expression from text into speech, reducing the students’ 
anxieties when speaking in English. However, the teaching result did not entirely meet the expectation. 
The students’ experiences revealed that the multimodal design lacked transformation between tasks and 
had no active effect on lowering anxiety (see Table 6: Language anxiety). According to Krashen’s (1982) 
affective filter hypothesis, second language learners with high motivation, self-confidence, positive 
attitudes, and low levels of anxiety are better equipped for successful language learning. For the students 
with high anxiety, the affective filter became a barrier to language performance. To reduce the negative 
affective factor during videoconferencing, it is necessary to revise the learning tasks to allow students to 
become more familiar with synchronous communication. 
In his research on multimodality, Nelson (2006) examined the synesthetic functions of transformation and 
transduction through the process of multimodal communication. Other research has shown that language 
skills can be transformed from text, as in online chatting, to second language speech (Blake, 2005; Payne 
& Ross, 2002; Sanders, 2006). The resemblance between an online task and a real-time conversation is a 
vital factor for successful transformation across semiotic modes. A re-examination of the learning tasks in 
the first two projects may reveal that the similarity across tasks may be not high enough to facilitate 
learning transformation, especially given the differences between asynchronous and synchronous tasks. 
Based on the positive effects found in multimodality research, conducting an online real-time chat 
Jen June Chen and Shu Ching Yang  Technology-Enhanced Intercultural Projects 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
(textual exchange) before videoconferencing (audio and video exchange) may increase students’ self-
confidence in synchronous conversations. 
Instructional design and ICC 
Thorne (2005) once described Internet-mediated intercultural FLE as a complex Venn diagram that 
overlapped with other areas of research and with numerous models. In addition, each model has varied 
instructional designs. Educators must consider which model or instructional method will be best suited for 
their context. The research suggests that students’ levels of cognitive development could be one of the 
most important considerations when creating an effective TEILI instructional design.  
Richards (2010) launched a study on technology-enhanced intercultural collaboration between elementary 
school students in the U.S. and Jordan. The 16-week project focused on guided story writing, and ePals 
and Skype were the communicative tools. The researcher, who was also the project facilitator, worked 
closely with two instructors to design the project plan and assign tasks. This tended to be a teacher-
managed instructional design. Our action research chose the same tools (ePals and Skype) and similar 
themes (sharing stories and information about daily life), but we utilized a teacher-and-student-managed 
instructional model in a junior high school context. The instructor was a facilitator; the students engaged 
in discussion and had great freedom in deciding how to interact with their foreign partners. Based on 
theories of cognitive development, the tasks were designed to require different cognitive skills and 
proceeded in an orderly developmental sequence, gradually “transforming from sensory-motor actions to 
representations and then to abstractions” (Fischer, 1980). At different ages, students think in different 
ways. Generally, middle school students are becoming increasingly capable of handling more 
sophisticated and abstract learning tasks. We therefore required our students to engage in complicated 
tasks autonomous learning and critical thinking tasks that would challenge them.  
Telecollaboration conducted at the university level tends to adopt a more student-managed instructional 
model. For instance, Liaw (2006) created a web-based system with self-help resources in the form of 
online reference tools to foster reading discussions between Taiwanese university students and their 
American partners. The participants were seen as independent, self-directed learners.   
Above all, telecollaboration cases insist on the effectiveness of “international class-to-class partnership 
within institutionalized settings” (Thorne, 2005, p. 4). With proper designs that consider students’ levels 
of cognitive development, TEILI can be put into practice across a variety of education levels.   
In addition to language learning, another core aim of TEILI is to develop intercultural communication 
awareness. All three of the above cases revealed that intercultural collaboration may enhance cultural 
understanding and cultural awareness. Due to differences in the project designs and the ages of 
participants, the aspects of the students’ intercultural development were not the same. However, in all 
three cases, students perceived that they could gain knowledge about their own and other cultures. Liaw 
(2006) showed that students developed the ability to change their perspective of and knowledge about the 
intercultural communication process, which was not discovered in Richards (2010) nor in our research. It 
is possible that projects with more discussion tasks could encourage participants to interact with each 
other more deeply and facilitate high-level ICC. It is also possible that university students have higher 
order cognitive abilities and better development of ICC. 
CONCLUSION 
The action research revealed that the TEILI course provided authentic opportunities for students to 
develop their language skills and ICC. The students acknowledged that they improved their knowledge of 
the varieties of English language use and culture, improved their vocabulary, writing, and technological 
abilities, and learned collaboration. TEILI participation revealed the students’ inadequate expressive skills 
and the limits of traditional language instruction. Online educational communities provide diverse 
collaboration projects for classes around the world. The study found that, with proper planning and 
Jen June Chen and Shu Ching Yang  Technology-Enhanced Intercultural Projects 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
project management, learners could experience varied intercultural projects without difficulty. TEILI 
promoted language-learning motivation and helped learners develop active attitudes towards language 
learning and intercultural communication. 
TEILI allows students use language in school that is relevant to the way they will use language outside 
school. This action study implemented only one type of TEILI curriculum. Future studies should 
investigate the results of integrating other types of projects into such a course. They should consider 
whether it is better to work on a project over a long period of time or to try various short-term projects, 
what type of TEILI curriculum design will benefit students most, and how students’ learning autonomies 
and cultural awareness can be systematically developed through TEILI. As this action research has 
shown, authentic language learning environments can be created through technology use. Further research 
on curriculum design and the impact of TEILI on language teaching and learning will allow the model to 
be evaluated from different perspectives.  
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research was partially supported by the National Science Council of Taiwan, grant number 
(NSC100-2628-H-110-007-MY3) and “The Aim for the Top University Plan” of the National Sun Yat-
sen University and Ministry of Education, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Jen Jun Chen is currently a Ph.D. student of the Graduate Institute of Education, National Sun Yat-sen 
University, and is also a member of the country coordination team of iEARN Taiwan as well as an 
English teacher at Kaohsiung Municipal Jhengsing Junior High School. She received an M.S. in 
Education from National Sun Yat-sen University in 2004.  
 
Shu Ching Yang is a professor at Graduate Institute of Education, National Sun Yat-sen University, 
Taiwan. She received her PhD in Instructional Systems Technology at Indiana University of 
Bloomington. Her current research focuses on the learning processes associated with various kinds of 
interactive technologies. She has additional articles published in Computers and Education, Computers in 
Human Behavior, etc.  
E-Mail: shyang@mail.nsysu.edu.tw 
 
REFERENCES 
ACTFL. (1996). Standards for foreign language learning: Preparing for the 21st century. Lawrence, KS: 
Allen. 
Blake, R. J. (2005). Bimodal CMC: The glue of language learning at a distance. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 
497–512.  
Byram, M. (1997). Teaching and assessing intercultural communicative competence. Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters. 
Byram, M. (2012). Language awareness and (critical) cultural awareness– relationships, comparisons and 
contrasts. Language Awareness, 21(1–2), 5–13.  
Byram, M., Gribkova, B., & Starkey, H. (2002). Developing the intercultural dimension in language 
teaching. A practical introduction for teachers. Strasbourg, France: Council of Europe Publishing, 
Jen June Chen and Shu Ching Yang  Technology-Enhanced Intercultural Projects 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
Language Policy Division.  
Chen, Y. C. (2007). An analysis study on the knowledge contents of “cultural globalization” in Junior 
High School English textbooks. (Unpublished master’s thesis). National Taipei University of Education, 
Taipei, Taiwan. 
Cunningham, U. M., Fägersten, K. B., & Holmsten, E. (2010). "Can you hear me, Hanoi?" Compensatory 
mechanisms employed in synchronous net-based English language learning. The International Review of 
Research in Open and Distance Learning, 11(1), 161–177.  
Cziko, G. A. (2004). Electronic tandem language learning (eTandem): A third approach to second 
language learning for the 21st century. CALICO Journal, 22(1), 25–40.  
Deardorff, D. K. (2006). Identification and assessment of intercultural competence as a student outcome 
of internationalization. Journal of Studies in International Education, 10(3), 241–266.  
Erling, E. J. (2005). The many names of English. English Today, 21(1), 40–44.  
Fischer, K. W. (1980). A theory of cognitive development: The control and construction of hierarchies of 
skills. Psychological Review, 87(6), 477–531.  
Gilakjani, A. P., & Ahmadi, S. M. (2011). Role of consciousness in second language acquisition. Theory 
and Practice in Language Studies, 1(5), 435–442.  
Greenfield, R. (2003). Collaborative e-mail exchange for teaching secondary ESL: A case study in Hong 
Kong. Language Learning and Technology, 7(1), 46–70. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num1/greenfield/default.html 
Jenkins, J. (2006). Current perspectives on teaching world Englishes and English as a lingua franca. 
TESOL Quarterly, 40(1), 157–181.  
Kern, R., Ware, P., & Warschauer, M. (2008). Network-based language teaching. Encyclopedia of 
Language and Education, 4, 281–292.  
Kilickaya, F. (2009). World Englishes, English as an international language and applied linguistics. 
English Language Teaching, 2(3), 35–38.  
Kilimci, S. (2010). Integration of the internet into a language curriculum in a multicultural society. 
TOJET, 9(1), 107–113.  
Kramsch, C. (1998). Language and culture. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Krashen, S. (1982). Principles and practice in second language acquisition. Retrieved from 
http://www.sdkrashen.com/content/books/principles_and_practice.pdf 
Lee, L. (2007). Fostering second language oral communication through constructivist interaction in 
desktop videoconferencing. Foreign Language Annals, 40(4), 635–649.  
Leow, R. P. (2000). A study of the role of awareness in foreign language behavior. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 22(4), 557–584.  
Leow, R. P. (2001). Attention, awareness, and foreign language behavior. Language Learning, 51, 113–
155.  
Liaw, M. (2006). E-learning and the development of intercultural competence. Language Learning & 
Technology, 10(3), 49–64. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num3/liaw/default.html 
Liu, G-Z. (2005). The trend and challenge for teaching EFL at Taiwanese universities. RELC Journal, 
36(2), 211–221. 
McKay, S. L. (2003). Toward an appropriate EIL pedagogy: Re‐ examining common ELT assumptions. 
Jen June Chen and Shu Ching Yang  Technology-Enhanced Intercultural Projects 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 13(1), 1–22.  
McKay, S., & Bokhorst-Heng, W. D. (2008). International English in its sociolinguistic contexts: 
Towards a socially sensitive EIL pedagogy. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Nelson, M. E. (2006). Mode, meaning, and synaesthesia in multimedia L2 writing. Language Learning & 
Technology, 10(2), 56–76. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num2/nelson/default.html 
O’Dowd, R. (2007). Evaluating the outcomes of online intercultural exchange. ELT Journal, 61(2), 144–
152. 
Payne, J. S., & Ross, B. M. (2005). Synchronous CMC, working memory, and L2 oral proficiency 
development. Language Learning & Technology, 9(3), 35–54. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/payne/default.html 
Peters, L. (2009). Global education: Using technology to bring the world to your students. Washington, 
D.C.: International Society for Technology in Education. 
Richards, B. E. (2010). An exploration of what happens when second and third graders in two countries 
interact through a technology enhanced multicultural collaboration. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
University of South Carolina, Columbia. Retrieved from http://gradworks.umi.com/34/34/3434964.html 
Sanders, R. (2006). A comparison of chat room productivity: In-class versus out-of-class. CALICO 
Journal, 24(1), 59–76.  
Shomoossi, N., & Ketabi, S. (2008). Authenticity within the EIL Paradigm. Iranian Journal of Language 
Studies, 2(2), 173–185.  
Smith, E. A. (2000). Making culture and language real in a rural setting: The technology connection. 
Inquiry, 5(1), 37–41.  
Spitzberg, B. H. (2000). A model of intercultural communication competence. Intercultural 
Communication: A Reader, 9, 375–387.  
Spitzberg, B. H., & Changnon, G. (2009). Conceptualizing intercultural competence. In D. K. Deardorff 
(Ed.), The Sage handbook of intercultural competence (pp. 2–52). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Stier, J. (2006). Internationalisation, intercultural communication and intercultural competence. Journal 
of Intercultural Communication, 11(1), 1–12. 
Su, Y. C. (2008). Promoting cross-cultural awareness and understanding: incorporating ethnographic 
interviews in college EFL classes in Taiwan. Educational Studies, 34(4), 377–398. 
Thorne, S. L. (2005). Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language education: Approaches, pedagogy, 
and research. CALPER Working Paper Series No. 6. The Pennsylvania State University, Center for 
Advanced Language Proficiency Education and Research. 
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer‐ mediated collaborative learning: Theory and practice. Modern 
Language Journal, 81(4), 470–481.  
Wu, W. V., & Marek, M. (2010). Making English a “habit”: Increasing confidence, motivation, and 
ability of EFL students through cross-cultural, computer-assisted interaction. TOJET, 9(4), 101–112.  
Wu, W. V., Yen, L. L., & Marek, M. (2011). Using online EFL interaction to increase confidence, 
motivation, and ability. Educational Technology & Society, 14(3), 118–129.  
