Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/news.pdf 
February 2014, Volume 18, Number 1 
pp. 38–41 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 38 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC) 
 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
LANGUAGE FOR SPECIFIC PURPOSES SUMMER INSTITUTE 
July 7-11, 2014 • University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa 
Language for specific purposes (LSP) courses and programs focus on developing learner communicative 
competence in a particular professional or academic field (e.g., Korean for business, Japanese for health 
care providers, etc.). 
This summer institute will provide accepted participants with training and experience in developing LSP 
courses (including doing needs analysis, setting goals and objectives, assessing, developing materials, 
teaching, and evaluating LSP) for their home institution. Participants are expected to develop some aspect 
of a real LSP course as part of this institute. Selected projects will be published by the NFLRC as a 
Network (available online for teachers around the world). Partial travel funding is available for eligible 
accepted participants. The application deadline is March 31, 2014. 
STAY IN TOUCH WITH SOCIAL MEDIA 
Did you know that the NFLRC has its own Facebook page with over 1,600 fans? It’s one of the best 
ways to hear about the latest news, publications, conferences, workshops, and resources we offer. Just 
click on the “Like” button to become a fan. For those who prefer getting up-to-the-minute “tweets,” you 
can follow us on our Twitter page. Finally, NFLRC has its own YouTube channel with a growing 
collection of free language learning and teaching videos for your perusal. Subscribe today! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology   39 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
The National Foreign Language Resource Center released three new titles in June: 
 
Noticing and second language acquisition: Studies in honor of Richard 
Schmidt 
by Joara Martin Bergsleithner, Sylvia Nagem Frota, &  
Jim Kei Yoshioka, (Eds.)  
(2013)  
374pp 
Download/view the table of contents 
This volume is a collection of selected refereed papers presented at the Association of Teachers of 
Japanese Annual Spring Conference held at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa in March of 2011. It not 
only covers several important topics on teaching and learning spoken and written Japanese and culture in 
and beyond classroom settings, but also includes research investigating certain linguistic items from new 
perspectives. 
 
Practical Assessment Tools for College Japanese 
by Kimi Kondo-Brown, James Dean Brown, & Waka Tominaga (Eds.)  
(2013)  
162pp 
Download/view table of contents 
Practical Assessment Tools for College Japanese collects 21 peer-reviewed assessment modules that were 
developed by teachers of Japanese who participated in the Assessments for Japanese Language 
Instruction Summer Institute at University of Hawai‘i at Manoa in summer 2012. Each module presents a 
practical assessment idea that can be adopted or adapted for the reader’s own formative or summative 
assessment of their Japanese language learners. For ease of use, each module is organized in 
approximately the same way including background information, aims, levels, assessment times, 
resources, procedures, caveats and options, references, and other appended information. 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology   40 
Check out our many other publications. 
Save the trees! Check out our other two online journals: 
  
Language Documentation & Conservation is a 
refereed, open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC 
and published by University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to 
language documentation and conservation, as well 
as book reviews, hardware and software reviews, 
and notes from the field. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed 
international journal of issues in foreign language 
reading and literacy, published twice yearly on the 
World Wide Web and sponsored by NFLRC and 
the University of Hawai‘i College of Languages, 
Linguistics, and Literature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology   41 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language research. 
RICH INTERNET APPLICATIONS FOR LANGUAGE LEARNING 
One of CLEAR’s most successful projects is our suite of free online language learning and teaching tools 
called Rich Internet Applications (RIAs). We have been busily working on retooling the user interface for 
the RIAs and look forward to launching the new website this fall. New features will include improved 
documentation of all the RIAs, screen flow videos and demonstrations of each app, a gallery of sample 
RIA activities created by language teachers, and printable start-up guides for both teachers and students. 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We enjoyed seeing many of you in 
Hawai‘i at the CALICO conference hosted by our sister center, the University of Hawai‘i National 
Foreign Language Resource Center. We look forward to seeing you at MIWLA and ACTFL later this 
year, and the Central States Conference in the spring. 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
CLEAR hosted four well-attended professional development workshops in July and August 2013. 
Covering topics including writing in the foreign language classroom, the teaching of vocabulary, online 
tools for language learning, and assessing speaking skills, the workshops offered hands-on experience and 
lots of ideas for language educators. Watch our Web site in October for the announcement of topics and 
dates for summer 2014. 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/. 
