Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/hattem.pdf 
June 2014, Volume 18, Number 2 
pp. 151–174 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 151 
MICROBLOGGING ACTIVITIES: LANGUAGE PLAY AND TOOL 
TRANSFORMATION 
David Hattem, Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey 
The following is a qualitative case study presenting three vignettes exploring the use of 
language play while microblogging during an academically sanctioned task. Ten students 
and one teacher used Twitter in an intensive, English as a second language advanced 
grammar course to practice writing sentences with complex grammatical constructions 
from the academic genre. In turn, the students received occasional corrective feedback 
from the instructor. Drawing on qualitative data consisting of a corpus of time- and date-
stamped tweets, retrospective interviews and discourse analysis of the students’ tweets, the 
author presents three “micro-vignettes” demonstrating how three students responded to 
contradictions within the original task by qualitatively transforming its context. As a 
result, they created new learning opportunities, ‘spinning-off’ (Wertsch, 1998) the 
microblogging tool, due to the tool’s features, the students’ previous cultures-of-use, 
(Thorne, 2003) and their pre-existing social networks (Stefanone & Gay, 2008). The 
students used Twitter as an instant messaging chat room, moving from the sentence to the 
utterance (Bakhtin, 1953/1986), embedding target grammar constructions in various forms 
of ludic language play (Cook, 2000). By dynamically reframing (Goffman, 1974) their 
own learning activities students took ownership of the task and went through a process of 
expansive learning (Engëstrom, 2007). 
Keywords: Language Play, Computer-mediated communication, Computer-assisted 
language learning, Collaborative learning 
APA Citation: Hattem, D. (2014). Microblogging activities: Language play and tool 
transformation. Language Learning & Technology, 18(2), 151–174. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/hattem.pdf 
Received: March 3, 2013; Accepted: February 19, 2013; Published: June 1, 2014 
Copyright: © David Hattem 
MICROBLOGGING 
Microblogging was developed in 2006 with the launch of Twitter from the short message services used to 
generate and send text messages. One of its co-founders, Evan Williams, founder of Blogger, imagined a 
broadcast system in which users could share short messages. Twitter’s popularity rose dramatically 
following the South by Southwest (SXSW) conference in 2007. Growing from a small start-up with little 
more than ten thousand users by the end of its first year, (Shah, 2010) who mostly shared links and 
information about their daily activities, (Java, Finin, Song, & Tseng, 2007) as of 2012 Twitter had more 
than a half billion users, (Semiocast, 2012) who send out an almost equal amount of messages per day 
(Martinez, 2012; Tsukayama, 2013). Twitter is currently one of the ten most visited websites in the world 
(Fitzgerald, 2012) and is used by parents, teenagers, politicians, entertainers, corporations, athletes, 
spiritual leaders, and students—sometimes to great folly, as a number of politicians and athletes have 
demonstrated; other times to dramatically transform society, as in the case of the Arab Spring (Eltantawy 
& Wiest, 2011; Grossman, 2009).  
Although microblogging is a relatively new form of computer-mediated communication, it has an 
historical analog. Humphreys (2010) finds a strong parallel between microblogging and diaries of the late 
18th and early 19th centuries. He suggests that technological advances allowing the production of ‘small 
leather-bound journals,’ contributed to a quantitative and qualitative shift in diary writing: the length and 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  152 
the content of the entries became briefer and more quotidian. In a digital reincarnation, advances in SMS 
and web technology, contributed to a qualitative and quantitative shift in the blog genre, again, the length 
and content of the entries became briefer and more quotidian. 
On Twitter, users post short messages, known as tweets. Each tweet, which is time and date-stamped, can 
contain up to 140 characters and may include links, photos, audio, and video. Users connect by following 
each other. Once you are following a user, their messages appear on your home page in reverse 
chronological order. Users interact with tweets through a variety of features (Figure 1): by replying to 
messages using the @ symbol as a form of addressivity, by favoriting a tweet (similar to the Like function 
on Facebook) or by retweeting it so that all of your followers can also see it. In order to aggregate the 
abundance of messages into topics, users attach hashtags to their tweets, which are words denoting topics, 
preceded by the # symbol, e.g., #languagelearning. Twitter is also a de facto corpus; users can perform 
simple Boolean searches by limiting searches to keywords, phrases or topics using Twitter’s search box 
(Appendix A).  
 
Figure 1. Interactional Features of Twitter 
Twitter and Language Learning 
In spite of its widespread popularity, research on microblogging and language learning remains scant. A 
few studies on microblogging have focused on how Twitter can be leveraged for collaborative learning 
and community building (Lomicka & Lord, 2011; Newgarden, 2009) as well as to train students in 
communicative competencies (Borau, Ullrich, Feng & Shen, 2009). Other studies have focused on 
whether Twitter can be a useful forum for generating input, output, and interaction with students, 
instructors and native speakers (Antenos-Conforti, 2009; Castro, 2009; Hattem, 2012; Ullrich, Borau; 
Stepanyan, 2010). In one relevant and early microblogging study, Perifanou (2009) used Edmodo as a 
microblogging application in an Italian foreign language class, designing four communicative activities, 
including dialogue and subtitle writing. She found that a large majority of the students described the 
activities as ‘fun’ and would prefer that microblogging activities be the central focus of the curriculum, 
not a secondary one. Perifanou concludes that micro-gaming language activities had a positive effect on 
students’ participation, collaboration and achievement of learning outcomes.  
Language Play 
In the last fifteen years, the study of language play has begun to attract the attention of second language 
researchers (Lantolf, 1997; Belz & Reinhardt, 2004). Early research led to discussions on whether 
language play was used primarily for language development through private rehearsal of unmastered 
forms (Lantolf, 1997) or for pure enjoyment through various ludic forms (Cook, 1997; 2000). This led 
Broner and Tarone (2001) to study the occurrence of play in private speech vs. ludic play in a fifth-grade 
Spanish class. The authors developed a 5-point criteria scale for distinguishing between the two, finding 
evidence of both types being used. The authors concluded that both might play a distinct role in the 
acquisition process. Whereas language play as rehearsal allows learners opportunities to compare their 
current interlanguage systems with new forms, ludic language play increases noticeability due to the 
affective charge of the language, helps learners develop voices in multiple registers, and may help 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  153 
stabilize the interlanguage system (Broner & Tarone, 2001). Since Lantolf’s (1997) call for more research 
into language play, more focus has been placed on language play with adults learning a foreign language, 
primarily on how language play may contribute to the development of sociolinguistic competence (Bell, 
2005; Forman, 2011), multi-competence (Pomerantz & Bell, 2007) and the use of unsanctioned language 
play to reorganize tasks to create learning opportunities (Bushnell, 2008; Pomerantz & Bell, 2007). These 
studies helped lay the groundwork for future research on language play and adults in foreign language 
classrooms. Since this article is primarily concerned with forms of ludic language play outlined by Guy 
Cook (2000), a short explication of Cook’s theory follows. 
Ludic Language Play 
In his article “Language Play, Language Learning,” a prelude to his book of the same title, Cook (1997) 
argues that play is associated with “enjoyment,” “relaxation,” and “intelligence.” Language play is, 
“behavior not primarily motivated by human need to manipulate the environment and to form and 
maintain social relationships—though it may indirectly serve these purposes.” Cook (2000) later 
developed a tri-partite construct for identifying features of language play on the formal, semantic and 
pragmatic level, emphasizing the causal role between the three features, “The patterning of form, though 
apparently random, leads to the creation of alternative realities, and this in turn performs essential 
functions in human life,” (p.122). We can focus the lens on any particular feature of language play, yet 
these features are inextricably linked in a causal chain.  
One type of language play on the linguistic level includes repetition of forms (Cook, 2000). Grammatical 
parallelism, for example, involves the repeated use of structures in tandem with lexical substitution. The 
repeated patterning of forms places the language learner in a relaxed environment, allowing them greater 
processing time to notice abstract categories and common collocations (Cook, 2000). Cook highlights the 
many examples of grammatical parallelism in children’s stories, as seen in the back and forth between 
Little Red Riding Hood and the Big Bad Wolf in the children’s classic (Perrault, 1697/2002). In one 
interesting comparison, Cook notes that the structural substitution drills popularized by the audiolingual 
method of the 1950s bear a striking resemblance to the lexical substitutions in parallel grammatical 
structures found in many nursery rhymes (Cook, 2000).  
Another type of language play is on the semantic level and includes the creation of alternative realities 
and the inversion of existing realities. Fictional worlds created through language also abound in the world 
of both children and adults. As Cook notes, children grow out of their games of make-believe, only to 
grow into fiction (Cook, 2000). Examples of carnival language include the use of grotesque realism, such 
as references to lower bodily functions, slang words, jokes, and grotesque references. Indeed, if we want 
to have a complete picture of language play with imaginary worlds we might include any sentence or 
utterance that employs a hypothetical proposition. On a formal level, certain linguistic forms, for 
example, the subordinating conjunctions of condition, such as if, only if, and even if can be used to speak 
of hypothetical situations which do not exist in reality (Cook, 2000). In his study of Rabelais, Bakhtin 
(1965/1984) describes how participants in Medieval and Renaissance festivals used ludic language to 
invert the social order and equalize power relations between the populace and the church. Iddings and 
McCafferty (2007) examined the use of language play in a children’s classroom, finding unsanctioned use 
of carnival language during off-task behavior helped create additional learning opportunities not present 
in the original task, allowing the students to recoup their role as a student when they had grown 
disinterested.  
As an illustration of pragmatic language play, Cook (2000) draws an analogy between competitive 
language games and various games played with a ball. On the one hand, Cook argues that simple, non-
competitive ball games, such as a game of catch, can be used to establish solidarity between the 
participants. On the other hand, more competitive ball games may be played to establish superiority. 
Similarly, some language games—in which conversational turns are similar to the passing of a ball—can 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  154 
also be used to establish solidarity or superiority between its participants (Cook, 2000). One example of 
can be found in verbal duels, such as The Dozens, a language game originating with African-Americans 
that consists of competitive, ritualized boasting (Labov, 1974). Another example is freestyling, a form of 
rapping in which participants take turns improvising lyrics, sometimes instantaneously to topics which are 
given to them by the audience. These word games show dexterous and creative language use but also 
serve the pragmatic function of building solidarity and competition. 
Warner (2004) helps broaden the perspective of language play for pragmatic purposes drawing on the 
work of the social interactionist models of Cook (2000), Bateson (1972) and Goffman (1974). Warner 
synthesized their approaches and introduced a category for analyzing pragmatic language play called, 
“play with the frame” which focuses primarily on “the level of understanding,” and the transforming of 
established frameworks, known as keying (Goffman, 1974), which Goffman describes as the use of 
frameworks as a pattern for another activity that is understood by the participants as distinct from the 
original frame. This notion of frame and key bears a resemblance to the distinction between task and 
activity seen in research on task-based learning and student agency, in which students have been found to 
transform classroom tasks at their own behest into new activities to target their own self-prescribed 
learning goals (Coughlan & Duff, 1994; Iddings & McCafferty, 2007; Lantolf & Pavlenko, 2001).  
Bakhtinian Discourse 
In his critique of Sauserrian linguistics, Speech genres and other late essays, Bakhtin (1953/1986) makes 
a distinction between a “sentence”, which is a unit of language, and an “utterance,” which is a unit of 
speech communication. Sentences are monologic—they are not bound to any other sentence that has 
come before or will come after it. They are isolated, decontextualized, unexpressive and unresponsive. 
They are not directed towards any interlocutor. Utterances, on the other hand, are dialogic. They exist 
between people—they unite sentences into a speech communion that exhibits a change of speaking 
subjects, where preceding and proceeding utterances are co-dependent, directed, responsive—forming a 
continuous dialogue. The analysis of real language use is performed by focusing the lens on utterances 
(Bakhtin, 1953/1986). 
According to Bakhtin, (1935/1981, 1953/1986) utterances and the words that fill them can be said to 
belong to no one, to another, and to oneself simultaneously. Belonging to no one, words are neutral, 
empty, a framework for construction. Yet, we learn words from the way others use them. Their words 
come to us with a certain flavor for generic usage, impressed with ideological overtones and established 
norms that define the function, style and phraseology, thus becoming the “authoritative discourse” of a 
genre and era. However, exposed to generic language, individuals still shape their own understanding and 
usage of words through their own accumulated and unique speech experiences whereby utterances take on 
individual expressiveness through a process of ‘creative assimilation,’ of others words, language learning 
itself, in which people shape and reshape utterances to make them their own (Bakhtin, 1935/1981). In The 
Discourse of the Novel, Bakhtin (1935/1981) notes a type of discourse known as double-voiced discourse, 
where the speech of a character represents not only the ideological intentions of the character in the novel, 
but also of the author, who uses the character to advance dual intentions, “…two voices, two meanings, 
two expressions,” and can be seen in forms of “…comic, ironic and parodic discourse...” (p.324). Bakhtin 
marks double-voiced discourse as a special kind of utterance in which the author and character hold a 
conversation with each other.  
Cultures-of-Use and the Spin-Off Function  
Thorne (2003) has coined the term “cultures-of-use” to help understand how mediating cultural tools are 
malleable and become imbibed with cultural resonances that accumulate over short and long-term 
repeated individual and collective usage, shaping how the tool is used in the present and the future. 
Humans are not shaped by their tools; on the contrary, humans shape and reshape tools through directed 
activity. Applying a cultures-of-use analysis to the use of internet communication tools between French 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  155 
and American students in sanctioned educational contexts, Thorne (2003) found in one case study that a 
shift in the mediating tool from email to chat resulted in a quantitative and qualitative shift in 
communication patterns of two students, providing them with additional, and at times, more effective and 
authentic opportunities for language learning and interrelationship building. Thorne (2003) argues that in 
this tool shift the two students crossed a threshold in which they positioned, “themselves as insiders with 
a vested interest in the educational, social, and communicative activities at hand,” (p. 48) allowing them 
to construct zones of proximal development not previously afforded in the classroom. He concludes the 
availability of tools and the cultural ‘sedimentation’ they carry play a large role in the formation of 
communication and resulting interpersonal relationships.  
As cultural tools are used and reused in varying cultural contexts and resonances build, the opportunity 
exists for a novel and complex transformation in the intended use of the tool to take place, known as the 
spin-off (Wertsch, 1998) or ratchet function (Tomasello, 1999). The evolution of Twitter to date presents 
itself an illustrative example of a spin-off. When Twitter was first introduced it was seen more as a 
monologic, broadcast tool. However, users had a need for more dialogic forms of communication, so they 
articulated ways to respond to each other’s tweets with addressivity symbols, using the @ symbol 
followed by a particular username (Williams, 2009). This advent, although, was not unique to Twitter, 
and had been previously articulated in other computer-mediated communication (CMC) settings, replete 
with their own cultures-of-use, such as internet relay chat. In using Twitter again and again, and carrying 
to each use their historical experiences with Twitter and comparable communication tools, the users 
repositioned not only Twitter’s purpose but also its foundational communicative practices. They 
articulated new ways of using the tool that significantly and dramatically changed it in ways that even its 
inventors had not imagined, notes Twitter co-founder, Evan Williams, who credits Twitter’s users for 
shaping how Twitter is currently and will be used in the future (Williams, 2009). 
Language Play & CMC Environments 
Despite the plentiful opportunities for ludic engagement in CMC environments (Herring, 1999; Nardi, 
Whittaker & Bradner, 2000) a lack of research exploring language play, adults and CMC environments 
persists, particularly with social media. In some of the first studies Warner (2004) explored types of 
language play in a Mud, object-oriented (MOO) environment, concluding that although there was no 
conclusive evidence of language learning through play, its ubiquitous use in the CMC setting demanded 
attention. In another study, Belz and Reinhardt (2004) looked at the use of language play by an advanced 
German student involved in a tele-collaboration project. The authors found that the language play the 
student used served a variety of functions, including consolidating grammar, building personal 
relationships and presenting a positive face in the CMC community.  
Although these studies have set the table for future research, they were conducted on what may be 
considered first-generation, or Web 1.0 technologies, such as email, chat and MOO. As far back as a 
decade ago, Goodwin-Jones (2003) suggested that as new internet 2.0 technologies begin to make their 
way into the classroom, researchers should explore how they may create new opportunities for language 
play. To date, however, sparse research on these new technologies and their connection to language play 
exists. Two noteworthy studies involve new technologies: memes and Second Life. Gawne and Vaughan 
(2011) explored how contributing to a popular internet meme craze, known as LOLspeak, in which 
people take on the role of personified cats that use non-standard grammar to communicate ludic 
messages, helped second language students develop their understanding of identity and grammar, such as: 
morphology, clause structure, orthography, lexemes, and syntax. Moreover, Liang (2012) used Second 
Life, an online virtual world in her class. She found that competitive, virtual role-playing helped to 
recreate languages and tasks by facilitating various forms of language play. 
 
 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  156 
The Study 
Setting 
Twitter was used in a high advanced grammar class—where high advanced is the sixth of nine levels in 
an eighteen month intensive, academic English program hosted at a state university located in the 
northeastern United States. The class met for one hour and twenty minutes twice a week for seven weeks, 
for a total of twenty-one contact hours during the course. Eleven students plus the instructor made up the 
participants of the course. The instructor brought in a laptop, speakers, and projector in order for the class 
to have access to the internet during demonstrations and instructional activities. 
Outcomes and Student Learning Objectives 
The learning objectives for the entire course, High Advanced Grammar, were taken from the program 
course curriculum. Among the outcomes were: 1) to express surprise, contrast, cause/effect, and 
hypothetical conditions by writing complex sentences using a variety of subordinating conjunctions and 
2) to use verb + preposition combinations with accurate collocation and meaning. There were five 
objectives for the course: 1) to learn to express surprise using although, even though and though; 2) to 
demonstrate contrast using while and whereas; 3) to show cause and effect using because, since, so…that; 
4) to be able to describe purpose using infinitives and so that; and 5) to use frequent verb+preposition 
combinations, such as guilty of, apologize for, and married to. 
Task 
Students were given the option of using Twitter during our class. In considering the various ways one can 
interact with and view tweets, I imagined Twitter would be a useful forum for comprehensible input 
(Krashen, 1982), comprehensible output (Swain, 1995), and meaningful interaction (Long, 1996). 
Students would be able to test hypotheses by writing tweets, they would have those hypotheses confirmed 
or challenged through corrective feedback with me, and they would get model sentences from the other 
students and me to serve as comprehensible input. To provide the student with feedback, I imagined I 
could use the favorite and retweet features to let individual students and the whole class know that 
accurate grammar was used in a tweet. The reply and direct message features could be used to engage the 
student in various forms of corrective feedback.  
I introduced the optional assignment of using Twitter for getting extra practice on the first day of class. I 
gave a short talk on what Twitter was and an in-class demonstration of how to use it. I also provided the 
students with a handout (Appendix B) of how to use the various features of the Twitter application and 
step-by-step instructions for signing up for a Twitter account. The instructions for the task were to 1) 
write 70 sentences during the seven-week session, or 10 sentences per week, 2) use the grammar 
structures presented in class in the class in their tweets, and 3) use contexts created in class or their own 
life experiences to fill the content of the tweet. I then encouraged the students to check their Twitter 
accounts daily to read the feedback I would be providing them through the direct message, “private 
interaction”, and the reply feature, “public interaction”.  
Participants 
Based on the content of their tweets and their use of Twitter, six months after the completion of the 
course, three participants were selected to participate in a study about their use of Twitter (Table 1). In 
each case, the student has given written consent for their tweets and other information herein to be used in 
this article. The names of the participants have been changed. 
 
 
 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  157 
Gülden   
 
Figure 2. Humorous tweet by Gülden 
Gülden, who had never used Twitter prior to this study, was 32 years old and the oldest of the three 
students. She, fluent in Turkish, was born and raised in Germany in a middle-class family with one 
German and one Turkish parent. She lived in the US by herself with her young daughter and throughout 
the course developed a close relationship with another classmate in this study, Florence. They were also 
friends with another Turkish woman in the class and all sat near each other in class and spent time with 
each other outside of class as well. 
Florence 
 
Figure 3. Florence reaching a goal 
Florence was a high school graduate from Turkey who was 19 at the time of the study. She came from a 
middle class background. She had the internet in her house in Turkey and usually spent between 30 
minutes to one hour using the internet per day. She also had experience with digital communication tools, 
such as texting and chatting, using these to communicate with people in her social group before coming to 
the US. Since she had arrived in America, she had lost contact with her social circle in Turkey, “…bcuz in 
this country no one has time actually after coming to usa I also stop calling my friends who live in Turkey 
now.” Prior to this study, Florence had never used Twitter. 
Michael 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Michael announcing he was getting ready to tweet some Yo Mama jokes1 
Michael, aged 24, was from the Philippines and had a strong foundation in English, testing immediately 
into the advanced level. He received his Bachelors of Science in Nursing from the Philippines. He had 
had access to the internet in his house since 2000. He also had experience with various digital 
communication tools, such as texting, instant messaging (IM), blogging and emailing. His preferred 
method of communication was IM. At times throughout the session, Michael seemed to cross the line 
with the female students through insensitive comments made both in and out of the classroom about some 
of the female students involved in the study. Despite his penchant for inappropriate jokes, he remained 
friendly with the females, one of whom he met occasionally with on Twitter to practice. Prior to this 
study, Michael claimed that he had made a Twitter account, but never used it and mostly communicated 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  158 
with friends through instant messaging. 
Table 1. Participant Demographics 
Name Gender Age Nationality Native 
Languages 
Experience with digital 
communication tools 
Experience with 
Twitter prior to study 
Gülden F 32 Turkish Turkish & 
German 
E-mail, chat, text 
messaging 
None 
Florence F 20 Turkish Turkish E-mail, chat, text 
messaging 
None 
Michael M 24 Philippine Tagalog Email, chat, text 
messaging, blog, social 
media 
Opened account, but 
never used 
 
Data Collection 
Qualitative data was triangulated and consists of discourse analysis of CMC conversations, analysis of the 
use of language play, as well as interviews with three students. Content from the tweets is analyzed using 
various methods of discourse analysis. To identify conversations between students, I analyzed tweets and 
coded them for characteristics of CMC coherence (Herring, 1999). According to Herring, coherence in 
CMC conversations differs from coherence in face-to-face conversation. Coherence in CMC is marked by 
considerable lag time, disrupted turn adjacency and violations of sequential coherence. Thus, in order to 
identify connections between tweets, they are analyzed for such cohesive features as addressivity using 
the @symbol (Honeycutt & Herring, 2009), as well as for topic continuation, evident through the use of 
similar grammar structures, lexemes, or semantic ideas. Once coherence among tweets was identified, I 
analyzed and coded the semantic content for instances of language play using Cook’s (2000) tri-partite 
construct for distinguishing between formal, semantic, and pragmatic language play as well as for other 
salient characteristics which may suggest language play, such as smiley face emoticons  or 
abbreviations for laughter, such as lol, lolololol, and LOL. Chat interviews with the 3 students involved in 
the study serve as additional source of qualitative data. These interviews took place through instant 
messaging services on Gmail and Skype six months after the class had ended and were used to ascertain 
student attitudes, motivations and lived recollections of their participation in the task (Appendix C).  
Research Questions 
Despite more of a focus on language play and adults in CMC environments, there is still a gap in the 
literature focusing on Web 2.0 internet technologies, in particular involving the use of language play on 
social media tools. Given the abundance of users of social media, such as Twitter and Facebook, and the 
sheer amount of language that is produced on a daily basis on these networks, exploration is warranted. 
As I examined the data set, I had two questions driving my inquiry: 
1. Did the students’ tweets exhibit any characteristics of ludic language play? If so, which kinds of 
ludic language play were used? 
2. If language play was used, what may have been contributing factors? 
RESULTS 
Vignette 1. From Sentence to Utterance: Repetition and Verbal Dueling 
“Whereas Michael today is very offensive, their girls are very defensive.” 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  159 
In the following vignette Gülden, Florence, Michael, and another student, Yucel, a young Turkish woman 
who was friends with Gülden and Florence and was also in the grammar class, had come to the computer 
lab after class to use Twitter, where I also happened to be assisting other students. In one of the earlier 
classes that day, Michael had made a playfully-intended, yet derogatory comment toward Gülden, 
Florence, and Yucel, which they referenced during the grammar class. Now in the computer lab, Gülden 
and Florence used Twitter and subordinating conjunctions of contrast (while/whereas) and surprise (even 
though/although) to sound out Michael for his behavior through reprimands and insults. Although it 
appears to be serious, their reprimands and insults are done somewhat in jest and tongue-in-cheek, as 
before they had begun to reprimand Michael on Twitter, I had observed them speaking casually with him 
in the computer lab.  
In turns 1 through 6, Gülden, Yucel and Michael play with language form, perhaps influenced by each 
other, paralleling each other’s form using subordinating conjunctions of contrast, whereas and while. In 
turn 1, Gülden is expressing her pleasure with writing on Twitter, while in turns 3 and 4, she comments 
on what was happening in real-time in the lab, mainly, Michael was showing Florence some disgusting 
pictures. In turn 5, Michael begins a chain of playful substitution patterns writing a sentence containing 
whereas. In turn 6, Gulden may be picking up on Michael’s use of the word whereas to compare German 
and English pronunciation. In turn 7, she makes a veiled reference to Michael’s impropriety earlier in the 
day when she engages Florence in direct conversation, “@florence, hey, while hate words are forbidden 
in the lab, you can use peace or even love words.” In turn 8, Michael displays a playful substitution 
pattern with the subordinating conjunctions whereas. In turn 9, Gülden makes a direct reference to 
Michael’s behavior, showing her displeasure with it, and contrasting it with the behavior of the women: 
“Whereas Michael is today very offensive, the girls are more defensive.” Florence also now begins to 
reprimand Michael (turn 10), indirectly chastising him, using the same conjunction as Gülden: “whereas 
some people are nice, some people are bad.” Michael then seemingly tries to defend himself (turn 11), 
justifying his behavior by arguing that there is a direct correlation between hating and loving, as he 
directly responds to Florence: “@Florence The more you hate, the more you love.”  While his sentence 
does not contain a target word, it displays a rhythmically and grammatically parallel structure. In turn 12, 
Florence continues to antagonize Michael indirectly, expressing her displeasure: “Whereas I don’t want to 
speak to some people, I want to talk some of them,” before she directly responds to Michael’s previous 
utterance in excitable disagreement (turn 13): “@Michael don’t believe it!!!!!!!!!!!!” In turn 14, “Whereas 
some people are tall, others are short,” Michael continues his chain of playful substitution patterns, now 
moving whereas to the initial part of the sentence. In turn 15, Gülden perhaps makes another dig at 
Michael, who had expressed an earlier interest in studying philosophy, which is what I studied as an 
undergraduate student, by stating that Michael wants to become something she inaccurately believes that I 
have already become. In turns 16-19, the conversation digresses and Yucel and Florence appropriate the 
semantic and structural content of each other’s tweets to discuss real world intentions (Table 2). 
In the preceding exchange, these students demonstrated a dynamic transformation of the original task I 
had proposed to reframe the activity to suit their own goals. Whereas I had thought the students would 
work individually, asynchronously, writing informational sentences with prescribed grammar structures 
with me as their audience and their goal as practice, the students met up in the computer lab, worked 
synchronously and collaboratively not only to practice but also to accomplish a more meaningful 
objective. On the one hand, they are using the forms while and whereas as prescribed in the syllabus to 
practice writing with structures we were studying in the class. Their playful repetition, substitution and 
rhythmic patterns suggest linguistic play as described by Cook (2000). On the other hand, it seems the 
purpose of Gülden and Florence’s tweets is not simply to practice but is also an attempt to ridicule and 
admonish Michael for his behavior earlier that day by engaging him in a quasi-verbal duel. Gülden frames 
parts of her discourse almost as if it were a game pitting Michael vs. the women: Whereas Michael today 
is very offensive, the girls are more defensive. Her teamwork with Florence to insult Michael may be seen 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  160 
as an attempt to establish gender solidarity, while also trying to gain superiority over Michael by letting 
him know his behavior is unacceptable. At the same time, as like with other verbal duels in which 
violence or insults remain largely symbolic and not taken to heart (Cook, 2000), these students appear to 
be engaging in this duel in a tongue-in cheek fashion as I did observe them walking into the lab together 
joking around before they sat down to Twitter just a few minutes before these verbal duels. 
The reframing of the activity was made possible in part through the ‘spinning off’ (Wertsch, 1998) of the 
microblogging tool, which allowed the students to use it in a novel way that I had not imagined. Rather 
than broadcasting unrelated, disjointed sentences, Gülden, Florence and Michael collaborated in real-time 
on Twitter, using CMC conversational elements, such as addressivity and topic continuation (Herring 
1999, Honeycutt & Herring, 2009). The students thus moved from the sentence to the utterance (Bakhtin, 
1935/1981, 1953/1986) in which a large portion of their tweets established a formal, semantic and 
pragmatic continuum. Their proximity to each other in the computer lab, their simultaneous tweeting, and 
their restricted network of followers helped them turn Twitter into a quasi-instant messaging chat room 
and the task into something interesting, fun and intrinsically meaningful. In fact, in the interviews, Gülden 
comments on how the first time she realized the enjoyment of using Twitter was when the students met in 
the lab and used it together. This initial experience of collaborating in the lab would lead the students to 
collaborate from their homes as seen in the following two vignettes. 
Table 2. From Sentence to Utterance 
Turn Student Tweet Time 
1 Gülden While professor and Florence are discussing about time, I have a lot of 
fun.  
1:48 pm 
2 Yucel Even though I am so tired, I am still studying in computer lab. 1:52 pm 
3 Gülden Florence feels disgusting while Michael are showing her pictures about 
dog who were eaten 
1:55 pm 
4 Gülden Whereas Yucel looks to the picture voluntarily, Michael has to force 
Florence alias Takiturkar to look at the pictures. 
1:56 pm 
5 Michael Some people are tall, whereas others are short. 2:00 pm 
6 Gülden Whereas English language pronunciation is soft, the german 
pronunciation is more hard. 
2:01 pm 
7 Gülden @Florence hey, while hate words are forbidden in the lab, you can use 
peace or even love words. 
2:04 pm 
8 Michael Some people are short, whereas others are tall 2:05 pm 
9 Gülden Whereas Michael today is very offensive, the girls are more defensive 2:05 pm 
10 Florence Whereas some people are nice, others are so bad. 2:05 pm 
11 Michael @Florence The more you hate, the more you love 2:05 pm 
12 Florence Whereas I don’t want to speak some people, i want to talk some of them 2:06 pm 
13 Florence @Michael don’t believe it!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! 2:07 pm 
14 Michael Whereas some people are tall, other are short. 2:07 pm 
15 Gülden Michael wants to become a philosopher, whereas our professor already 
has become one 
2:08 pm 
16 Yucel I would like to go home, while Florence wants to stay here 2:08 pm 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  161 
17 Florence whereas i asked Yucel to go home, she send me this sentence 2:08 pm 
18 Yucel Whereas Florence is hungry, I am full 2:12 pm 
19 Florence Yucel is full, while I am hungry 2:15 pm 
Note. Target subordinators from the syllabus are in bold. 
Vignette 2. Word Games: Free-styling, Sounding Off and Solidarity 
“I am proud of to be addicted to twitter anyway, because I associate it with our class and through 
twitter I am prepared for the next class.” 
 
 
Figure 5. Initiating a word game. 
In this vignette, Michael and Gülden are on Twitter. They are in their homes and come online at different 
times. Once they realize that they are both on Twitter, they begin chatting with each other using Twitter 
as an instant messaging tool like they had done in the lab in the previous vignette. Once again, the 
students seem to have dual objects at hand as they engage in an impromptu improvisational word game in 
which one student gives a verb/preposition combination and the other student must create a sentence 
using the combination. 
Gülden first appears on Twitter at 8:10 pm hoping to find someone “in” Twitter, “Is anybody in there???? 
Come on….” She begins to share YouTube videos containing Arab humor. At 8:12, Michael responds to 
her with a playful take on the word hello, “Halo!” Gülden continues sharing videos seemingly unaware 
that Michael is now online. “I’m here,” he tweets. The two then trade humorous YouTube videos. 
Michael then attempts to engage Gülden in an improvisational game involving preposition combinations 
(in bold), they were studying in class: “Give a preposition then we’ll make a sentence.” Gülden replies, 
“Be done with.” Michael begins on his own, however, “Thou shall not be absent from any gathering in 
PALS.” Gülden writes two tweets of her own containing prepositions, before Michael finally responds to 
her initial prompt, “Our class will be done with lots of knowledge gained.” Gülden is excited by 
Michael’s response and gives him some positive feedback, “Yeaaaaah!” The two continue trading tweets. 
Then Michael makes a joke about Gülden’s use of Twitter, addressing her by her Twitter handle: 
@thelaw, “Its not easy to be addicted to tweeter like thelaw.” She finds this funny, responding, 
“hahahaha!” before justifying her addiction in her next tweet by using a variety of combinations to 
express how Twitter helps her, “I am proud of to be addicted to twitter anyway, because I associate it 
with our class and through twitter I am prepared for the next class,” (Figure 6) Gülden then once again 
takes the opportunity to sound off on Michael for another instance of inappropriate behavior in class 
earlier that day, “Michael seemed today in Marnie's class to be bored with the topic, but anyway he 
succeeded in making jokes about Brandy, Marnie and me.” Michael apologizes blaming his behavior on 
the early start of school, while also using preposition combinations, “I apologize for my bad behavior.” 
“Its just because I arrive in school too early I get nuts.” In her next two tweets, Gülden tries to console 
Michael, while still admonishing him, explicitly marking her sentences as jokes. “Mike doesn’t have to 
feel guilty of what he had done today with us in Marnie’s class. However, in real there is no excuse for 
his behavior.” “hey I am just kidding and trying to use the prepositions, so please dont be upset with 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  162 
me.” Michael seemingly did not take offense as the two continued to chat for a few more tweets about 
topic sentences for an essay before Mike takes leave and says good night in two separate tweets, “Can I 
be excuse for my sleepiness? “Good night! peeps! my bed is seducing me.. and I can't resist it! maybe I'll 
just give in..” 
 
Figure 6. Addicted to Twitter 
In their impromptu word game, Michael and Gülden once again reframe the activity reimagining the 
rules, objectives, tools, and division of labor I had set forth in the task guidelines. Michael attempts to 
transform the original solitary informational task I had constructed into a game in which he and Gülden 
must improvise a sentence based off of the other’s prompt. As with verbal dueling, improvisational word 
games like this may be an exercise in solidarity building or an attempt to establish intellectual superiority 
by coming up with the most ingenious sentence (Cook, 2000). Michael’s suggestion to, “Give a 
preposition and make a sentence,” may have come from his interest in hip-hop culture, which was 
apparent in the language and content he used and shared in his tweets as well as his enthusiasm for Yo 
Mama jokes, which we had studied in class as an example of the so…that subordinating conjunction of 
cause/effect. This invented game they were playing may be viewed as a type of ‘freestyling,’ a style of 
singing common in hip-hop music, where rappers come up with rhymes extemporaneously and try to 
continue as long as they can without stopping while rapping about different topics. At times, rappers 
engage in “battles,” a type of verbal duel in front of audiences to determine who the most skilled 
freestyler is. The more dexterous ones will take prompts from the audience about topics to rhyme about 
without breaking their flow, while also engaging in insulting and discrediting their competitors.  
Gülden responds to Michael’s request and gives him verb/preposition phrase: be done with, which he 
successfully uses to create an accurate sentence. In the beginning, Gülden is seemingly playing the game 
with Michael, even encouraging him and finding humor in his responses, evidenced by her use of 
hahahahahaha. However, after Michael takes a humorous jab at Gülden’s Twitter usage, she once again 
takes the opportunity to sound off on Michael for another instance of inappropriate behavior. Thus, once 
inside the reframed activity Michael has set-up in order to practice and have fun through an 
improvisational word game, Gülden uses the frame to express her real feelings towards her classmate. 
Despite her claims that she is just kidding and trying to use the prepositions, given the previous vignette, 
there does seem to be an element of truth to her displeasure with Michael’s actions. He at least believes 
so, evident by his apology and attempts to save face and reestablish solidarity with his classmate. All the 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  163 
while the two stay within at least one parameter of the original frame I created for the task: use grammar 
structures from the syllabus.  
Moving from the computer lab, where they tweeted in real-time in the presence of each other, the three 
students began to meet and communicate with each other from their own houses, conceptualizing Twitter 
as a virtual meeting space for synchronous communication in the vein of an instant messenger or internet 
relay chat room. That they conceived of Twitter as a place is evident in their arranging times to meet as 
well as in their various tweets describing Twitter as a place, such as when Gülden signed in and 
impatiently asked: Anybody in there???? Come on.... 8:10 PM Dec 14th from web. The exchange in this 
vignette took place around 8:00. Gülden mentions in her interview how it had been difficult living in 
America the short time she had been here, raising her daughter alone with no real social life due to family 
and school obligations. Gülden and Florence also both describe how moving to America contributed to 
them losing contact with their primary social circles back in Turkey, leaving their only friends in America 
the ones they had met through going to school. That these students felt a lack of a social circle and began 
meeting on Twitter to chat, suggests Twitter had become a place not only to practice their English, but 
also to establish, build, and maintain relationships with their classmates 
Vignette 3. Hypothetical Carnage: Carnival, Alternative Realities and Double-Voiced Discourse 
“If I put my picture here, you will see my beautiful face. I don’t wanna bad eyes on my face. 
LOL.”   
In the following vignette, Gülden, Florence, and Michael are each at their homes using Twitter in the 
evening at the same time. Over a span of 10 minutes from 8:53 pm to 9:03 pm, the students have a 
conversation on Twitter, blending such forms of language play as: speaking to hypothetical situations, 
using a foreign phrase, referencing fictional worlds, repeating structures, double-voiced discourse and 
parody. The students draw out two distinct conversational threads. The first one involves good natured 
teasing and references to foreign ideas and words. Michael initiates the teasing by prodding Florence to 
put her picture on Twitter, which she did not want to do and which had been a running joke both online 
and in class throughout the seven-week session. Florence and Gülden are clearly amused with the banter 
as they use abbreviations and emoticons to back channel their enjoyment. In the second thread in Table 2, 
the students used the function of the 1st conditional2 to create an imaginary world in which they discuss 
the possibility of Florence being murdered by Michael, Gülden and myself.  
In turns 1 through 3, the students make it known to each other that they are on Twitter, yet still 
accomplish this task by using a target grammar structure. In turn 5, Michael teases Florence about not 
having her picture on her Twitter account, a running joke throughout the session, “If Florence can only 
put a picture on her profile, it’ll be great!” In turn 7, Florence justifies not putting a picture on Twitter by 
hypothesizing that if she had a picture of her ‘beautiful’ face on Twitter, it could lead to ‘bad eyes’ and 
envy. “If I put my picture here, you will see my beautiful face. I don’t wanna bad eyes on my face. LOL.”  
In turn 11, however, Gülden tries to convince Florence with a witty hypothesis that if Florence does put 
her picture on Twitter, “…we can all say mashallah to her, which keeps her safe from bad eyes ;-). 
 
The second topic revolved around murder as the students joke about killing each other. The students had 
been working on collaborative essays with each responsible for an individual part of the essay. The topic 
of murder is brought up by Florence in turn 4, who appears to be attempting to use a joke as a leave-
taking strategy when she writes, “If I go will you kill me?” Michael appropriates the topic from Florence 
in turn 8, noting that if there is utility in killing Florence, then he has no problem committing the act, “If 
killing you would do me any better then I will.” Gülden appropriates the semantic and structural content 
of Florence and Michael’s previous tweets in turn 9 by joking that she’ll turn a blind eye toward this 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  164 
murder, “If Michael will kill you, I don’t know anything about it.” In turn 10, Florence, still on the topic 
of death wonders whether I will murder her if she doesn’t complete her homework, “If I don’t correct my 
individual essay, Dave can kill me or not?” Michael then leaves the conversation, which continues with 
Florence and Gülden. In turn 12, Gülden maintains her blind eye towards murder, “If Dave will kill you, I 
won’t know it too.” In turn 13, Florence tries to persuade Gülden not to kill her by asking Gülden what 
she would do without her, “IF I die, what are you going to do without me, So don’t kill me.” In turn 14, 
Gülden now tries to support Florence, assuring that killing her is not permitted, “If Florence won’t correct 
her individual essay, Dave is not allowed to kill her, even Michael.” In turn 15, although, Gülden 
speculates that I might “murder” something else, Florence’s grade, if the essay is not completed, “But if 
Florence won’t correct her individual essay, Dave can kill her grade.” In turns 16 & 17, Florence is 
expressing her happiness about surviving her physical death, but realizes she is not safe from the death of 
her grade: “ok I am not going to die tomorrow it is great… but I see I will die anyway.” Finally, in turn 
18, Gülden unites the two topics of envy and murder by threatening to kill Florence should she not put her 
picture on Twitter (Table 3).  
In this vignette, the students rely heavily on addressivity, carnival language, parody and double-voiced 
discourse (Bakthin, 1981, 1984, 1986) to establish and continue their conversation. Each successive tweet 
seems to be the fuel for the next as students practice grammar structures picking up on each other’s 
linguistic and semantic content in their pseudo world of carnage. Their references to fictional words in 
which the students and teacher may consider murder for such actions as leaving a conversation or not 
completing an assignment dramatically invert the accepted social order, yet provide the students with 
semantic content that may be intrinsically interesting and motivating due to its humorous nature. Their 
use of parody, in which they use the content of each other’s tweets to maintain and advance their 
conversation, makes the whole episode possible and heightens the sense of humor. It can also be argued 
that the students not only have become the authors, but also the characters of their tweets. In double-
voiced discourse the author’s words serve two intentions, to further and advance the ideology of the 
character as well as the author (Bakhtin, 1935/1981). As the author of their tweets, they seem to stay 
within the confines of the authoritative academic discourse by restricting the linguistic content of their 
tweets to the subordinating conjunction if and the pragmatic purpose to practice. However, the semantic 
content repositions the students as characters of their tweets, which advances a different, if not hidden 
ideology; the students’ parodying of the power relations between the teacher and students might be seen 
as a form rebellion against the task that allows the students to gain greater control over their learning and 
reframe the activity in a way that is more enjoyable. 
Table 3. Hypothetical Carnage 
Turn Student Tweet Time 
1 Gülden If Michael can start tweeting too, then Florence would know that he is 
also here 
8:53 pm 
2 Michael If Florence is here, it’ll be great! 8:55 pm 
3 Florence If I am not here, how can I write something. LOL :D 8:56 pm 
4 Florence If I go will you kill me? 8:57 pm 
5 Michael If Florence can only put a picture on her profile, it’ll be great! 8:57 pm 
6 Gülden If you send me your paragraphs, I could check my text because I need it 
for the introduction. 
8:57 pm 
7 Florence If I put my picture here, you will see my beautiful face. I don’t wanna bad 
eyes on my face. LOL 
8:58 pm 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  165 
8 Michael If killing you would do me any better then I will… 8:59 pm 
9 Gülden If Michael will kill you, I don’t know anything about it. 8:59 pm 
10 Florence If I don’t correct my individual essay, can the professor kill me or not? 9:00 pm 
 
11 
 
Gülden 
 
If Florence is afraid of bad eyes, we can all say mashallah to her which 
keeps her safe from bad eyes ;-) 
9:00 pm 
12 Gülden If the professor will kill you, I won’t know it too. 9:01 pm 
13 Florence IF I die, what are you going to do without me, So don’t kill me. 9:01 pm 
14 Gülden If Florence won’t correct her individual essay, the professor is not 
allowed to kill her, even Michael. 
9:01 pm 
15 Gülden But if Florence won’t correct her individual essay, the professor can kill 
her grade. 
9:02 pm 
16 Florence Ok I am not going to die tomorrow it is great 9:02 pm 
17 Florence but I see I will die anyway. 9:03 pm 
18 Gülden If you don’t put a picture in here, then I could kill you tomorrow ;-) 9:03 pm 
DISCUSSION 
During their use of Twitter during the seven-week session Gülden, Michael and Florence did in fact use a 
variety of types of language play, including repetition, joking, insulting, improvisational word games, 
foreign words and references, imaginary worlds and carnival language. While communicating 
collaboratively, the students seemed to show a preference for using language play, continuing to embed it 
in frames that used academic grammatical constructions, resulting in awkward, if not humorous and 
memorable tweets. That they were enjoying themselves and finding humor in the interactions in the 
vignettes is corroborated by the abbreviations and emoticons signaling humor which appear in the tweets 
as well as the students’ own admission in the interviews that their real-time communication on Twitter 
helped make the task fun.  
The use of language play may have been influenced by a few factors. Dialogic, synchronous digital 
communication tools, such as internet relay rooms and chatting, have been demonstrated to foster online 
communities with relaxed interactional norms which students can exploit for creative, risk-taking and 
playful language (Herring, 1999, 2009; Nardi, Whittaker & Bradner, 2000; Thorne, 2000). Furthermore, 
using Twitter as a bounded community in educational, language learning settings contributes to the 
building of classroom community (Antenos-Conforti, 2009; Lomicka & Lord, 2011; Newgarden, 2009). 
The camaraderie and support of the micro-community may have further helped to establish a space which 
opened up opportunities for language play and risk-taking.  
One may ask why these students in particular formed an online community and not any of the other 
students. Stefanone and Gay (2008) posit that students who have established in-class social networks 
based on choice homophily––such as age, gender, and ethnicity––tend to reproduce these social networks 
in computer-mediated communication forums. This is clearly evident in the case of Gülden and Florence 
both females with Turkish cultural heritages, who were roughly around the same age and had similar 
experiences with digital communication tools, particularly instant messaging applications. Although 
Michael did not share the same gender and ethnicity as Gülden and Florence, he was a part of their social 
network in class—he sat next to them in all of their classes and usually worked with them in groups. He 
only seemed to be outcast from the group when his attempts at humor were not met kindly by his 
classmates. This social network at times led the students to visit the computer lab together with each other 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  166 
after class time, where they practiced on Twitter. These visits to the computer lab allowed them to 
initially discover that they could communicate in real-time on Twitter.  
The students could not have formed an online community had they not ‘spun-off’ Twitter from a 
microblog to a quasi-instant messenger. These students brought to their experience with Twitter 
sustained, cultures-of-use (Thorne, 2003) with a variety of digital communication tools in non-academic 
speech communities. Yet, according to the interviews, they all preferred chatting and texting above 
others, which was how they communicated with their friends back home. Confronted with a largely 
asynchronous, digital communication tool given to them to learn authoritatively-sanctioned ways for 
using academic English grammar, while struggling with being taken out of their established social 
networks with their friends back home, the students may have responded to this contradiction by spinning 
it off, drawing on their repertoire of communication methods with chatting and texting, noticing similar 
affordances in Twitter’s interactional capabilities, despite synchronous communication not being the 
intended nor dominant method of communication within the Twitter speech community or the space I 
originally constructed for the class. Spinning off the tool, the students moved from the sentence to the 
utterance (Bakhtin, 1953/1986) resulting in a quantitative and qualitative change in language use. The 
students displayed conversational, interactional language marked by characteristics of synchronous CMC 
communication (Honeycutt & Herring, 2009; Thorne, 2000). Their tweets contained parody and double-
voiced discourse (Bakhtin, 1935/1981) becoming the vehicle for multiple intentions, including the 
appropriation of sanctioned academic grammar, as well as informal language commonly used in 
synchronous digital communication and the building and developing of interpersonal relationships 
established in the micro community. This study suggests similar findings to Thorne (2003) who described 
how CMC tool shifts in language learning tasks in academic settings opened up possibilities for 
transformative change, creating additional learning opportunities. 
In the interviews, Gülden, Florence and Michael all mention how their real-time collaboration on Twitter, 
as seen in this previous vignette, was beneficial to their learning experience. Gülden points to being able 
to compare sentences with each other to see if they were using the forms accurately. She also remarks that 
how I initially set up the task for the students to work individually clashed with her cultural experiences in 
Germany, where she was used to working with groups. Florence provides insight into how collaborating 
on Twitter gave the students the opportunity to practice their informal language use, which wouldn’t have 
been possible if they had only worked individually practicing the sanctioned academic structures outlined 
in the course syllabus. This “street language,” as she terms it fit in better with the nature of the tool as 
they were using it and helped her develop and broaden her style and generic repertoire, as Florence rightly 
remarks it is not too common to use academic language while chatting. Michael states that while not too 
practical, they were able to leverage Twitter as a conversational tool in order to help them get ideas for 
the content of their tweets and receive instantaneous feedback, “…sometimes what happens is, we get 
ideas from the first person's post. In my opinion, I think it's better to work with them, cause you can get 
corrected in some instances you make mistakes.” When I asked Michael about the positive or negative 
aspects of using Twitter, he commented that one positive to using Twitter for the class was that he found 
another way to use Twitter, one that was not intended “as it's main purpose”. (sic). 
CONCLUSION 
Student agency is not an individual state of being, rather direct actions taken by the student. It is doing 
rather than being, initiating rather than reacting, meaningful rather than void (van Lier, 2008; Lantolf & 
Thorne, 2006). Although constrained by their material environment, agents––individually or 
collaboratively– choose their own motivations, tools, partners, rules, divisions of labor and direct their 
activity accordingly. In educational settings, students form their own motivations that direct their activity 
and result in learning. Even in the middle of a single activity, students may reshape the context, and thus 
the activity, by redefining the object according to their own goals and outcomes (Coughlan & Duff, 1994; 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  167 
Lantolf & Pavlenko, 2001). Students therefore show agency in creating their own learning contexts (van 
Lier, 2008). Gülden, Michael and Florence did not solely place themselves in the task designed for them, 
but co-constructed their own activities to better direct their own educational and social goals. Thus, the 
students engaged in a process of “expansive learning,” in which they ‘resolve[d] the pressing internal 
contradictions by [co-]constructing and implementing a qualitatively new way of functioning…’ 
horizontally distributing the learning process amongst themselves in ‘situationally constructed social 
spaces,’ (Engeström, 2007), which, according to the students, positively impacted and changed the 
learning outcomes and objectives set forth in the class syllabus, as well as the interpersonal relationship 
dynamics between the students. 
This study suffers from a few limitations, such as a small sample-size, the time between the retrospective 
interviews and the closing of the task as well as a lack of inter-rater reliability for coding the data in the 
corpus. However, the findings still serve to make us consider Cook’s (2000) suggestion that teachers and 
researchers need to expand their conceptualization of what constitutes authentic language use and make 
spaces in classrooms for language play to attain learning outcomes and objectives remains highly 
relevant, especially in the current era of innovation and expansion in digital communication and the 
additional and surprising opportunities they afford for sanctioned and unsanctioned language learning. It 
is advisable to perform further research in how language play can be integrated into tasks involving 
synchronous digital communication tools, while remaining flexible and open to task design and 
implementation, as transformative uses affecting language use and learning outcomes may be latent in the 
tools, student networks and cultures-of-use, and may remain unapparent to curriculum designers and 
teachers at the outset of or even during the task. 
 
 
NOTES 
1. Yo Mama jokes are often crude jokes told about people’s mothers. The jokes usually insult the 
intelligence or appearance of one’s mother and depending on the context may be taken light-heartedly 
or more seriously. 
2. The First Conditional expresses a hypothetical future situation and uses the subordinator if in the 
subordinate clause and the modal auxiliary will in the main clause. 
 
APPENDIX A. Tweet Clouds 
 
 
Gülden’s tweet cloud displaying most used words 
 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  168 
 
Michael’s tweet cloud displaying most used words 
 
 
APPENDIX B. Task Handout 
 
Rationale 
Output, or production of language, contributes significantly to language acquisition by allowing the student to test 
ideas they have about language, by noticing a gap in their language output, and by giving them the opportunity to 
use meta-language to reflect on their production (Swain, 1995). In addition, becoming a member of an English 
language community also can aid acquisition, both cultural and linguistic, by allowing the student to participate in 
a community first on the periphery, then as an outright member Finally, micro-blogging helps to build classroom 
community (Newgarden, 2009). 
 
Background 
Microblogging is a social media platform which has become quite popular in the United States. It consists of 
writing short messages, or updates, of 140 characters or less, and then posting them to a public timeline, which can 
be viewed by anyone. A person builds their network by following people. As you follow people and they follow 
you, your messages appear on their home page, and vice-versa. This is the core of the microblogging network. 
Similar to Facebook and other social-networking sites, users can post short messages, photos, videos and audio to 
their profile, and even engage in conversations; however, microblogging differs from social-networking in that 
one’s network of friends may be based on similar interests, rather than on prior friendship or acquaintances.  
 
The most popular microblogging service to date is TWITTER. Twitter is used by more than 6,000,000 people in 
the United States, including famous actors and celebrities, well-known businesses and news outlets, even President 
Obama. Being the most-well known service, Twitter will be the microblogging platform used for this class. To 
further acquaint yourself with microblogging and Twitter, view these two short videos: http://tinyurl.com/384n2f  
http://tinyurl.com/d33ul4 
 
 
With Twitter you can: 
 
Task-Based Activity 
1: 
Microblogging 
 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  169 
• Update your status: 140 characters including spaces 
• Send direct messages: private messages to your friends 
• Favorite someone’s tweets 
• Retweet: display a friend’s tweet so all of your other friends can see it 
• Reply to someone: use the @username to reply to someone’s tweet. 
• Search the public timeline: use the search box to enter words you want to search on Twitter. 
 
Objective 
To develop grammatical competence especially accuracy and complexity in sentence writing and conciseness 
through micro-blogging. 
 
Summary 
During the course of the sessions, it is your option to use Twitter. I suggest you write a total of 75 tweets. This 
averages out to approximately ten sentences per week. However, I encourage you to take advantage of this 
opportunity to have your English reviewed and write as many sentences as possible. I will give you suggestions 
during each week about which grammar constructions should be in your updates; the content of the updates should 
revolve around your life and interests. 
 
As you begin to Tweet, I will do one of two things. First, I might REPLY to a tweet you have written and 
MENTION your name. If I do this, the tweet is non-normative and should be corrected. Second, I might 
FAVORITE and RETWEET your sentence. This means that the sentence is normative. 
 
Assessment and Grading Criteria 
This assignment is optional and does not count towards your grade, but should you choose to do it, you should aim 
to write 10 sentences per week throughout the session. I will provide you with feedback for all the sentences you 
write. 
Twitter’s Layout 
Home Page 
 
 
On your home page is where you write your sentences. You write them in the box that says WHAT’S 
HAPPENING?  Also on your home page, you can check any mentions by clicking on the @username link. Those 
are the two tabs useful to you for this task 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  170 
 
Profile Page 
Your profile page shows all of the tweets you have made. It also shows you any tweets that you have favorited as 
well as any people you are following. 
 
Message Page 
 
On Twitter, you are allowed to send users private messages, messages that only you and the user can see. You can 
do this on your message page. Simply create a new message and choose which user you would like to send it to. 
 
Follow Page 
On the following page, you choose who you want to follow. Enter their twitter name or email in the user box. 
When the user appears, click on the FOLLOW button. This user’s updates will now appear on your page. 
 
 
APPENDIX C. Interview Questions 
1. Had you ever used a chat tool, instant messaging service or microblog before attending this course?  
2. What is your preferred method of communication among your friends? 
3. How competent are you using a computer and the internet? 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  171 
4. Compare your interactions with your social circle in your home country from the last few months 
living in your country to your interactions with the social circle during your time in the class. 
5. What are your thoughts about the microblogging experience we had in class? 
6. What is your memory of the instructions for using Twitter in the class? 
7. Do you remember using Twitter to chat? 
8. If so, what do you remember about the experience? 
9. Whose decision was it to use Twitter as a chat tool? 
10 If so, what do you remember about the experience? 
11. What were your goals while you were using Twitter as a chat tool? 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank my brother, Michael Hattem, for taking time out of his incredibly busy schedule to 
discuss and read drafts of this article. His insight and support were invaluable.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
I have 8 years of experience teaching English as a Second Language in northern New Jersey. I attained 
my M.A. in Applied Linguistics from the University of Massachusetts-Boston in 2011, where I 
concentrated on ESL and EFL pedagogy. My interests included computer-assisted language learning, 
additional language acquisition, sociocultural theory, cognitive approaches, critical pedagogy and corpus 
linguistics. 
E-mail: hattem@andromeda.rutgers.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Antenos-Conforti, E. (2009). Microblogging on Twitter: Social networking in intermediate Italian classes. 
In L. Lomicka, & G. Lord (Eds.), The Next generation: Social networking and online collaboration in 
foreign language learning, (pp. 59–90.) 
Bakhtin, M. (1981). Discourse in the Novel. (M. Holiquist & C. Emerson, Trans.). In M. Holiquist (ed.). 
The Dialogic imagination: Four essays by M. M. Bakhtin (pp. 259–402). Austin, TX: University of Texas 
Press. (Original work published in 1935) 
Bakhtin, M. (1984). Rabelais and his world. (H. Iswolsky, Trans.). Bloomington, IN: Indiana University 
Press. (Original work published in 1965) 
Bakhtin. M. (1986). The problem of speech genres. (V. Mcgee, Trans.). In C. Emerson and M. Holiquist 
(Eds.), Speech genres and other late essays (pp. 60–102).  Austin: University of Texas Press. (Original 
work published in 1953)  
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an ecology of mind: Collected essays in anthropology, psychiatry, evolution, 
and epistemology. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson. Retrieved from 
http://www.edtechpost.ca/readings/Gregory%20Bateson%20-%20Ecology%20of%20Mind.pdf  
Bell, N. (2005). Exploring L2 language play as an aid to SLL: A Case study of humour in NS-NNS 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  172 
interaction. Applied Linguistics, 26(2), 192–218. 
Belz, J. A., & Reinhardt, J. (2004). Aspects of advanced foreign language proficiency: Internet-mediated 
German language play. International Journal of Applied Linguistics. 14(3), 324–362. 
Borau, K., Feng, J., Shen, R. & Ullrich, C. (2009).  Microblogging for language learning: Using twitter to 
train communicative and cultural competence. Lecture Notes and Computer Science, 5686. doi: 
10.1007/978-3-642-03426-8_10 
Broner, M., & Tarone, E. (2001). Is it fun? Language play in a fifth-grade Spanish immersion classroom. 
Modern Language Journal, 85(3), 363–379. 
Bushnell, C. (2008). ‘Lego my keego!: An analysis of language play in a beginning Japanese foreign 
language classroom. Applied Linguistics, 30(1), 49–69. 
Castro, M. (2009). The use of microblogging in language education. Proceedings of the third international 
wireless ready symposium. 8–11. Retrieved from http://opinion.nucba.ac.jp/~thomas/castro2009.pdf 
Cook, G. (1997). Language play, language learning. ELT Journal, 51(3), 224–231. 
Cook, G. (2000). Language play, language learning. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
Coughlin, P. & Duff, P. A. (1994). Same task, different activities: Analysis of a SLA task from an activity 
theory perspective. In J. P. Lantolf & G. Appel (eds.), Vygotskian approaches to second language 
research. (pp. 173–194). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Eltantawy, N. & Wiest, J. B., (2011). Social media in the Egyptian revolution: Reconsidering resource 
mobilization theory. International Journal of Communication, 5, 1207–1234. 
Engeström, Y. (2007). Enriching the theory of expansive learning: Lessons from journeys towards 
coconfiguration. Mind, Culture and Activity, 14(1–2), 23–39. 
Fitzgerald, B. (2012, August 8). The 17 most-visited websites in the world. The Huffington Post. 
Retrieved from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/news/most-visited-websites 
Forman, R. (2011). Humorous language play in a Thai EFL classroom. Applied Linguistics, 32(5), 541–
565. 
Gawne, L., & Vaughan, J. (2011). I can has language play: The Construction of language and identity in 
LOLspeak. Presented at the Australian Linguistics Society annual conference. Retrieved from 
http://www.academia.edu/1152393/I_can_haz_speech_play_The_construction_of_language_and_identity
_in_LOLspeak 
Goffman, E. (1974). Frame analysis: An essay on the organization of experience. New York, NY: Harper 
& Row. 
Goodwin-Jones, B. (2003). Blogs and wikis: Environments for on-line collaboration. Language Learning 
and Technology, 7(2), 12–16. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/pdf/emerging.pdf 
Grossman, L. (2009, June). Iran Protests: Twitter, the Medium of the Movement. Time. Retrieved from 
http://www.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,1905125,00.html. 
Hattem, D. (2012). The Practice of microblogging. The Journal of Second Language Teaching and 
Research. 1(2), 38–70. Retrieved from http://pops.uclan.ac.uk/index.php/jsltr/article/view/47 
Herring, S. (1999). Interactional coherence in CMC. Proceedings of the Thirty-Second Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on Systems Sciences (CD-ROM). Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society. 
doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.1999.tb00106.x 
 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  173 
Honeycutt, C. & Herring, S. (2009). Beyond microblogging: Conversation and collaboration via Twitter. 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS-42).Los Alamitos, 
CA: IEEE Press. Retrieved from http://www.ledbetter.de/pdf/beyondmicroblogging.PDF 
Humphreys, L. (2010, April). Historicizing Microblogging. Paper presented at the CHI Workshop on 
Micro-Blogging 2010. April 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, Georgia. Retrieved from: 
http://cs.unc.edu/~julia/accepted-papers/Humphreys_HistoricizingTwitter.pdf 
Iddings, A. & McCafferty, S. (2007). Carnival in a mainstream classroom: A Bakhtinian analysis of 
second language learner’s off-task behaviors. Modern Language Journal. 91(1), 33–44. 
Java, A., Finin, T., Song, X., & Tseng, B. (2007). Why we twitter: Understanding microblogging usage 
and communities, Proceedings of the 9th WebKDD and 1st SNA-KDD 2007 workshop on Web mining and 
social network analysis, pp. 56–65, August 12, 2007, San Jose, CA doi: 10.1145/1348549.1348556 
Krashen, S. D. (1982). Principles and practices in second language acquisition. Oxford, UK: Pergamon. 
Retrieved from http://www.sdkrashen.com/content/books/principles_and_practice.pdf 
Labov. W. (1974). The art of sounding and signifying. In W. Gage (ed.), Language and its Social Setting 
(pp. 84–116). Washington, DC: Anthropological Society of Washington. 
Lantolf, J. P. (1997). The Function of language play in the acquisition of L2 Spanish. In W. R. Glass & A. 
T. Prez-Leroux (eds.), Contemporary perspectives on the acquisition of Spanish (3–24). Somerville, MA: 
Cascadilla Press. 
Lantolf, J. P. & Pavlenko, A. (2001). (S)econd (L)anguage (A)ctivity theory: Understanding second 
language learners as people. In M. Breen (ed.), Learner contributions to language learning: New 
directions in research (pp.141–158). London, UK: Longman. 
Lantolf, J. P. & Thorne, S. (2006). Sociocultural theory and the genesis of second language development. 
New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
Liang, M. (2012). Foreign lucidity in online role-playing games. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 
25(2), 455–473. 
Lomicka, L. & Lord, G. (2011). A tale of tweets: Analyzing microblogging among language learners. 
System, 40(1), 48–63. 
Long, Michael (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C. 
Ritchie & T. K. Bhatia (eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition, (pp.413–468.) San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press.  
Martinez, J. (2012, October 28). Twitter CEO Dick Costolo reveals staggering number of tweets per day. 
Complex Tech, Retrieved from http://www.complex.com/tech/2012/10/twitter-ceo-dick-costolo-reveals-
staggering-number-of tweets-per-day 
Nardi, B. A., Whittaker, S., & Bradner, E. (2000). Interaction and outeraction: Instant messaging in 
action. Proceedings of Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) (pp. 79–88). 
Philadelphia, PA: ACM. Retrieved from 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.31.7157&rep=rep1&type=pdf 
Newgarden, K. (2009, September). Twitter. TESL-EJ, 13(2). Retrieved from http://www.tesl-
ej.org/wordpress/past-issues/volume13/ej50/ej50m2/ 
Pavlenko, A., & Lantolf, J. P. (2000). Second language learning as participation and the (re)construction 
of selves. In J. P. Lantolf (ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 155–177). 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
David Hattem Microblogging 
 
Language Learning & Technology  174 
Perifanou, M. A. (2009). Language micro-gaming: Fun and informal microblogging activities for 
language learning. Communication in Computer and Information Science, 49(1), 1–14. DOI 10.1007/978-
3-642-04757-2_1 
Perrault, C. (2002). Little Red Riding Hood. In M. Hallett & B. Karasek (eds.), Folk and fairy tales 
3rd Edition. (pp. 6–8), Toronto, Canada: Broadview. 
Pomerantz, A., & Bell, N. (2007). Learning to play, playing to learn: FL learners as multicompetent 
language users. Applied Linguistics, 28(4), 556–578. 
Semiocast. (2012, July 30). Twitter reaches half a billion accounts more than 140 million in the U.S. 
Retrieved from 
http://semiocast.com/publications/2012_07_30_Twitter_reaches_half_a_billion_accounts_140m_in_the_
US 
Shah, D. (2010, August 26). [Web log message]. Retrieved from 
http://blog.hubspot.com/blog/tabid/6307/bid/6505/The-March-of-Twitter-Analysis-of-How-and-Where-
Twitter-Spread.aspx 
Stefanone, M. & Gay, G. (2008). Structural reproduction of social networks in computer-mediated 
communication forums. Behavior& Information Technology, 27(2), 97–106. 
Swain, M. and Lapkin, S. (1995). Problems in output and the cognitive processes they generate: A step 
towards second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 16, 371–391. 
Thorne, S. (2000). Beyond bounded activity systems: Heterogeneous cultures in instructional uses of 
persistent conversation. In S. Herring & T. Erickson (eds.), The Proceedings of the thirty-third Hawaii 
International Conference on Systems Science (pp. 1–11). New York, NY: IEEE. 
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38–67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/thorne/default.html 
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
Tsukayama, H. (2013, March 21). Twitter turns 7: Users send over 400 million tweets per day. The 
Washington Post. Retrieved from http://articles.washingtonpost.com/2013-03-
21/business/37889387_1_tweets-jack-dorsey-twitter 
Ullrich, C., Borau, K. & Stepanyan, K. (2010). "Who students interact with? A social network analysis 
perspective on the use of Twitter in language learning", In Proceedings of EC-TEL 2010. pp. 432–437. 
Springer-Verlag. 
van Lier, L. (2008). Agency in the classroom. In J. Lantolf & M. Poehner (eds.), Sociocultural theory and 
the teaching of second languages (pp. 163–186). London, UK: Equinox. 
Warner, C. (2004). It’s just a game, right? Types of play in foreign language CMC. Language Learning 
and Technology, 8(2), 69–87. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num2/warner/default.html 
Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
Williams, E. (2009, February). Evan Williams: The voices of Twitter users or listening to Twitter users 
[Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.ted.com/talks/evan_williams_on_listening_to_twitter_users.html 
