Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/action1.pdf 
February 2014, Volume 18, Number 1 
pp. 11–22 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 11 
CAN A WEB-BASED COURSE IMPROVE  
COMMUNICATIVE COMPETENCE OF FOREIGN-BORN NURSES? 
Eileen Van Schaik, Talaria, Inc. 
Emily M. Lynch, Talaria, Inc. 
Susan A. Stoner, Talaria, Inc. 
Lorna D. Sikorski, LDS & Associates 
Key words: Web-Based Instruction, Second Language Acquisition, Speaking, 
Pronunciation, Online Teaching & Learning, Culture, Language For Special 
Purposes 
APA Citation: Van Schaik, E., Lynch, E. M., Stoner, S. A., & Sikorski, L. D, (2014). Can 
a web-based course improve communicative competence of foreign-born nurses? 
Language Learning & Technology, 18(1), 11–22. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/action1.pdf 
Received: January 25, 2013; Accepted: May 18, 2013; Published: February 1, 2014 
Copyright: © Eileen Van Schaik, Emily M. Lynch, Susan A. Stoner, & Lorna D. Sikorski 
INTRODUCTION 
In the years since World War II, the United States has grown increasingly dependent on foreign-born 
healthcare personnel at all levels of the healthcare system.  Currently, 1.46 million immigrants account for 
15% of all healthcare providers in the United States. (Clearfield & Batalova, 2007). Current estimates 
indicate that 17% of the total U.S. nursing workforce are foreign-born, a dramatic increase from 1998 
when they were approximately 4.5% of the total (Brush, Sochalski, & Berger, 2004; Spry, 2009).  
Recruiting foreign-born nurses has been recommended as a solution to the U.S. shortage of nurses (Xu, 
2003; Gamble, 2002; Neal, 2002) and as a means of diversifying the nursing work force to meet the needs 
of an increasingly multicultural patient population (Abriam-Yago, Yoder, & Kataoka-Yahiro, 1999).  The 
American Nurses Association (ANA), however, questions the ethics of recruiting nurses for immigration 
to the United States. The ANA objects to the resulting “brain drains” in less wealthy nations as well as the 
failure to remedy the root causes of the nursing shortage in the United States (Trossman, 2002; Buchan & 
Aiken, 2008).  Nevertheless, shortages in the U.S. health-care labor force are not expected to disappear 
anytime soon (McMahon, 2004; Buerhaus, Auerbach, & Staiger, 2009; Ellenbecker, 2010) and reliance 
on immigrant professionals is likely to continue. 
Foreign-born professionals, whether educated in the United States or abroad, face tremendous challenges 
adjusting to differences in language, culture, and healthcare practices in the United States (Doutrich, 
2001; McMahon, 2004; Yi & Jezewski, 2000; Xu & Davidhizar, 2004).  Foreign-born nurses report that 
while they may feel clinically competent, they often feel unprepared for the use of English in the 
healthcare setting (Davis & Nichols, 2002; Guttman, 2004).  Immigrant health professionals experience 
communication difficulties with patients and coworkers that are easily exacerbated in a healthcare setting 
where situations can quickly become emotionally charged and stressful.  Their U.S.-born peers identify a 
number of difficulties in working with foreign-born nurses, including lack of communication skills and 
differences in decision making, behavioral norms, role expectations, and attitudes (Yi & Jezewski, 2000).  
Patients may express distress at being unable to understand physicians who are not native English 
speakers, and, whether their complaints reflect prejudices or not, they are undermining for the immigrant 
practitioner (McMahon, 2004).  
The Commission on Graduates of Foreign Nursing Schools (CGFNS) conducted focus groups with 
Eileen Van Schaik, Emily M. Lynch, Susan A. Stoner, & Lorna D. Sikorski Communicative Competence of Foreign-born Nurses 
 
Language Learning & Technology  12 
foreign-born nurses, identifying major challenges around language, culture, and the practice of nursing 
(Davis & Nichols, 2002).  These challenges point to the need for competencies in four aspects of 
language use: 1) intelligibility (phonology and syntactic patterns), 2) vocabulary, 3) conversation, and 4) 
context-dependent speech (discourse).  
Participants in CGFNS focus groups report feeling unprepared for using English in the healthcare setting.  
They had difficulty with colloquial expressions and abbreviated medical terms and found using the phone 
especially problematic.  Participants identified difficulties with medical and pharmacological terminology, 
the U.S. system of weights and measures, and the variety of medications U.S. patients take. Participants 
were too embarrassed to ask about procedures they did not understand.  Additionally, they felt that 
patients and coworkers perceived them as unskilled rather than as professionals.  Participants suggested 
that instruction would be helpful in basic communication techniques in the healthcare setting and in 
conversational English.  Nurses from more homogenous countries also reported that they were 
unaccustomed to the cultural diversity among U.S. patients.  They lacked knowledge of diverse dietary 
and religious needs and communication styles.  They also found aspects of U.S culture challenging, 
including exposure to substance abuse, unfamiliar sexual orientations, and religious customs.  
Maintaining a nonjudgmental stance was a challenge for them in many situations (Davis & Nichols, 
2002). 
Growing numbers of educators and employers are providing orientation courses for newly immigrated 
healthcare workers, incorporating content on American English and culture (McMahon, 2004; Guttman, 
2004; Xu et al, 2010).  It may, however, take years for foreign-born healthcare professionals to feel fully 
comfortable with American English, culture, and healthcare (Yi & Jezewski, 2000) and “the initial 
measures must be continued and reinforced to ensure that cultural and linguistic competence are 
consistently implemented in the healthcare setting” (Guttman, 2004, p. 265). 
The communicative approach has been dominant in the field of second language instruction in the U.S. 
and abroad since the 1970s (Nunan, 1991; Hiep, 2007).  This approach emphasizes the importance of 
meaningful dialogue and frequent interaction for second language acquisition in the belief that the 
individual will become fluent in English if provided with sufficient meaningful communication 
opportunities.  While the communicative approach encourages conversations in naturalistic settings, it 
does not provide a framework for the improvement of pronunciation and grammar, nor does the 
communicative approach promote the mastery of specific vocabulary sets (Levis, 2005; Sikorski, 2005a).  
Many foreign-born adults who have learned English using the communicative approach acknowledge 
gaps in their grasp of English and further indicate that these gaps frequently put them at a disadvantage in 
the workplace (Sikorski, 2005a).  Specifically, these adults experience difficulties with speech 
intelligibility, or the amount of information a listener can obtain from a spoken message. Derwing & 
Munro argue that mutual intelligibility is the “paramount concern” for second language learners who must 
be understood in a context where native speakers are the majority and when they wish to integrate 
socially in the native culture (2005, p. 380). 
To address the need of foreign-born nurses for continued language and cultural support, we developed 
and evaluated the first phase of a multimedia, Internet-based educational tool, the Intercultural 
Communication Workshop (ICW), designed to improve the overall communicative competence of 
foreign-born nurses.  The ICW is not designed to “erase” accents.  Rather, it expands the user’s 
knowledge of intonation (appropriate stress and pitch) and phonological rules specific to American 
English, enhancing their oral communication skills and improving listener understanding (Sikorski, 
2005a; Derwing & Munro, 2005).  Participants in the ICW learn a three-fold set of rules for improving 
their speech intelligibility: consonant clarity, vowel accuracy, and appropriate intonation (Sikorski, 
2005a).  Instruction in the ICW is tailored to the healthcare workplace whenever possible and includes 
contextual information about communication, culture, and healthcare in the United States, thereby 
avoiding the “one size fits all” approach to second language instruction rejected by Derwing & Munro 
Eileen Van Schaik, Emily M. Lynch, Susan A. Stoner, & Lorna D. Sikorski Communicative Competence of Foreign-born Nurses 
 
Language Learning & Technology  13 
(2005). 
The Intercultural Communication Workshop is designed as a supplement to formal in-person instruction 
and orientation programs.  When such programs are lacking, this e-learning course can stand alone as 
self-paced instruction.  While some may argue that the ICW cannot take the place of face-to-face 
interactions in a well-designed and executed ESL course, the e-learning environment offers several 
advantages: it is self-paced, private (thus less threatening), and provides continuous opportunities for 
practice and reinforcement. 
RESEARCH METHODS 
The Course  
The first version of the ICW is a web-based course that integrates instruction in speech intelligibility with 
contextual information on communication and culture in U.S. healthcare, along with instruction on 
common idioms and figures of speech relevant in the healthcare setting.  Instruction in the ICW is 
centered on multimedia recording exercises that encourage learners to apply "insider information" about 
the phonological and prosodic rules that govern American English pronunciation and intonation.  This 
distinctive approach enables users to progress quickly by making patterned changes to their speech.  
Whenever feasible, exercises are built on words and phrases that are likely to occur in conversations 
nurses have with patients and their families and with other members of the healthcare team. 
The core instruction in speech intelligibility was adapted from an established curriculum (Sikorski, 2004) 
in collaboration with the author.  Lessons in the ICW are grouped into three chapters—intonation, vowels, 
and consonants—corresponding to the most important components of speech intelligibility.  The 
intonation chapter explains that English requires stress timing (at odds with the syllable-timing rules of 
many FBNs’ native languages).  The focus is on typical intonation patterns at the word, phrase, and 
sentence level and the unique ways that intonation patterns change meaning.  The vowels chapter teaches 
the vowel inventory of American English, where and how to make these sounds, and common changes in 
vowel sounds based on word stress.  The final chapter on consonants teaches the consonant inventory of 
American English, how and where to make these sounds, and common changes to consonant sounds that 
must occur in conversational English.  Additional examples of speech intelligibility topics included in 
ICW are provided in Table 1. 
Table 1. Examples of Topics Included in ICW Speech Intelligibility Lessons 
Intonation Vowels Consonants 
Pitch 
Typical patterns for words   and 
phrases 
Special patterns for words and 
phrases 
Stress 
Word reductions 
Inflection 
Falling inflection 
Statements 
WH-questions 
Front vowels 
Similar sounds (minimal pairs, 
e.g. “cot” v. “cat”) 
Vowel length 
Vowel reductions in unstressed 
syllables 
Vowel additions 
Linking 
/t/ variations (such as the /t/ 
sound in “butter”) 
Initial aspiration 
/p/ v. /b/ and /k/ v. /g/ (e.g. 
minimal pairs “pin” v. “bin”) 
Unreleased stops 
Linking 
Consonant voicing 
Endings with “–s” and “–ed”  
Consonant reductions 
Throughout the course, users also view hundreds of tips about American English communication, 
language practice strategies, and idiomatic healthcare expressions.  “Tip” boxes are inset on most pages in 
Eileen Van Schaik, Emily M. Lynch, Susan A. Stoner, & Lorna D. Sikorski Communicative Competence of Foreign-born Nurses 
 
Language Learning & Technology  14 
the course and allow users to read succinct information with examples on the social and cultural context 
of healthcare in the United States.  Examples of the types of tips included in ICW are provided in Table 2. 
Table 2. Examples of “Tips” for Speaking and Practicing Provided in ICW 
Healthcare  “Medical talk is a new language, too / Medical terminology is a new language 
for everyone.  Your patients may not know the meanings of many medical words 
that you use every day!” 
Everyday Talk 
(idioms) 
 “‘A frog in one’s throat’ / Meaning: Hoarseness or phlegm in the throat; unable 
to speak clearly until you give a slight cough. / ‘Ahem, excuse me, I seem to 
have had a frog in my throat!’” 
Mr. Formal vs. 
Informal Guy 
“Offering Help / Formal & Polite: How may I help you? / Informal: What do you 
need?” 
U.S. English “Are you bored? / If you don't use a significant pitch rise, listeners may think 
you are bored or want to get away!” 
Mirror “You may want to use a mirror as you practice the contrasts in this section.” 
Providing immediate, tailored feedback to learners is one of the most significant challenges in the web 
environment.  To meet the need for feedback, we designed the “listen-record-compare object” (hereafter 
LRC), which allows users to listen to a model speaker, record their own speech, and then compare their 
recorded utterances to the model.  The ICW presents learners with 86 LRC lessons (with 10 to 20 target 
utterances each) for a total of 1,932 opportunities to compare their speech with a native speaker. The 
usefulness of the LRC is limited for those users who cannot distinguish between their utterances and the 
model’s; however, it is expected to aid intonation and pronunciation of U.S. vowels and consonants for 
the majority of learners.  
Research Design 
We evaluated the feasibility and usability of the ICW and used a single-group, pre- post-test design to 
conduct a preliminary evaluation of usefulness of the ICW in improving speech intelligibility.  All 
procedures were reviewed by the Western Institutional Review Board, in accordance with requirements 
for the protection of human subjects in all research funded by the National Institutes of Health.  
Participants received an incentive of $125 for participation in the study. 
Measures 
The following screening and testing measures were completed online by all study participants: 
• Demographic Questionnaire: includes questions about participants’ age, gender, education, 
native language, and employment, as well as questions about their use of American English. 
• Test of English Proficiency Level - Online (TEPL-Online): a placement tool challenging the full 
range of American English language skills—listening comprehension, oral expression, reading 
of correct structures, reading comprehension, and writing—that is scored on a 7-level scale (A 
= Survival English – G = Advanced English) with results shown for each skill area.  Field tests 
with adult students have shown it to be an appropriate placement and proficiency instrument.  
The TEPL-Online was administered at baseline (Rathmell & Sikorski, 2006). 
• Knowledge Test: a test consisting of 30 items, 15 true/false and 15 multiple choice questions 
based on information presented in the course (e.g., “Your best clues for how to pronounce 
words comes from American English spelling.”; “The word ‘comfortable’ is typically 
Eileen Van Schaik, Emily M. Lynch, Susan A. Stoner, & Lorna D. Sikorski Communicative Competence of Foreign-born Nurses 
 
Language Learning & Technology  15 
pronounced as a three-syllable word.”; “Saying the words below aloud, which word contains 
the /ae/ vowel: a) Last b) Calm c) Mammogram”). 
• Proficiency in Oral English Communication Screen (POEC-S): a two-part screen of auditory 
discrimination and verbal production of key vowel, consonant, and intonation variations unique 
to American English (Sikorski, 2005b).  POEC-S scores have been strongly correlated to 
perceptual ratings made by Speech Language Pathologists (SLPs) and SLP graduate students on 
accent, articulation, intonation, naturalness, and intelligibility (Morton, Brundage, & Hancock, 
2010). 
• Satisfaction and Usability Questionnaire: a 22-item questionnaire using a 5-point Likert scale 
on which participants rated their agreement. 
Active, unencumbered participation in an online training program demands good visual language skills.  
For this pilot study, we used the written (nonverbal) portions of the TEPL-Online to determine examinees' 
ability to actively participate in an online language learning program.  The two written portions of the 
TEPL-Online, "reading of correct structures" and "reading comprehension," are multiple choice and can 
be scored automatically in the web environment.  All components of the current POEC-S were adapted to 
the web environment.  Cuing and prompts were adapted for the multimedia environment, but no changes 
in content were necessary.  The Demographic Questionnaire and Knowledge Test were created 
specifically for this project.  The Satisfaction and Usability Questionnaire was adapted from the System 
Usability Scale (SUS) (Brooke, 1996) with items tailored for the ICW. 
Participants 
The participants were 22 foreign-born nurses and nursing students recruited from nine institutions, 
including schools of nursing, nursing associations, and websites for nurses via fliers (hard copies and 
online) and e-mail announcements distributed by directors and staff at the sites.  All individuals who 
expressed interest in the study were eligible for participation.  Twenty-two participants enrolled in the 
study and received practice tools (described below).  Due to time constraints, 3 individuals did not 
continue with the course, leaving 19 participants who were invited to complete follow-up measures. 
Procedures 
The entire study took place online.  Participants completed all screening measures and the written 
components of the baseline measures.  Participants were then sent a mirror and a headset with a 
microphone for use in the study, along with a letter instructing them how to return to the website.  Upon 
receiving their practice tools, participants logged in and completed the auditory components of the 
baseline measures.  Auditory discrimination sections were automatically scored by the software, and 
scores were included in the participant database for later analysis.  Participants’ verbal answers were 
recorded and stored on a secure server for scoring by trained POEC-S coders.  When the baseline 
measures were complete, participants were mailed a payment of $50. 
Participants were given 3 months to complete 8 hours of practice time in the online course.  They were 
asked to practice a minimum of three times a week for 15-20 minutes and no more than 20 minutes at a 
time for a total time of 1 hour per week (for a minimum of 8 weeks).  During the study period, study 
personnel contacted participants by telephone and/or emails, according to the participant’s preference, at 
least every 3 weeks.  These “check-ins” were intended to provide support to participants and to learn 
about their experiences in the course.  The “check-ins” also provided an opportunity to answer 
participants’ questions and solve any technical difficulties. 
After 8 weeks, participants completed the follow-up measures.  When these were completed, the study 
research assistant conducted an exit interview by telephone or e-mail, depending on the participant’s 
Eileen Van Schaik, Emily M. Lynch, Susan A. Stoner, & Lorna D. Sikorski Communicative Competence of Foreign-born Nurses 
 
Language Learning & Technology  16 
preference, to allow participants to discuss their experience using the course.  The research assistant had a 
BA in anthropology and was familiar with collecting and analyzing qualitative data.  The interview guide 
included 13 open-ended questions about the participants’ experience in the course and covered topics 
such as what they found most useful and anything they would like to see added.  Participants were then 
mailed a payment of $75 for a total of $125 for their participation in the study.  Notes taken during phone 
interviews and the content of e-mail responses were analyzed for similarities and differences in content. 
FINDINGS 
Participants 
All participants (N = 19) were women, ranging in age from 22 to 67 years (M = 39.2, SD = 12.3).  
Additional participant characteristics are summarized in Table 3, including education, native languages, 
current employment, the reported percentage of time spent in English-only communication.  More than 
one-third (39%) of participants reported previous training in language/grammar improvement and one-
third (33%) reported cross-cultural training. 
Table 3. Characteristics of Study Participants 
Native Language Degrees Held* Employment Position English-Only 
Communication (% of day) 
Tagalog / Ilocano 6 BSN 7 Staff Nurse 7 <20% 1 
Chinese 3 RN 7 Student 7 20%-40% 6 
Thai 2 MSN 5 Project Director 2 40%-80% 4 
Russian 2 CNA 1 Research Technician 1 80%-100% 5 
Danish 1 LPN 1 Research Assistant 1  
Korean 1 Other 2     
[None reported] 4       
Note.*Some participants held multiple degrees. 
Table 4. TEPL-ONLINE Scores 
TEPL Scores Structure Subscale Reading Comprehension Subscale 
G 6 7 
F 7 6 
E 2 2 
D 1 1 
Missing 3 3 
As anticipated, participating nurses scored in the mid to upper ranges of the TEPL-Online placement tool 
(Table 4). The TEPL-Online is scored on a 7-level scale (A = Survival English – G = Advanced English) 
with results shown for each skill area.  Scores for the TEPL-Online correspond to the seven-level system 
used to place ESL students in classes according to their English proficiency.  Upon review of the TEPL-
Online’s Seven Instructional Level Scoring system, the authors chose Level E (Intermediate) as the 
Participant Placement minimum.  This placement level matches the Readability Index (vocabulary 
Eileen Van Schaik, Emily M. Lynch, Susan A. Stoner, & Lorna D. Sikorski Communicative Competence of Foreign-born Nurses 
 
Language Learning & Technology  17 
sophistication, sentence structure, etc.) of the course content.  Additionally, the authors felt that 
intermediate English skills would minimally impact participants’ speed and comprehension of the 
information presented, allowing them to move through the course at an appropriate pace. 
Participants reported communication challenges in the following five areas: difficulties with 
dictation/reporting (n=6), problems understanding clinical lectures (n=5), problems communicating with 
patients and family members (n=4), difficulties with rapport building (n=3), and problems communicating 
with colleagues (n=3).  Nearly three-quarters (71%) of the participants indicated that they had been in 
clinical situations where their English language affected patient care, and 58% felt that they had been 
perceived or treated differently by patients, colleagues, family members, or others because of 
language/accent or cultural differences. 
Main Analyses Quantitative Data 
Outcome Results: The Knowledge Test and the POEC-S were administered before and after completion 
of the online workshop. Paired t-tests were conducted to evaluate within-subject effects of the course.   
As shown in Table 5, participants made significant gains from pretest to posttest in several domains. The 
largest effect (d = 1.27) was observed for the Knowledge Test, suggesting that users were learning the 
rules which govern American English.  Participants also showed significant gains on all subscales of the 
POEC-S Verbal Performance Test with a medium-to-high effect size for the overall verbal performance 
scale score (d = 0.66).  These gains are particularly remarkable given the relatively short duration of the 
course. No significant gains were observed for the POEC-S Auditory Discrimination Performance Test. 
Table 5. Means, Paired t-tests, and Effect Sizes for the Pre-Post Study Measures 
  Pretest Posttest        
 Mean SD Mean SD t df p d            
Knowledge Test 16.2 3.2 20.4 3.5 -5.33 14 <.001 1.27 
Proficiency in Oral English  112.1 36.5 121.9 39.9 -1.64 18 .118 0.26 
    Communication Screen Total  
Auditory Discrimination 24.1 2.7 23.6 2.6 0.80 17 .433 -0.19 
    Performance Test Total 
Single Word Discrimination 5.7 0.7 5.4 0.9 0.72 17 .481 -0.29 
Word Discrimination within Sentences* 6.6 1.0 6.5 1.0 -- -- -- -0.08 
Sentence Completion Discrimination 7.6 1.8 7.6 1.6 0.14 17 .889 -0.01 
Word Stress Discrimination 4.2 0.9 4.1 0.7 0.90 17 .381 -0.20 
Verbal Performance Test Total 98.3 18.7 111.3 20.5 -4.77 15 <.001 0.66 
Vowel Survey 49.9 13.8 56.9 8.9 -2.53 15 .023 0.60 
Intonation Survey 13.7 2.4 15.1 3.0 -2.35 13 .035 0.52 
Articulation Variations Survey Total 36.3 7.2 41.1 8.6 -4.13 15 .001 0.60 
Note. *All variables were normally distributed, with the exception of Word Discrimination within Sentences, which was skewed 
and kurtotic. Pre and post scores on this measure were compared using a Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test, which was not significant. 
User Experience  
Usage Data: Participants varied in their use of the ICW.  Most logged into the course every 2 to 5 days for 
approximately 20 minutes to 1 hour while others participated every 1 to 2 weeks for 1- to 3-hour sessions.  
Eileen Van Schaik, Emily M. Lynch, Susan A. Stoner, & Lorna D. Sikorski Communicative Competence of Foreign-born Nurses 
 
Language Learning & Technology  18 
Some used the course twice in a single day in short, 15- to 30-minute intervals.  The majority of users 
proceeded linearly through the course, although several returned to previously finished sections for 
additional practice.  One user repeated the course in its entirety. 
Exit Interviews:  Participants (N = 10; 3 by email and 7 by phone) reported generally positive experiences 
with the course, and several noted that they had already recommended the course to their friends and/or 
colleagues.  The majority of respondents found the ability to play back their own recorded voice for 
comparison with a model speaker a helpful tool.  While one participant had difficulty using the LRC, 
seven found it instructive and said that it provided a unique opportunity to hear specific features of their 
own speech that needed improvement.  Typically, these participants found that it was helpful, “Being able 
to hear yourself right away.  You know, being able to hear your voice recorded and compared.” 
Ten participants emphasized the benefits of instruction in the mechanics of speech while nine commented 
on the usefulness of the cultural information.  They reported improvement in stressing syllables and 
sentence elements with some stating that they were able to correct the pronunciation of words that had 
long been stumbling blocks.  The following comments reflect the features participants found most useful: 
• “Everyday talk was the most helpful. Also how 'stress timing' is done.  How to stress certain 
syllables and words in sentences.”  
• “I really liked the part where, at the end of each page, you were shown how people talk in 
America.  Either how to pronounce things properly or what particular sayings mean.” 
• “This course in general was helpful to understand why some people don’t understand foreigners 
sometimes.  Although, I am pretty sure that mostly it’s their inability to listen.” 
• “When I learned how to pronounce things correctly in English (for example, not pronouncing 
every syllable like I would normally do), Filipino nurses saying you are speaking 'fake English'.  
Like you're trying too hard and it doesn't sound right.  But now I know it IS right!” 
Participants described two key benefits from the cultural information: 1) a better understanding of 
common American English idioms and 2) ways to speak in the most professional and inoffensive manner.  
Many acknowledged developing awareness of cultural norms in the United States that they were 
previously unaware of, and several noted that they were already using the tips’ practical advice for 
communicating in a more professional style in their workplaces and daily lives.  Other respondents stated 
that they would have liked more of this information, including a greater focus on terms specific to 
healthcare professionals.  
Participants were enthusiastic about the tip boxes, offering comments, such as the following:  
• “The cultural information was helpful.  I also liked the parts about informal/formal speaking.” 
• “I really liked these!  They were very helpful and showed me how to speak 'American.’  I could 
learn new sentences (sayings).” 
• “I liked learning about how words may have two meanings and what certain phrases mean.” 
• “I think these are very helpful.  There are things you don't understand unless you understand the 
culture around it.” 
• “I learned that saying I was assisting a ‘crippled’ patient can be offensive, so I would say 
‘disabled’.” 
Most participants found the quizzes and tests helpful and motivating, and used the feedback to identify 
areas where they needed more practice.  One participant offered the following recommendation, “Also, I 
found the quizzes very helpful.  I think you should have more quizzes.” 
Eileen Van Schaik, Emily M. Lynch, Susan A. Stoner, & Lorna D. Sikorski Communicative Competence of Foreign-born Nurses 
 
Language Learning & Technology  19 
Participants noted that it would be very useful for healthcare workers to complete the course before 
coming to the United States.  Several noted the absence of any similar educational programs in their 
countries of origin.  Many participants thought the course would also serve as a useful “refresher” for 
foreign-born healthcare workers who are currently in the United States.    
Asked what they would like to see added to the course, participants offered a number of recommendations 
such as these: 
• “It should be required because if it is optional, people won't do it.  Not because they are lazy 
but because they are so busy in school!” 
• “I think you should have more practice with consonants.  I am from Taiwan, not the Philippines, 
and we have more trouble with consonants like 'L'.” 
• “More practice on communication.  If you could add short stories about the habits and culture 
in America, I think we'd find that useful.”   
• “More video!  This is more helpful than the graphs and descriptions that show people how to 
speak.  I would rather see someone's tongue placement, jaw movement, etc. than have it 
described or just listen to it.”   
DISCUSSION 
Scores on the TEPL-Online screening measure confirmed that the study population had the written 
fluency needed to benefit from an Internet-based course. 
Changing an accent is a slow and difficult process (Corrigan, 2010), and we did not expect to see 
improvements on the POEC-S over the short duration of the study period.  As expected, participants’ 
scores on the POEC-S for auditory discrimination did not improve significantly but were relatively high 
at pretest.  On the other hand, participants’ scores on the POEC-S for verbal performance improved 
significantly, suggesting that the practice presented in this early version of the course was beneficial.  
Moreover, participants made significant gains on the Knowledge Test from pretest to posttest, suggesting 
that they were learning the rules that native speakers of American English employ unconsciously. 
There are several limitations to this study.  First, the study sample was small and lacked a control group.  
Second, 8 hours of practice time over a 3-month period is not sufficient for most speakers to show major 
improvement.  Third, users received telephone calls or emails to support their participation in the course, 
a procedure that will not always be possible outside a research environment.  Fourth, as mentioned earlier 
in this paper, there may be some would not find computer-based practice an acceptable substitute for in-
person instruction.  Additionally, the LRC exercises will not be helpful for participants who do not hear 
the difference between their own recordings and the model speaker’s.  However, in the exit interviews, 
participants frequently reported that the comparison with a model speaker was most helpful for 
identifying areas for improving their own speech intelligibility. 
In the next phase of development, we will add several features to support users, including a personalized 
homepage where they will set personal goals and view an automated record of their progress in the course.  
Content will be presented in small units suited to 20 minutes of practice in one sitting, and the personal 
progress report will encourage daily practice.  We will also incorporate social network support, including 
automatically generated emails offering tips and encouragement and a discussion forum where learners 
can share their experiences with other foreign-born nurses.  We will evaluate the effectiveness of the 
complete ICW in a two-group randomized controlled trial in which participants have access to the course 
for 6 months.  We will attempt to recruit nurses who are preparing to emigrate while they are still in their 
native countries as well as newly arrived and recently employed nurses in the United States. 
When complete, the ICW will address several of the challenges presented in developing web-based 
Eileen Van Schaik, Emily M. Lynch, Susan A. Stoner, & Lorna D. Sikorski Communicative Competence of Foreign-born Nurses 
 
Language Learning & Technology  20 
training for adult learners, particularly those working in healthcare.  Highly contextualized for nursing 
and other healthcare professionals, the course is immediately relevant and useful, two crucial criteria for 
adult learners. With automatic feedback, learners can readily see the areas where they need improvement 
and are reinforced for their effort and progress.  Learning strategies that generally work for adult learners, 
visual memorization or self-tutoring, won’t improve speech intelligibility.  A self-directed course with 
ample opportunities to practice speaking can be effective and should be worthwhile and engaging for 
busy adults. 
Healthcare professionals work under tremendous time constraints, making speech improvement classes at 
community colleges, for example, unattractive.  Speech trainers are often reluctant to offer courses at 
hospitals because absenteeism is such a chronic problem.  Yet the stakes are high for ineffective 
communication in the stressful healthcare environment.  Web-based training will appeal to healthcare 
professionals who are already savvy with computers and who appreciate the convenience and flexibility 
of working online at their own pace.  Furthermore, technology that makes it possible to record speech to a 
remote server and receive immediate feedback offers learners a dynamic practice environment free of 
embarrassment in front of colleagues or burden on patients. 
The ICW is a self-directed, rather than instructor-driven, course and is dependent on how self-directed 
users are.  It could be integrated into instructor-driven courses, either classroom or web-based, where it 
would provide opportunities for review and practice with guidance from an instructor who is not always 
present. Busy professionals could benefit from the structure and interaction provided in an instructor-
driven course and take advantage of the flexible practice time and the anonymity of a virtual community 
of learners in the ICW. 
CONCLUSION 
This early field test of the ICW demonstrated that it is feasible to deliver speech intelligibility training 
over the web.  While computer-based speech intelligibility instruction is no substitute for in-person, 
human feedback, an online course can provide a low-stakes environment for learners who wish to work 
on the “readability” of their speech at their own pace. 
In the next phase of development of the course, we intend to: 
• Expand the speech intelligibility content to meet the training needs of native speakers of the 
major language groups represented in the nursing work force; 
• Develop additional content on vocabulary, communication practices, and culture in the U.S. 
healthcare workplace, including interactive role play simulations; 
• Restructure the navigation to simplify the learning process for users and increase the length of 
time users spend in the course; and 
• Add social networking features to promote learners’ commitment and deepen their engagement 
by participating in a learning community. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Eileen Van Schaik is a Senior Research Scientist at Talaria, Inc. and a Clinical Assistant Professor, 
Biobehavioral Nursing and Health Systems at the University of Washington. She is a medical 
anthropologist and develops e-learning on culture and communication for healthcare professionals. 
Additional research interests include healthcare disparities and end-of-life care. 
 
Eileen Van Schaik, Emily M. Lynch, Susan A. Stoner, & Lorna D. Sikorski Communicative Competence of Foreign-born Nurses 
 
Language Learning & Technology  21 
Emily Lynch has degrees in linguistics, cultural anthropology and library and information science. She is 
a freelance writer and consultant as well as an on-call librarian for the Seattle Public Library. 
Susan Stoner is a clinical psychologist with expertise in research design and broad interests related to 
health psychology and healthcare provision. She holds current appointments as a Research Scientist at 
Talaria, Inc., and Affiliate Instructor in Anesthesiology & Pain Medicine at the University of Washington. 
Lorna Sikorski is a speech pathologist and founder of LDS & Associates, which conducts research, 
authors products and offers communication programs for adult English learners. She has authored 
products, published and presented on: intonation, accent assessment/instruction, communication/learning 
style. LDS Online Learning Center delivers professional education and client training. 
REFERENCES 
Abriam-Yago, K., Yoder, M., & Kataoka-Yahiro, M. (1999). The Cummins model: A framework for 
teaching nursing students for whom English is a second language. Journal of Transcultural Nursing, 10, 
143–149. 
Brooke, J. (1996). SUS: A quick and dirty usability scale. In Jordan, P.W., Thomas, B., Weerdmeester, B. 
A., & McClelland, A.L. (eds.) Usability evaluation in industry. London, UK: Taylor and Francis. 
Brush, B. L., Sochalski, J., & Berger, A. M. (2004). Imported care: Recruiting foreign nurses to U.S. 
health care facilities. Nurse Migration, 23, 78–87. 
Buchan, J., & Aiken, L. (2008). Solving nursing shortages: A common priority. Journal of Clinical 
Nursing, 17, 3362–3268. 
Buerhaus, P. I., Auerbach, D. I., & Staiger, D. O. (2009). The recent surge in nurse employment: Causes 
and implications. Health Affairs, 28(4), w657–w668. 
Clearfield, E., & Batalova, J. (2007, February 1). Foreign-born health-care workers in the United States. 
Migration Policy Institute. Retrieved from http://www.migrationpolicy.org/article/foreign-born-health-
care-workers-united-states-0/ 
Corrigan, P. (2010). What’s that you said? Sometimes it’s not the words, it’s the accent. Health Progress, 
91(4), 34–37. 
Davis, C. R., & Nichols, B. L. (2002). Foreign-educated nurses and the changing U.S. nursing workforce. 
Nursing Administration Quarterly, 26, 43–51. 
Derwing, T. M., & Munro, M. J. (2005). Second language accent and pronunciation teaching: A research-
based approach. TESOL Quarterly, 39(3), 379–397. 
Doutrich, D. (2001). Experiences of Japanese nurse scholars: Insights for U.S. faculty. Journal of Nursing 
Education, 40, 210–216. 
Ellenbecker, C. H. (2010). Preparing the nursing workforce of the future. Policy, Politics, & Nursing 
Practice, 11(2), 115–125.  
Gamble, D. (2002). Filipino nurse recruitment as a staffing strategy. Journal of Nursing Administration, 
32, 175–177. 
Guttman, M. S. (2004). Increasing the linguistic competence of the nurse with limited English proficiency. 
The Journal of Continuing Education in Nursing, 35, 265–269. 
Hiep, P. H. (2007). Communicative language teaching: unity within diversity. ELT Journal, 61(3), 193–
201. 
Levis, J. M. (2005). Changing contexts and shifting paradigms in pronunciation teaching. TESOL 
Eileen Van Schaik, Emily M. Lynch, Susan A. Stoner, & Lorna D. Sikorski Communicative Competence of Foreign-born Nurses 
 
Language Learning & Technology  22 
Quarterly, 39(3), 369–378. 
McMahon, G. T. (2004). Coming to America: International medical graduates in the United States. New 
England Journal of Medicine, 350, 2435–2437. 
Morton, E. S., Brundage, S. B., & Hancock, A. B. (2010). Validity of the proficiency in oral English 
communication screening. Contemporary Issues in Communication Science and Disorders, 37, 153–166. 
Neal, S. L. (2002). Hiring foreign nurses in the U.S.A. International Journal of Nursing Practice, 8, 173–
174.   
Nunan, D. (1991). Communicative tasks and the language curriculum. TESOL Quarterly, 25(2), 279–295. 
Spry, C. (2009). Between two cultures: Foreign nurses in the United States. Global Perspectives, 89, 593–
595. 
Rathmell, G. & Sikorski, L.D. (2006). Test of English Proficiency Level (TEPL) (Electronic ed.). Santa 
Ana: LDS & Associates, LLC. 
Sikorski, L.D. (2004). Mastering effective English communication CD series (5th Ed.). Santa Ana: LDS & 
Associates. 
Sikorski, L.D. (2005a). Foreign accents: Suggested competencies for improving communicative 
pronunciation. Seminars in Speech and Language, 26, 126–131. 
Sikorski, L.D. (2005b). POEC Screen, Electronic Edition (Proficiency in Oral English Communication – 
Screen) (3rd ed.). Santa Ana: LDS & Associates, LLC. 
Trossman, S. (2002). The global reach of the nursing shortage: The ANA questions the ethics of luring 
foreign-educated nurses to the United States. American Journal of Nursing, 102, 85–87. 
Xu, Y. (2003). Are Chinese nurses a viable source to relieve the U.S. nurse shortage? Nursing Economics, 
21, 269–274. 
Xu, Y., Bolstad, A. L., Shen, J., Colosimo, R., Covelli, M., Torpey, M., & Jorgenson, M. (2010). Speak 
for success: A pilot intervention study on communication competence of post-hire international nurses. 
Journal of Nursing Regulation, 1(2), 42–48. 
Xu, Y., & Davidhizar, R. (2004). Conflict management styles of Asian and Asian American nurses—
implications for the nurse manager. The Health Care Manager, 23, 4653. 
Yi, M., & Jezewski, Y. M. (2000). Korean nurses' adjustments to hospitals in the United States of 
America. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 32, 721729. 
 
