Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/jung.pdf 
October 2014, Volume 18, Number 3 
pp. 97–119 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 97 
UBIQUITOUS LEARNING: DETERMINANTS IMPACTING LEARNERS’ 
SATISFACTION AND PERFORMANCE WITH SMARTPHONES 
Hee-Jung Jung, Chosun University 
Although the concept of ubiquitous technologies has been introduced to many parts of 
society, there have been limited applications, and little is known about learners’ behavior 
toward ubiquitous technologies, particularly in the context of English learning. This study 
considers a sample of Korean students to identify the key factors that influence English-
language learners’ (ELLs’) satisfaction with ubiquitous learning (u-learning). The 
proposed model incorporates ubiquitous characteristics (omnipresence, context 
customization, interactivity, self-directed learning, and perceived enjoyment) as well as 
learner characteristics (innovation, learning motivation, and computer self-efficacy) and 
their impact on ELLs’ satisfaction.  In addition, the study assesses the effects of 
satisfaction on expectation in the context of English learning and employs structural 
equation modelling (SEM) to test the hypotheses. The results were based on a sample of 
376 students using u-learning to study English and indicate that all the variables for 
ubiquitous characteristics and two variables for learner characteristics (innovation and 
computer self-efficacy) had significant effects on satisfaction with u-learning and that this 
satisfaction had a positive effect on expectation.  
Keywords: Online Teaching & Learning, Computer-Assisted Language Learning, 
Learners' Attitudes 
APA Citation: Jung, H.-J. (2014). Ubiquitous Learning: Determinants Impacting 
Learners’ Satisfaction and Performance with Smartphones. Language Learning & 
Technology, 18(3), 97–119. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/jung.pdf 
Received: January 1, 2013; Accepted: October 3, 2013; Published: October 1, 2014 
Copyright: © Hee-Jung Jung 
INTRODUCTION 
Rapid advances in information and communication technology (ICT) and various applications have led to 
the development of digitalized user environments for learning. In addition, there has been an increase in 
the demand for both traditional and alternative learning systems as well as lifelong education because of 
the establishment of a knowledge- and information-based society. This situation is also reflected in the 
fields of general education, which has induced many individuals to search for new learning environments 
and content, including ubiquitous learning (u-learning). In particular, educational environments have 
shifted from traditional teacher-oriented learning to individual self-directed learning, reflecting the 
constructivism paradigm, which requires new learning methods such as u-learning (Song, Kim & Jung, 
2009). In addition, the low cost of mobile internet services based on wireless broadband (WiBro) and 
high-speed downlink packet access (HSDPA) has led to their wide commercialization and access to meet 
the demand from every part of society. 
Based on this phenomenon, the convergence of electronic learning (e-learning), mobile learning (m-
learning), mobile devices, and wireless technologies has made u-learning possible for learners anytime, 
anywhere. One big difference between m-learning and u-learning is that u-learning provides the right 
learning materials according to learners’ situation by getting information from learning contexts. U-
learning makes use of mobile technologies such as smartphones (e.g., Galaxy, iPhone, and Blackberry) to 
provide learners with self-directed learning opportunities without imposing time and location constraints 
(Joiner, Nethercott, Hull & Reid, 2006). In fact, u-learning facilitates innovation by incorporating unique 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 98 
characteristics such as ubiquity, self-directed learning, mobility, interactivity, personalization (context 
customization), accessibility, and portability into web-based learning environments (Shotsberger & 
Vetter, 2000). 
In addition, with the globalization of many parts of society, including commerce and education, English 
has become the most popular and important language in many non-English-speaking countries. Therefore, 
many studies have attempted to develop effective teaching methods for English education, including e-
learning, blended learning, and m-learning. Collins (2005) claimed that using appropriate learning 
strategies and developing effective learning activities that support English learning play a crucial role in 
computer-assisted language learning (CALL), and therefore many studies have focused on e-learning or 
web-based learning (e.g., Lee & Lee, 2008). In fact, previous studies of e-learning have highlighted the 
rapid development of wireless and ubiquitous technologies such as smartphones and sensor technologies, 
and therefore the research topic has recently shifted from e-learning to m-learning and then to u-learning 
(Chen, Chang, & Wang, 2008).  
However, few CALL studies have investigated learners’ attitudes and behaviors in innovative learning 
environments. That is, previous studies of u-learning have focused mainly on descriptive aspects or 
applications of u-learning in various learning contexts (e.g., Liu & Chu, 2010). In this regard, the present 
study is motivated by the following three important trends in the English-learning environment:  
• The rapid development and adaptation of ubiquitous technologies in the English-learning 
environment 
• A lack of empirical research considering ELLs' u-learning behavior in terms of their satisfaction 
and expectation 
• The existence of group differences based on the level of educational in explanation of ELL’s u-
learning behaviors 
Given this gap in the CALL literature, this study provides a better understanding of ELLs’ u-learning 
behavior in terms of satisfaction and expectation. Therefore, the main objective of the study is to propose 
and empirically test a research model that incorporates ubiquitous characteristics as well as learner 
characteristics to explain ELLs’ satisfaction and expectation in the context of u-learning. In this study, 
ubiquitous characteristics include omnipresence, context customization, interactivity, self-directed 
learning, and perceived enjoyment. Learner characteristics include innovation, learning, and computer 
self-efficacy. In addition, the study investigates the level of education as a moderator to examine group 
differences across three levels of education (elementary school, junior/high school, and university 
degrees) for each path in the proposed model. Based on previous research, these constructs are expected 
to have positive effects on ELLs’ satisfaction and thus their expectation of language learning. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
Ubiquitous learning 
U-learning is a new learning paradigm that makes learning possible anytime, anywhere for various 
educational materials. Yahya, Ahmad, and Jalil (2010) claimed that u-learning is an extension of previous 
learning paradigms because learners are shifting from traditional learning to e-learning and then to m-
learning, followed by u-learning. However, rapid changes in the learning environment can make it 
difficult to define u-learning (Hwang, Yang, Tsai & Yang, 2009). In this regard, scholars have defined u-
learning in diverse ways. For example, Ogata and Yano (2004) defined u-learning by comparing four 
learning environments (desktop-assisted learning, m-learning, pervasive learning, and u-learning) and 
classified pervasive learning and m-learning as u-learning. Casey (2005) provided support for this 
definition by claiming that u-learning combines e-learning and m-learning. In addition, Yang, Kuo, 
Hwang, and Chu (2008) noted that u-learning is widely defined as learning based on u-computing 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 99 
technologies such as Radio Frequency Idntification (RFID) and Wi-Fi-enabled smartphones.  
Based on these definitions, this study defines u-learning as a new learning paradigm that provides 
learning resources (networks) with communication and connectivity anytime, anywhere based on the 
learner’s situation using smart devices such as a smartphone, tablet PC, and smart PC. Figure 1 provides a 
conceptual understanding of u-learning in the cases of two devices: RFID and Wi-Fi-enabled 
smartphones. U-learning systems generally consist of three components. First, the learning management 
system (LMS) is a comprehensive and secure web-based learning system employing a simple built-in 
interface for learners. The LMS is a software application for the administration, documentation, tracking, 
and reporting of learning programs, classroom events, u-learning programs, and training content and is 
connected to a database of learning content. Here learners using either RFID or Wi-Fi-enabled 
smartphones can access the LMS via wireless networks to conduct a wide range of learning activities such 
as sharing learning materials with others and communicating with other learners and instructors.  
 
Figure 1. Concept of u-learning 
Previous research on u-learning 
Because u-learning for language learning is a relatively recent trend, few studies have explained various 
aspects of this concept. In addition, various educational settings require the performance and examination 
of u-learning in different contexts such as ubiquitous pedagogy, classroom-centered u-learning modes, 
faculty education for u-learning implementation, development standards for u-learning resources, and the 
development of u-learning management systems (Liu, Li & Carlsson, 2010).  
Previous studies have emphasized the role of information technology (IT), particularly computers and the 
Internet, in language learning. Based on CALL, the roles of computers can be classified into three models 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 100 
(Koschmann, 1996): the tutor, tutee, and tool models. The tutor model provides an algorithm designating 
learners’ learning paths in advance and plays a role as a controller of learners. In the tutee model, learners 
participate in technology-enabled simulations to interact with learning programs. Finally, in the tool 
model, technologies play a role as a mediator of the relationship between learners and learning materials 
but control neither. When learners become IT-savvy, they are able to use u-learning not only to play these 
three roles but also to enjoy other CALL characteristics, including the self-directed learning environment 
on a real-time basis. Harrison (1999) claimed that innovative technologies play a key role in making self-
directed language learning in CALL possible. 
Many studies of English learning under the u-learning environment have provided experimental analyses 
or case studies or both. For example, Myers (2000) claimed that mobile devices capable of reorganizing 
voice data and portable translation programs are useful English-learning tools for Chinese students and 
suggested that technology mobility has a positive effect on their satisfaction and thus performance. 
Several descriptive studies have examined the effectiveness of mobile phones. For example, Kiernan and 
Aizawa (2004) evaluated the usefulness of mobile phones (a representative mobile device) as well as the 
advantages and disadvantages of using them for English learning. Similarly, Stanford Learning Lab (SLL) 
examined the effectiveness of voice and e-mail communication through mobile phones for Spanish 
learning and found that they can facilitate language learning because they represent an effective tool for 
delivering quizzes and other learning materials.  
Thornton and Houser (2005) claimed that m-learning and u-learning can be distinguished by their unique 
characteristics in terms of the learning environment, including omnipresence, mobility, interactivity, 
personalization, and self-directed learning, as well as by learner characteristics such as innovation, 
motivation, and self-efficacy. Such characteristics can facilitate learning, particularly language learning.  
In this study, instructors regularly sent English vocabularies to Japanese students through mobile devices 
such as their phones for English learning. The results indicated that mobile devices are more effective for 
English vocabulary learning than other methods such as e-learning. Furthermore, m-learning can provide 
learners with more learning opportunities than other learning methods and stimulate enjoyment, thereby 
facilitating English learning. 
Recent studies have focused on the technological development of u-learning, particularly context-aware 
ubiquitous learning, by using experimental methods (e.g., Chiou, Tseng, Hwang & Heller, 2010; Chu, 
Hwang & Tsai, 2010; Hwang, Kuo, Yin & Chuang, 2010). Chiou et al. (2010) formulated a navigation 
support problem to find learning paths for individual learners for context-aware ubiquitous learning and 
proposed two navigation support algorithms by considering learning and navigation efficiency, 
suggesting that the proposed algorithms can better facilitate learners’ effective and efficient use of 
learning resources and realization of learning efficacy than other methods.  
Similarly, Chu et al. (2010) developed computer-based tools and learning environments that can serve as 
an extension of the mind and referred to them as “mindtools” for context-aware u-learning as a 
knowledge engineering approach. They demonstrated that this approach can increase learning motivation 
and enhance students’ learning achievement. Liu and Chu (2010) investigated the effects of ubiquitous 
games on English learning and motivation by considering the Handheld English Language Learning 
Organization (HELLO), a context-aware u-learning environment for learners to engage in ubiquitous 
games in an English-learning environment and found that integrating ubiquitous games into English-
listening and speaking courses can better improve learning outcomes and motivation than a non-gaming 
approach.  
However, previous studies of u-learning have been limited particularly in terms of explaining learners’ 
behaviors. For example, most studies of u-learning have focused on developing and experimentally 
testing new learning approaches in designed learning environments. That is, these studies have generally 
focused on the u-learning technology itself instead of understanding learners’ u-learning behavior. In 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 101 
addition, few studies have considered u-learning in the context of English learning. In this regard, the 
present study examines u-learning users’ attitudes and behaviors in the context of English learning.    
Satisfaction and expectation 
User satisfaction and expectation are considered to be desirable outcomes of various technologies and 
services because they are the most important criteria for assessing information systems (IS) success. In 
this regard, previous studies have examined these factors in various educational settings, including e-
learning and m-learning (e.g., Ramayah & Lee, 2012; Sun, Tsai, Finger, Chen & Yeh, 2008), as key 
outcomes of technology use. In addition, previous studies of IT/IS adoption and success in various 
contexts have found that user satisfaction and performance (or expectation) are key determinants of 
product or service quality (Oliver, 1993) as well as users’ behaviors (Fullerton & Talyor, 2002). Bailey 
and Pearson (1983) claimed that if users are highly satisfied with particular technologies such as 
computers and the Internet, then they are likely to show better task/job performance. In this regard, 
DeLone and McLean (1992) found that satisfaction has a significant effect on individuals’ performance, 
facilitating the successful implementation of new technologies in various environments.  
In the context of new technologies for education, previous studies have examined the positive relationship 
between satisfaction and expectation and found that outcomes of adopting new technologies in 
educational settings can be measured by the level of learners’ (users’) satisfaction (Ali, 2011). For 
example, Desimon and Harris (1998) claimed that learning satisfaction and expectation increase if 
learners are motivated and perceive the usefulness of relevant technologies in certain learning 
environments. This implies that if learners perceive the usefulness of computer-assisted language 
learning, including u-learning, then they are more likely to be satisfied and thus show a higher learning 
expectation or better learning performance. 
Song et al. (2009) found a positive effect of ELLs’ satisfaction with m-learning on their 
performance/expectation. More specifically, those learners who are satisfied with m-learning tend to show 
a higher expectation and better performance in various English-learning contexts such as communication 
and certification exams. However, no study has examined the effects of learners’ satisfaction with u-
learning on their expectation. This suggests that any analysis of u-learning environments in the context of 
language learning requires a better understanding of the relationship between satisfaction and expectation. 
RESEARCH MODEL AND HYPOTHESES 
Research model 
Figure 2 shows the proposed research model, which highlights the importance of the constructs, namely 
ubiquitous characteristics and learner characteristics pertaining to satisfaction with u-learning in the 
context of English learning based on a literature review and interviews with actual u-learning users with 
some experience studying English through smartphones. The model includes five constructs for 
ubiquitous characteristics (omnipresence, context customization, interactivity, self-directed learning, and 
perceived enjoyment) and three constructs for learner characteristics (innovation, learning motivation, and 
computer self-efficacy). These eight constructs are expected to have positive effects on u-learning 
satisfaction and thus on expectation in the context of English learning.  
In terms of ubiquitous characteristics, Song et al. (2009) claimed that these characteristics have 
considerable influence on innovation adoption in the context of English learning. Previous studies have 
found that these characteristics, which include omnipresence, context customization, interactivity, self-
directed learning, and perceived enjoyment, have significant positive effects on ELLs’ attitudes toward u-
learning and satisfaction (Shih, Chu, Hwang & Kinshuk, 2010). Therefore, the proposed research model 
includes ubiquitous characteristics to evaluate u-learning satisfaction. 
In terms of learner characteristics, Zangyuan (2003) and Shih et al. (2010) claimed that these 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 102 
characteristics are important drivers of technology-based learning environments and u-learning 
satisfaction. In this regard, the proposed research model includes three constructs for learner 
characteristics, including innovation, learning motivation, and computer self-efficacy, to investigate the 
key factors influencing satisfaction with u-learning in the context of English learning.  
Ubiquitous 
Characteristics
Omnipresence
Context 
Customization
Interactivity
Learner 
Characteristics
Innovation
Learning 
Motivation
Computer Self-
Efficacy
Self-Directed 
Learning
Perceived 
Enjoyment
Satisfaction PerformanceH9(+)
H1(+)
H2(+)
H3(+)
H4(+)
H5(+)
H6
(+)
H7
(+
)
H8
(+
)
 
Figure 2. Proposed research model with hypotheses. 
Hypotheses 
Ubiquitous characteristics 
The first construct for ubiquitous characteristics is omnipresence. This study defines omnipresence as 
ELLs’ perception of the extent to which u-learning offers personalized and uninterrupted connections and 
communication between the learners and other learners and/or learning contexts (Kim, 2008). That is, 
omnipresence, which is synonymous with ubiquity, implies communication and connectivity in learning 
environments anytime, anywhere. The increasing proliferation of smart technologies has enabled learners 
to acquire and connect to learning materials and instruction anytime, anywhere. In particular, smartphones 
are regarded as a new learning method for various applications and skills (e.g., English dictionaries, 
games, and English proficiency) for ELLs.  
Looney, Jessup, and Valacich (2004) claimed that the ubiquitous nature of smart technologies provides 
learners with exceptional efficiency, flexibility, and convenience, thereby influencing their satisfaction. In 
addition, omnipresence is one of the most well-known advantages of smart technologies and a main 
reason for the adoption of smartphones by many learners (Dholakia, Dholakia, Lehrer & Kshetri. 2004). 
In this regard, the following hypothesis is proposed: 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 103 
Hypothesis 1: Omnipresence has a positive effect on u-learning satisfaction for ELLs. 
The second construct for ubiquitous characteristics is customization, which is defined in this study as the 
extent to which u-learning provides ELLs with useful content based on the learners’ learning environment 
(Figge, 2004; Kannan, Chang & Whinston 2001). Some studies have referred to context customization as 
contextual offerings, representing one of the traditional ubiquitous characteristics for language learning. 
The nature of the learning environment plays a critical role in influencing ELLs’ attitudes and behaviors 
toward u-learning. Kim (2008) claimed that the distinct learning condition encountered by learners is a 
key driver of their attitudes and thus influences their behaviors. 
In fact, ELLs face rapidly changing learning environments and thus require learning contexts that fit 
given learning conditions. In such contexts, the context customization of u-learning can provide the most 
effective and optimal learning information and services based on the overall situation, including time and 
location constraints, facing ELLs. Bhattacherjee and Sanford (2006) suggested that ELLs who view u-
learning as pertinent to their learning outcomes are more likely to be motivated to actively explore it as a 
technological learning option. This suggests that ELLs who consider u-learning as relevant to their 
learning are likely be satisfied because of context customization. This argument leads to the following 
hypothesis: 
Hypothesis 2: Context customization has a positive effect on u-learning satisfaction for ELLs. 
The proposed research model includes interactivity as the third construct for ubiquitous characteristics. 
Wang (2006) defined interactivity as the interaction between ELLs and learning resources. It should be 
noted that this definition of interactivity is different from interactions between human interlocutors. In 
this regard, this study defines interactivity as the technological interaction between learners and 
technological tools such as smartphones. That is, ELLs interact with learning content through ubiquitous 
devices such as smartphones.  
Previous studies focusing on e-learning and m-learning in language education have found that 
interactivity is an important determinant of learners’ satisfaction (e.g., Khan & Vega, 1999; Reeves & 
Reeves, 1997). U-learning is much more likely to facilitate interactivity than other technology-based 
learning methods because of communication offering continuous interactivity, that is, communication 
anytime, anywhere (Kannan et al., 2001). Interactions between learners and learning materials are much 
easier today than in the past not only because of the diversity of smart devices but also because of the 
functional variety provided by the technology.  
ELLs can use their own set of learning materials and service frameworks without restrictions for certain 
frames by using smart devices. With the development of user-oriented smart devices, such interactions are 
likely to be increasingly relevant to English learning. In addition, as ELLs become more knowledgeable 
about new technologies, their interactions in u-learning environments are likely to intensify, which 
increases their satisfaction with u-learning. In this regard, the following hypothesis is proposed: 
Hypothesis 3: Interactivity has a positive effect on u-learning satisfaction for ELLs. 
Self-directed learning is a typical characteristic of various types of computer-based learning methods, 
including e-learning, m-learning, and u-learning (Zhang & Nunamaker, 2003). In this regard, this study 
defines self-directed learning as a process by which learners take the initiative to find their learning needs, 
articulate learning objectives, identify sources for learning, select and implement learning strategies, and 
evaluate learning outcomes (Knowles, 1975). That is, self-directed learning implies that learners process 
learning through their own motivation after choosing their own learning goals, content, method, and many 
others for English learning.  
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 104 
Previous studies (e.g., Joo, Kim, & Cho, 2008; Lee & Choi, 2007) have emphasized the importance of 
self-directed learning in the context of various learning outcomes such as learners’ achievement, 
satisfaction, and participation in diverse learning environments. For example, Lindner and Harris (1998) 
claimed that self-directed learning is a key attribute used to explain learners’ satisfaction and expectation 
and found a significant relationship between self-directed learning and learning satisfaction, particularly 
in the context of higher education. In addition, Lee and Lee (2006) investigated the relationship between 
self-directed learning and satisfaction in the context of e-learning and found that even when e-learning 
has time and location limitations, self-directed learning can provide learners with learning opportunities 
and thus is positively related to their overall satisfaction.  
U-learning makes self-directed learning possible through smart devices. Learners can ensure their 
learning process and outcomes without facing time and location constraints. Therefore, learners can 
control their learning process based on their ability, which is differentiated from self-directed learning in 
e-learning. This suggests that ELLs are more likely to be satisfied with self-directed learning in u-learning 
environments than in e-learning ones. In this regard, the following hypothesis is proposed: 
Hypothesis 4: Self-directed learning has a positive effect on u-learning satisfaction for ELLs. 
Perceived enjoyment has been defined as the extent to which u-learning use is perceived to be enjoyable 
in its own right, aside from any performance consequences of using the system (Lee, Kozar & Larsen, 
2003). Previous studies have emphasized the effect of enjoyment resulting from the use of new 
technologies. For example, Davis (1992) and Gordon and Anand (2005) claimed that enjoyment from 
using mobile devices has a positive effect on users’ attitudes through perceived usefulness. Lee and Lee 
(2006) found that enjoyment has a significant effect on satisfaction through perceived usefulness in the 
context of e-learning. 
Learners may be more likely to perceive enjoyment for u-learning than for other technology-based 
learning methods such as e-learning because of various functions provided by the u-learning environment. 
For example, ELLs using smartphones can download various applications for language learning from 
application providers, which are often referred to as application stores. Some applications are free and 
very useful and thus can motivate learners to use smartphones and induce their learning satisfaction. In 
this regard, the following hypothesis is proposed:  
Hypothesis 5: Perceived enjoyment has a positive effect on u-learning satisfaction for ELLs.  
Learner characteristics 
Previous studies have considered various technologies and highlighted the importance of individuals’ 
characteristics in examining the relationship between a new technology and user satisfaction. Learners’ 
characteristics are important in analyzing a given technology itself, and it is the user’s perception of the 
technology’s attributes that influences his or her satisfaction (Kim & Garrison, 2010). This study 
proposes three constructs for learner characteristics (innovation, learning motivation, and computer self-
efficacy) that may have positive effects on u-learning satisfaction.  
This study considers innovation as individuals’ voluntary intention to use new technologies (Agarwal & 
Karahanna, 2000) and thus defines it as the extent to which ELLs make voluntary use of smartphones for 
their English learning. Highly innovative learners tend to adopt new learning technologies and are likely 
to be satisfied with the use of new technologies for their learning. In particular, smartphones provide 
learners with many benefits. For example, ELLs can access learning content and communicate with other 
learners and instructors anytime, anywhere. Lee and Lee (2009) claimed that u-learning can increase 
learner satisfaction through ubiquitous characteristics that innovative learners seek from new 
technologies. In this regard, the following hypothesis is proposed: 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 105 
Hypothesis 6: Innovation has a positive effect on u-learning satisfaction for ELLs. 
Learning motivation is another learner characteristic, and in the context of learning, it is considered to 
play an important role in language development (Chen, Fang, Chen & Wu, 2010; Bin & Lixia, 2009). A 
lack of learning motivation can hinder ELLs’ development, and therefore this study includes it as an 
important factor influencing u-learning satisfaction in the context of English learning. This study defines 
learning motivation as the learner’s motivation for learning new behavioral patterns in terms of the use of 
a new technology (e.g., u-learning) (Taris & Kompier, 2005).  
Even when ELLs have sufficient knowledge and skills for studying learning materials, little or no learning 
motivation can produce low satisfaction and expectation. In this regard, Noe and Schmitt (1986) and Liu 
and Chu (2010) claimed that learning motivation in any learning setting stimulates learners’ passion for 
learning, providing them with opportunities to master learning materials. U-learning materials can 
reinforce intrinsic and extrinsic motivation during its design process and thus have a positive effect on u-
learning satisfaction as well as on expectation. In addition, innovative learners are generally more likely 
to show a higher level of learning motivation with new technologies such as smartphones (Kim, 2008). In 
this regard, the following hypothesis is proposed: 
Hypothesis 7: Learning motivation has a positive effect on u-learning satisfaction for ELLs. 
Bandura (1995) defined computer self-efficacy as the user’s confidence in his or her knowledge and skills 
to successfully complete a specific task and suggested that such confidence has considerable influence on 
the user’s satisfaction and perseverance in a wide range of activities. Compeau and Higgins (1995) 
defined computer self-efficacy as the universal belief that users are able to use computer technologies to 
complete certain tasks. Based on these definitions, the present study defines computer self-efficacy as the 
degree of ELLs’ confidence in making successful use of u-learning technologies such as smartphones. 
Such confidence includes learner’s ability to handle both hardware/software (HW/SW) aspects of 
technologies.  
Smartphone users can be considered early adopters of new technologies and often have a considerable 
passion for and in-depth knowledge of new technologies that can be used as learning tools. Therefore, 
ELLs who can better understand and have the necessary skills to use new technologies are more likely to 
be satisfied with using those technologies. Previous studies have examined computer self-efficacy in 
various technology-enabled learning contexts (e.g., Lee & Lee, 2008; Wangpipatwong, 2008) and verified 
that it is positively related to perceived usefulness as well as to satisfaction (Lee & Lee, 2009). The 
present study provides an empirical analysis of the effects of computer self-efficacy on u-learning 
satisfaction in the context of English learning. In this regard, the following hypothesis is proposed: 
Hypothesis 8: Computer self-efficacy has a positive effect on u-learning satisfaction for ELLs. 
Satisfaction and expectation 
Ives et al. (1983) defined satisfaction as the extent to which a user believes that a given technology meets 
his or her information requirements. Doll and Torkzadeh (1988) also defined it as a user’s opinion about a 
specific technology. Based on these definitions, this study defines satisfaction as ELLs’ opinion or belief 
that a given u-learning technology meets their performance needs. Scholars have traditionally assumed 
that satisfied users outperform unsatisfied ones in the IS context (Bailey & Pearson, 1983). In addition, 
DeLone and McLean (2003) proposed a model of IS success and suggested that user satisfaction is a key 
measure of IS success (performance).  
Previous studies have suggested a positive relationship between satisfaction and expectation/performance 
for ELLs based on u-learning systems. In the case of smartphones, ELLs can access learning materials 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 106 
anytime, anywhere. In addition, u-learning is considered a self-directed learning method and provides 
customized contexts, a high degree of interactivity, and enjoyment. All these features of u-learning make 
it more likely to satisfy learners than other learning environments. Despite the importance of the 
relationship between satisfaction and expectation, little is known about this relationship in the context of 
u-learning, particularly in terms of English learning. In this regard, the following hypothesis is proposed: 
Hypothesis 9: U-learning satisfaction has a positive effect on ELLs’ u-learning expectation. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
Target population and data collection 
In this study, K-12 and college/university students in Korea were considered as the target population 
because these students represent a large and diverse population and make frequent use of u-learning to 
study English as well as smartphones. For maximum generalizability, groups of various sizes across 
South Korea were surveyed. These students were solicited because they were expected to be very 
interested in using smartphones for more efficient English learning. 
Data were collected through two-stage procedure. First, a pilot study was conducted. A group of middle 
school, high school, and university students with some experience using Wi-Fi-enabled smartphones for 
English learning was identified through a survey and asked to participate in this study. Then, a list of 
potential respondents was prepared, and the questionnaire was sent by mail and e-mail. The responses 
were collected over a two-week period, and any response with missing and inappropriate data was 
excluded from the analysis. As a result, a total of 69 usable responses were obtained for the pilot study. 
The construct validity (item reliability, internal consistency, and discriminant validity) of the pilot test 
was assessed to determine any issues associated with the study’s design and methodology.   
The participants of the pilot study consisted of 10 elementary students, 20 junior/high school students, 
and 10 college/university students. A total of 79 responses were collected for the pilot study. Most had 
more than two years of experience using u-learning for English. In addition, the participants used various 
types of learning content, including communication, English exams, and English certification exams. 
According to the results of the pilot study, there was sufficient construct validity. Cronbach’s alpha for all 
the constructs exceeded the recommended threshold of 0.7, and the factoring loadings for all the items 
exceeded 0.7. Finally, the square root of the average variance extracted (AVE) exceeded the correlation 
between the constructs. 
After the pilot test, the questionnaire was sent to 2,000 students at 10 middle schools, 11 junior schools, 9 
high schools, and 10 colleges/universities by mail and e-mail. For maximum generalizability, school 
locations and sizes were randomly selected. In addition, the questionnaire was posted online for those 
who preferred an online survey. A total of 389 responses were collected through online and offline 
surveys. Among these, 13 were discarded because of missing or inappropriate data. As a result, a total of 
376 responses were used to test the proposed research model.  
The respondents represented an educationally diverse group. More specially, 62.8% had a college degree 
or more. The ages of the respondents ranged from 14 to 39 (average age = 22.4), and 53.4% were male. In 
addition, 26.1% engaged in u-learning for less than one year while 33.2% of respondents used u-learning 
more than one year, but less than two years.  Regarding time spent on u-learning, 68.4% spent more than 
three hours a week learning English through smartphones. Table 1 shows the demographic characteristics 
of the respondents. 
 
 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 107 
Table 1. Demographic Characteristics 
Demographic Categories Frequency Percentage 
Age (Years) 
14-19 101 26.9% 
20-25   90 23.9% 
26-30 115 30.6% 
30+   70 18.6% 
Gender 
Male 158 42.0% 
Female 218 58.0% 
Education Level 
Elementary school   25   6.6% 
Junior/High school   76 20.2% 
College/University 141 37.5% 
Graduate School   95 25.3% 
Other   39 10.4% 
U-learning Experience  
< 1 year   98 26.1% 
≥1, <2 years 125 33.2% 
≥2, <3 years   99 26.3% 
≥3 years   54 14.4% 
Lecture Hours/week   
Less than 1 hr.   31   8.2% 
1-2 hrs.   88 23.4% 
3-4 hrs. 157 41.8% 
More than 5 hrs. 100 26.6% 
Learning Content (multiple responses)   
Communication  205 54.5% 
English Exams 277 73.7% 
English Certification Exams (e.g., 
TOEFL and TOEIC) 
239 63.6% 
 Other   91 24.2% 
Total 376 100% 
Measurement variables 
This study’s measures were obtained from previous studies but were modified to fit the context of u-
learning for studying English. For example, the items for omnipresence and self-directed learning were 
adapted from Lim (2001) and Kim (2008), and those for the other variables in the research model were 
developed by adapting and combining measures from other sources (e.g., Hicks & Klimosky, 1987; Lee 
& Lee, 2007). Each respondent was asked to indicate the extent to which he or she agreed with each item 
on a seven-point Likert-type scale ranging from “strongly disagree” (1) to “strongly agree” (7).  
Data analysis 
Assessment of the measurement model 
For the analysis of the data, a partial least square (PLS) approach using SmartPLS 2.0 was taken for 
several reasons. First, this study is more exploratory than confirmatory, which is the strength of the PLS 
approach (Leimeister, Leimeister & Knebel, 2009). Second, SmartPLS 2.0 can resample the initial data 
set and enlarge it by 100 to 200 times, thereby reducing the required sample size. Third, SmartPLS 2.0 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 108 
takes a two-step approach to test a model: an assessment of the measurement model and an evaluation of 
the structural model. That is, it can evaluate the reliability and validity of an instrument simultaneously. 
Therefore, the PLS approach was suitable for this study.  
Before testing the structural model, the reliability and validity of the measurement model were assessed 
through item reliability, internal consistency, and discriminant validity. For item reliability, individual 
item loadings were considered. Chin (1998) considered items with loadings greater than 0.7 to be 
acceptable. Here such items explain approximately 50% of the variance in a specific measure, implying 
that the items in the measurement model measure the same variable. The results for item reliability 
indicate that all items exceeded the accepted threshold, implying that the items were sufficient for 
measuring each construct individually.  
Cronbach’s alpha was used to evaluate internal consistency for each construct. Nunnally (1978) suggested 
a minimum threshold of 0.7 for each item loading. Cronbach’s alpha for all the variables exceeded this 
threshold, ranging from 0.84 and 0.96. The results for convergent validity and reliability are shown in 
Appendix A.  
Finally, the AVE was used to assess discriminant validity, which measures the lack of a relationship 
between measures that theoretically should not be related. The AVE measures the variance explained by 
indicators relative to the measurement error, which should be greater than 0.5 to justify the use of a 
construct (Chin, 1998). Latent variables describe the variance shared between constructs and should not 
exceed the AVE for sufficient discriminant validity. Table 2 shows the squared correlations between the 
latent variables, which did not exceed the AVE, indicating sufficient discriminant validity.  
Table 2. Squared Correlations Between Constructs 
Latent Variable (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
(1) Omnipresence  .85          
(2) Context Customization .30 .83         
(3) Interactivity .28 .27 .84        
(4) Self-Directed Learning .45 .36 .33 .76       
(5) Perceived Enjoyment .48 .40 .37 .43 .79      
(6) Innovation .32 .41 .39 .32 .40 .80     
(7) Learning Motivation .25 .28 .36 .51 .37 .42 .78    
(8) Computer Self-Efficacy .46 .43 .48 .33 .37 .45 .40 .82   
(9) Satisfaction .54 .41 .42 .37 .39 .33 .35 .47 .84  
(10) Performance .25 .27 .29 .28 .23 .30 .34 .39 .56 .88 
Note: Numbers in bold type along the diagonal indicate the square root of the AVE. 
Analysis of the structural model 
The independent relationships between the constructs in this study were tested using structural equation 
modeling (SEM) with the primary data (n = 376). The structural model was formulated using SmartPLS 
2.0, which provided two important pieces of information. First, SEM calculates the path coefficient (i.e., 
the standardized beta), which implies the strength of the causal relationship between two constructs. The 
results in Figure 3 provide support for the proposed hypotheses. The five variables for ubiquitous 
characteristics (omnipresence, context customization, interactivity, self-directed learning, and perceived 
enjoyment) had positive effects on user satisfaction. The path coefficient from omnipresence to 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 109 
satisfaction was 0.508 and significant at p < 0.01, and context customization had a significant positive 
effect on satisfaction (β = 0.383, p < 0.01). These results provide support for H1 and H2, respectively. 
Interactivity (β = 0.386, p<0.01), self-directed learning (β = 0.350, p < 0.01), and perceived enjoyment (β 
= 0.371, p < 0.01) had significant positive effects on satisfaction, providing support for H3, H4, and H5, 
respectively. 
R2 = 0.716
R2 = 0.220
OMN
omn1
omn3
omn2
.85
.86
.79
INT
int1
int3
int2
.77
.83
.84
SDL
sdl1
sdl3
sdl2
.90
.93
.84
SAT
sat1 sat3sat2
PE
pe1
pe3
pe2
.86
.81
.89
CC
cc1
cc2
.91
.76
.8
1
.7
3
.7
9
PER
per1 per2
.9
2
.8
8
.522**
(8.150) 
.371
**
(4.6
10) 
.350**
(4.226) 
.386 **
(4.648) 
.38
3
**
(5.
14
7) 
.50
8*
*
(7.0
10)
    
δ2
δ3
Note: Regular numbers represent “Standarded Regress 
Weight” or Factor Loadings,” whereas italicized numbers 
indicate “Squared Multiple Correlations.” 
Numbers with ( ) represent t-value. *p<0.05; **p<0.01. 
cc3
.7
3
per3
.86
INNO
inno1
inno3
inno2
.77
.93
.82
LM
lm1
lm3
lm2
.87
.85
.90
CSE
cse1
cse3
cse2
.84
.73
.82
.307 **
(4.553) 
.327 **(4.559)
.434**(5.867) 
 
Figure 3. SEM analysis of the proposed model 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 110 
In terms of the variables for learner characteristics, innovation (β = 0.307, p < 0.01), learning motivation 
((β = 0.327, p < 0.01), and computer self- efficacy (β = 0.434, p < 0.01) had significant positive effects on 
user satisfaction, providing support for H6, H7 and H8, respectively. Finally, the path coefficient from u-
learning satisfaction to performance was 0.422 and significant at p < 0.01, providing support for H9. 
The second piece of information was the squared multiple correlation (R2) for each endogenous variable 
in the research model. The R2 value measures the percentage of the variance explained by each construct 
in the model. The R2 value for the endogenous variable (satisfaction) was 0.716, implying that all the 
independent variables together explained 71.6% of the variance in u-learning satisfaction. In addition, u-
learning satisfaction explained 22.0% of the variance in u-learning performance. Figure 3 shows the 
standardized path coefficients (β) and their respective significance levels and variance explained. In the 
figure, the numbers in parentheses indicate the t-value for each path. Table 3 shows the results for the 
hypotheses. 
Table 3. Results for Hypotheses 
Hypothesis Path Standardized 
Coefficient 
t-value Results 
H1 Omnipresence  Satisfaction .508** 7.010 Accepted 
H2 Context Customization  Satisfaction .383** 5.147 Accepted 
H3 Interactivity  Satisfaction .386** 4.648 Accepted 
H4 Self-Directed Learning  Satisfaction .350** 4.226 Accepted 
H5 Perceived Enjoyment  Satisfaction .371** 4.610 Accepted 
H6 Innovation  Satisfaction .307** 4.553 Accepted 
H7 Learning Motivation  Satisfaction .327** 4.559 Accepted 
H8 Computer Self-Efficacy  Satisfaction .434** 5.867 Accepted 
H9 Satisfaction  Performance .522** 8.150 Accepted 
Note: *p < 0.05; **: p < 0.01. 
Analysis of group difference 
After the analysis of each path in the research model based on all data, multi-group moderating effects 
were tested to investigate the role of the education level. In this context, the user’s education level was a 
moderator, and there were three groups (elementary, school, junior/high school, and university degrees). 
To test group differences for each path in the research model, the chi-square difference between the 
unconstrained (free) and fully constrained models was examined. A path-by-path analysis was conducted 
to determine any difference in each path between the three groups. Therefore, each path in the research 
model was constrained one by one, which increased one degree of freedom (DF), and then the constrained 
model was run to calculate the chi-square of the constrained model. If the chi-square difference exceeded 
the threshold (3.84 at p < 0.05; 6.63 at p < 0.01), then the path was considered to be different across 
education levels. The chi-square of the unconstrained model was 392.427.  
 
 
 
 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 111 
Table 4. Results of Group Difference at Each Path (Elementary vs. Junior/High) 
Path Chi-square 
(X2) 
⊿X2 Difference 
Omnipresence  Satisfaction 399.874   7.447** Yes 
Context Customization  Satisfaction 398.996   6.569* Yes 
Interactivity  Satisfaction 402.541 10.114** Yes 
Self-Directed Learning  Satisfaction 400.369   7.942** Yes 
Perceived Enjoyment  Satisfaction 412.258 19.831** Yes 
Innovation  Satisfaction 394.214   1.787 No 
Learning Motivation  Satisfaction 416.123 23.696** Yes 
Computer Self-Efficacy  Satisfaction 398.587   6.160* Yes 
Satisfaction  Expectation 400.217   7.790** Yes 
Note: *: X2(1) = 3.84, p<0.05; **: X2(1) = 6.63, p<0.01. 
Table 4 shows the results for the differences between the elementary and junior/high school groups for all 
paths. Except for the path between innovation and satisfaction, all paths were different between these two 
groups.  
Table 5. Results of Group Difference at Each Path (Elementary vs. University) 
Path Chi-square 
(X2) 
⊿X2 Difference 
Omnipresence  Satisfaction 403.817 11.390** Yes 
Context Customization  Satisfaction 403.147 10.720** Yes 
Interactivity  Satisfaction 396.777   4.350* Yes 
Self-Directed Learning  Satisfaction 408.387 15.960** Yes 
Perceived Enjoyment  Satisfaction 404.517 12.090** Yes 
Innovation  Satisfaction 394.283   1.856 No 
Learning Motivation  Satisfaction 399.096   6.669** Yes 
Computer Self-Efficacy  Satisfaction 397.658   5.231* Yes 
Satisfaction  Expectation 396.397   3.970* Yes 
Note: *: X2(1) = 3.84, p<0.05; **: X2(1) = 6.63, p<0.01. 
The same results were found between the elementary school and university groups (see Table 5). 
However, Table 6 shows that there was no significant difference in satisfaction between the junior/high 
school and university groups. This implies that the level of education had significant effects on the 
hypothesized relationships.  
 
 
 
 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 112 
Table 6. Results of Group Difference at Each Path (Junior/High vs. University) 
Path Chi-square 
(X2) 
⊿X2 Difference 
Omnipresence  Satisfaction 399.141   6.714** Yes 
Context Customization  Satisfaction 396.316   3.889* Yes 
Interactivity  Satisfaction 396.403   3.976* Yes 
Self-Directed Learning  Satisfaction 397.703   5.276* Yes 
Perceived Enjoyment  Satisfaction 397.796   5.369* Yes 
Innovation  Satisfaction 392.976   0.549 No 
Learning Motivation  Satisfaction 401.058   8.631** Yes 
Computer Self-Efficacy  Satisfaction 407.685 15.258** Yes 
Satisfaction  Expectation 392.611   0.184 No 
Note: *: X2(1) = 3.84, p<0.05; **: X2(1) = 6.63, p<0.01. 
DISCUSSION   
This study provides an empirical analysis of the determinants of factors influencing ELLs’ satisfaction 
and its subsequent impact on their u-learning performance. In particular, the study considers ubiquitous 
characteristics (omnipresence, context customization, interactivity, self-directed learning, and perceived 
enjoyment) and learner characteristics (innovation, learning motivation, and computer self-efficacy) as 
the key factors influencing u-learning satisfaction. The SEM results verify sufficient reliability and 
validity for all the variables for the measurement model. In addition, the results for the structural model 
demonstrate that the path coefficients were significant for all the variables.  
The results provide educators and learners with important insights into u-learning in the context of 
English education. The five variables for ubiquitous characteristics were positively related to u-learning 
satisfaction, providing support for the notion that ELLs are more likely to be satisfied with u-learning if 
they regard it as having the capability to be combined seamlessly with their daily learning. H1, which 
proposed a positive relationship between omnipresence and satisfaction, showed the highest path 
coefficient from ubiquitous characteristics and thus was supported. This suggests that omnipresence is a 
key attribute of u-learning and that ELLs are likely to be satisfied with learning environments that provide 
learning anytime, anywhere.  
The results provide support for H2 (context customization  satisfaction), H3 (interactivity  
satisfaction), H4 (self-directed learning  satisfaction), and H5 (perceived enjoyment  satisfaction). 
This suggests that ELLs are more likely to perceive benefits from these u-learning characteristics than 
from other learning environments (e.g., e-learning and blended learning) and thus that they are more 
likely to be satisfied with u-learning. These results are consistent with the findings of previous studies 
(e.g., Lee, Chung & Noh, 2007; Song et al., 2009) claiming that learners are likely to be satisfied with 
new learning environments, including u-learning, because of their unique characteristics.  
H6 (innovation  satisfaction), H7 (learning motivation  satisfaction), and H8 (computer self-efficacy 
 satisfaction) predicted positive relationships between the variables for learner characteristics and u-
learning satisfaction. Innovation and computer self-efficacy had significant positive effects on u-learning 
satisfaction, which suggests that, with the rise of English as a global language, learners tend to consider 
new ways of studying English by adopting new technologies. That is, learners are more likely to adopt 
innovative methods than traditional ones as they become more IT-savvy. These results provide support 
for H6 and H8. In addition, learning motivation had a significant positive effect on u-learning satisfaction 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 113 
for ELLs, implying that the u-learning environment provides them with both enjoyment and challenges. 
That is, the learner’s motivation to learn new behavioral patterns through u-learning may increase his or 
her satisfaction with the new technology.  
The results are consistent with previous research. For example, Bin and Lixia (2009) and Jonassen (1997) 
claimed that learning motivation is relevant to u-learning expectations. That is, u-learning may motivate 
learners to a certain extent. In addition, learning motivation in u-learning can not only induce learners’ 
attitudes but also determine their behaviors. This suggests that, unlike in the case of traditional English 
education, the attitudes of learners toward English education are of great relevance to u-learning.  
Finally, previous studies have verified a positive relationship between satisfaction and expectations (e.g., 
Lim, Le & Nam, 2007), and this study’s results provide support for this relationship. This suggests that 
the higher the u-learning satisfaction for English education, the higher the learner’s English-learning 
expectations. That is, learners’ satisfaction is an important determinant of their learning expectations. In 
addition, the results of the multi-group moderation test show differences in all paths in the research model 
between the three groups (elementary school, junior/high school, and university groups) except for the 
path between innovation and satisfaction. This implies that the level of education had significant effects 
on the hypothesized relationships. That is, the learner’s attitudes or behaviors explaining the relationship 
between ubiquitous and learner characteristics are difference according to the level of education. 
CONCLUSION 
Contributions and implications 
This study highlights the uniqueness of u-learning for ELLs, which provides educators and developers 
with important insights into these learners’ behaviors. The research model provides a logical framework 
for understanding why ELLs may or may not be satisfied with u-learning as an innovative learning 
method. Instead of focusing on the technological characteristics that influence learners’ behaviors, the 
research model assesses ubiquitous characteristics (omnipresence, context customization, interactivity, 
self-directed learning, and perceived enjoyment) and learner characteristics (innovation, learning 
motivation, and computer self-efficacy) in the context of u-learning satisfaction.  
This study contributes to the literature on u-learning by considering ELLs with some u-learning 
experience. The study limits the sample to u-learning users to provide a better understanding of the 
relationships between the proposed external variables and satisfaction and between satisfaction and 
expectation.  In addition, the study provides important insights into some non-technological constructs 
that are key predictors of u-learning satisfaction. In this regard, the study explains the innovation decision 
process at the individual and learning environment level by evaluating the characteristics of individuals 
and learning environments, not technological attributes. Further, the results provide English-language 
educators considering u-learning adoption with a better understanding of the key factors influencing u-
learning satisfaction and thus the needs of English-language learners. 
In terms of practical implications, the results demonstrate the increasing popularity of u-learning for 
English education among Koreans. ELLs with a solid understanding of the technological benefits are 
likely to be better positioned to integrate u-learning into their daily routines. This suggests that those 
organizations and educational institutions considering u-learning for English education should better 
educate their members and educators to enable them to search for and respond to emerging technologies 
in a more efficient and effective manner. That is, educational institutions should focus more on increasing 
IT awareness among their educators and staff members to be more opportunistic and gain a competitive 
advantage over other educational methods for English learning.  
 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 114 
Limitations and future research 
This study has some limitations. First, the cross-sectional design limits the generalizability of the results. 
In addition, the use of a key informer to gather data is a limitation in that a single individual may not be 
representative of the entire group. However, the study addresses this limitation considering ELLs with 
some u-learning experience. In this regard, future research should increase the generalizability of this 
study’s results by considering a wider range of educational organizations or respondents representing 
various countries. Second, the study considers items adapted from previous studies, and therefore the 
potential misspecification of some constructs constitutes a limitation. Third, this study focuses on u-
learning satisfaction as the sole factor impacting u-learning expectation. In this regard, future research 
should identify other determinants of u-learning satisfaction and performance in the context of English 
learning. 
The results suggest many interesting avenues for future research on English education. For example, 
English education may impact the extent to which learners intend to adopt u-learning, and therefore ELLs 
should learn from their experience to remain viable and adapt to rapidly changing educational 
environments. With the introduction of new technologies for English education, satisfied (as well as 
dissatisfied) ELLs may rely on how well they apply what they learn. In this regard, future research should 
explore how individuals learn in terms of the mechanisms and processes they employ, what the most 
efficient ways to disseminate new knowledge are, and how ELLs can modify their behavior to reflect new 
knowledge and insights. 
This study investigates the effects of only ubiquitous characteristics and learner characteristics on u-
learning satisfaction, and therefore future research should consider other characteristics that may 
influence this satisfaction. In addition, future research should examine the moderating effects of 
demographic factors such as gender, age, and experience on the relationships between learner 
characteristics and satisfaction. 
 
 
APPENDIX A. Results of Convergent Validity and Reliability  
 Mean SD Loading Cronbach’s 
alpha 
Omnipresence     0.84 
1: I can use necessary content for English learning anytime, 
anywhere. 
4.83 0.66 0.85  
2: I can obtain necessary information for English learning 
instantly. 
4.98 0.59 0.91  
3: U-learning frees me from time and location constraints. 4.86 0.78 0.79  
Context Customization (CC)    0.86 
1: With u-learning, I can get customized learning content. 5.22 0.58 0.85  
2: U-learning provides me with English-learning materials 
based on my English skills.  
5.07 0.74 0.82  
3: I can design my own English learning materials with u-
learning system. 
5.13 1.07 0.83  
Interactivity (INT)    0.92 
1: I can interact with other ELL through u-learning. 4.11 0.91 0.89  
2: U-learning facilitates simultaneous, real-time 
communication for both English learning and content 
providers. 
4.20 0.98 0.79  
3: U-learning facilitates mutual communication between ELL 4.78 0.76 0.85  
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 115 
and content providers. 
Self-Directed Learning (SDL)    0.96 
1: I can find English-learning content that I want to study by 
myself through u-learning. 
4.95 0.90 0.78  
2: I can study necessary English-learning content through the 
self-directed learning process. 
4.84 0.81 0.74  
3: I can study needed English-learning content directly through 
u-learning. 
4.08 0.92 0.76  
Perceived Enjoyment (PE)    0.87 
1: English learning under the u-learning environment is 
exciting. 
5.13 0.97 0.74  
2: Using u-learning to study English is more enjoyable. 4.24 1.07 0.86  
3: English learning through u-learning makes me feel good. 4.85 0.89 0.76  
Innovation (INNO)    0.88 
1: I like to try new ways of learning English. 4.18 0.51 0.87  
2: I like something new and different when studying English.  5.02 0.66 0.79  
3: I am a kind of person who tries something new before others. 4.03 0.93 0.74  
Learning Motivation (LM)    0.90 
1: Learning English in u-learning environment is a challenge 
that I enjoy. 
4.34 0.73 0.74  
2: I very much enjoy learning English in u-learning 
environment. 
4.72 0.92 0.86  
3: Since using u-learning, I spend more time learning English. 5.00 1.02 0.73  
Computer Self-Efficacy (CSE)    0.87 
1: I understand the hardware for my current u-learning system. 3.91 0.67 0.80  
2: I understand the software for my current u-learning system. 5.13 0.78 0.75  
3: I can fix any technical problem with my current u-learning 
system. 
4.68 0.81 0.91  
Satisfaction    0.85 
1: I am satisfied with u-learning in terms of learning English. 4.74 0.82 0.77  
2: English learning through u-learning meets my learning 
expectations. 
4.92 0.67 0.83  
3: I am more satisfied with u-learning than other English-
learning methods. 
4.11 1.05 0.91  
Expectation (EXP)    0.92 
1: I can improve my English knowledge to expected levels 
through u-learning. 
5.39 0.51 0.94  
2: I can improve my grade in English through u-learning. 5.21 0.66 0.81  
3: English-related knowledge and information provided by u-
learning can help me improve my grade in English. 
4.99 0.47 0.87  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This study was supported by research fund from Chosun University, 2013. The author also thanks the 
reviewers for their insightful comments and suggestions that led to significant improvements in this paper. 
 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 116 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Hee-Jung Jung is an Associate Professor at the Department of English Education, Chosun University in 
Korea. Her research interests are focused on Computer-Assisted Language Learning and TESOL. 
E-mail: jung@chosun.ac.kr 
 
REFERENCES 
Agarwal. R., & Karahanna, E. (2000). Time flies when you’re having fun: Cognitive absorption and 
beliefs about information technology usage. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 24(4), 66594.  
Ali, A. (2011). Key factors for determining students’ satisfaction in distance learning courses: A study of 
Allama Iqbal Open University. Contemporary Educational Technology, 2(2), 118–134. 
Bailey, J. E., & Pearson, S. W. (1983). Development of a tool for measuring and analyzing computer user 
satisfaction. Management Science, 29(5), 530–545. 
Bandura, A. (1995). Exercise of personal and collective efficacy in changing societies. In A. Bandura. 
(Ed.). Self-efficacy in changing societies (pp. 1–45) New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Bhattacherjee, A., & Sanford, C. (2006). When attitudes don’t predict behavior: A study of attitude 
strength. Proceedings of the 12th Americas Conference on Information Systems, Universidad Autónoma 
Metropolitana.  
Bin. Z., & Lixia, J. (2009). Correlation of Anxiety and Motivation in English Language Learning. 
Proceedings of Computational Intelligence and Software Engineering (CISE) 2009, 1–3. 
Chen, G. D., Chang, C. K., & Wang, C. Y. (2008). Ubiquitous learning website: Scaffold learners by 
mobile devices with information-aware techniques. Computers and Education, 50, 77–79. 
Chen, W-C, Fang, R-J, Chen, C.-C., & Wu, S.-Y. (2010). A study on students’ learning motivation and 
satisfaction in the automobile practice curriculum. Proceeding of the 10th WSEAS International 
Conference on Multimedia Systems & Signal Processing, Stevens Point, Wisconsin, 137–142.  
Chin, W. (1998). The partial least squares approach for structural equation modeling. In G.A. 
Marcoulides (Ed.), Modern methods for business research (pp. 295–36), Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum. 
Chiou, C.-K., Tseng, J. C. R., Hwang, G-J, & Heller, S. (2010). An adaptive navigation support system 
for conducting context-aware ubiquitous learning in museums. Computers & Education, 55(2), 834–845. 
Chu, H.-C., Hwang, G.-J., & Tsai, C.-C. (2010). A knowledge engineering approach to developing 
mindtools for context-aware ubiquitous learning. Computers & Education, 54(1), 289–297. 
Collins, T. G. (2005). English class on the air: mobile language learning with cell phones. 5th IEEE 
International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies, July 5–8, 2005, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. 
Compeau, D., & Higgins, C. (1995). Computer self-efficacy development of a measure and initial test. 
Management Information Systems Quarterly, 22(2), 189–211. 
Davis, F. D. (1992) Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of information 
technology. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 13(3), 145–158. 
DeLone, W. H., & Mclean, E. R. (2003). The DeLone and McLean model of information systems 
success: A ten-year update. Journal of Management Information Systems, 19(4), 9–30. 
DeSimon, R. L., and Harris, D. M. (1998). Human resource development, 2nd Edition, Fort Worth, TX: 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 117 
Dryden. 
Dholakia, N., Dholakia, R., Lehrer, M., & Kshetri, N. (2004). Patterns, opportunities, and challenges in 
the emerging global m-commerce landscape. In N. Shi (Ed.), Wireless communications and mobile 
commerce (pp. 121) Singapore & Hershey PA: Idea Group. 
Doll, W. J., and Torkzadeh, G. (1991). The measurement of end-user computing satisfaction: Theoretical 
considerations. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 15(1), 5–10. 
Figge, S. (2004). Situation-dependent service: A challenger for mobile network operators. Journal of 
Business Research, 57(11), 1416–1422. 
Fullerton, G., & Taylor, S. (2002). Mediating, interactive, and non-linear effects in service quality and 
satisfaction with services research. Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences, 19(2), 124–136. 
Gordon, C. B., & Anand, K. (2005). Explaining consumer acceptance of handheld Internet devices, 
Journal of Business Research, 58(5), 553–558. 
Harrison, N. (1999). How to design self-directed and distance learning: A guide for creators of web-
based training, computer-based training, and self-study materials. Boston, MA: McGraw Hill.  
Hicks, W. D., & Klimosky, R. J. (1987). Entry into training outcomes: A field experiment. Academy of 
Management Journal, 30, 542–552. 
Hwang, G. J., Kuo, F.-R., Yin, P.-Y., & Chuang, K-H. (2010). A heuristic algorithm for planning 
personalized learning paths for context-aware ubiquitous learning. Computers & Education, 54(2), 404–
415. 
Hwang, G. J., Yang, T. C., Tsai, C. C., & Yang, J. H. (2009). A context-aware ubiquitous learning 
environment for conducting complex science experiments. Computers and Education, 53(2), 402–413. 
Ives, B., Olson, M. H., & Baroudi, J. J. (1983). The measurement of user information satisfaction. 
Communications of the Association for Computer Machinery, 26(10), 785–793. 
Joiner, R., Nethercott, J., Hull, R., & Reid, J. (2006). Designing educational experiences using ubiquitous 
technology. Computers in Human Behavior, 22(1), 67–76. 
Jonassen, D. (1997). Instructional design models for well-structured and ill-structured problem solving 
learning outcomes. Educational Technology Research and Development, 45(1), 65–94. 
Joo, Y. J., Kim, N. Y., & Cho, H. K. (2008). Relationship between self-efficacy, online task value and 
self-regulated learning, and satisfaction and achievement in cyber education. The Journal of Educational 
Information and Media, 14, 115–135. 
Kannan, P. K., Chang, A-M., & Whinston, A. B. (2001). Wireless commerce: Marketing issues and 
possibilities. Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International Conference Systems Science, IEEE Computer 
Society Press, Los Alamitos.  
Khan, B. H., & Vega, R. (1999). Factors to consider when evaluating a web-based instruction course: A 
survey.  In B.H. Khan (Ed.), Web-based instruction. (pp. 375–379). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational 
Technology.  
Kiernan, P. J., & Aizawa, K. (2004). Cell phones in task based learning: Are cell phones useful language 
learning tools? RECALL, 16(1), 71–84. 
Kim, S. H. (2008). Moderating effects of job relevance and experience on mobile wireless technology 
acceptance: Adoption of a smartphone by individuals. Information & Management, 45(6), 387–393. 
Kim, S. H., & Garrision, G. (2010). Understanding users’ behaviors regarding supply chain technology: 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 118 
Determinants impacting the adoption and implementation of RFID technology in South Korea. 
International Journal of Information Management, 30(5), 388–398. 
Knowles, J. L. (1975). Self-directed learning: A guide for learners and teachers. New York, NY: 
Association Press. 
Koschmann, T. (1996). Paradigm shifts and instructional technology: An introduction. In T. Koschmann 
(Ed.), CSCL: theory and practice of an emerging paradigm (pp. 268–305). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum. 
Lee, D. M., & Lee, S. H. (2009). The effects of ubiquitous attributes of the u-Learning on Learners’ 
Interactivity and Learning Performance. Journal of Business Research, 24(1), 33–68. 
Lee, K. N., & Choi, W. S. (2007). A study on the self-regulated learning factors affecting participation, 
satisfaction in e-learning. Journal of Korea Technology Education Association, 7(3), 117–148. 
Lee, J. K., & Lee, W. K. (2006). Self-directed learning and e-Learning environment satisfaction: 
Comparison analysis by self-regulated efficacy. Journal of the Korean Operations Research and 
Management Science Society, 31(3), 127–143. 
Lee, J. K., & Lee, W. K. (2008). The relationship of e-Learner’s self-regulatory efficacy and perception of 
e-Learning environmental quality. Computers in Human Behavior, 24(1), 32–47. 
Lee, S-H., Chung, K-S., & Noh, M-J. (2007). Factors influencing the learning performance in u-Learning. 
Business Education Review, 46, 143–163. 
Lee, Y., Kozar, K. A., & Larsen, K. R. T. (2003). The technology acceptance model: Past, present and 
future. Communications of Association for Information Systems, 12(50), 752–780. 
Leimeister, S., Leimeister, J. M., & Knebel, U. (2009). A cross-national comparison of perceived strategic 
importance of RFID for CIOs in Germany and Italy. International Journal of Information Management, 
29(1), 37–47. 
Lim, C. P. (2001). Object of the activity systems as a major barrier to the creative use of ICT in schools. 
Australian journal of Educational Technology, 17(3), 295–312. 
Lim, H., Lee, S-G., & Nam, K. C. (2007). Validating e-learning factors affecting training effectiveness. 
International Journal of Information Management, 27(1), 2007. 22–35. 
Lindner, R. W., & Harris, B. R. (1998). Self-regulated learning in education majors. Journal of General 
Education, 47(1), 63–78. 
Liu, T. Y., & Chu, Y. L. (2010). Using ubiquitous games in an English listening and speaking course: 
Impact on learning outcomes and motivation. Computers and Education, 55(2), 630–643. 
Liu, Y., Li, H., & Carlsson, C. (2010). Factors driving the adoption of m-learning: An empirical study. 
Computers and Educations, 55(3), 1211–1219. 
Looney, C., Jessup, L., & Valacich, J. (2004). Emerging business models for mobile brokerage services. 
Communications of the ACM, 47(6), 71–77. 
Myers, M. J. (2000). Voice recognition software and a handheld translation machine for second language 
learning. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 13(1), 29–41. 
Noe, R. A., & Schmitt, N. (1986). The influence of trainee attitudes on training effectiveness. Personnel 
Psychology, 39, 497–523. 
Nunnally, J.C. (1978). Psychometric theory (2nd ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 
Ogata, H., & Yano, Y. (2004). Context-aware support for computer-supported ubiquitous learning. 
Hee-Jung Jung Ubiquitous Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 119 
Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE International Workshop on Wireless and Mobile Technologies in Education, 
27–34 
Oliver, R. L. (1993). A conceptual model of service quality and service satisfaction: Compatible goals, 
different concepts. Advances in Services Marketing and Management, 2(4), 65–85. 
Ramayah, T. & Lee, J. W. C. (2012). System characteristics, satisfaction and e-learning usage: A 
structural equation model (SEM). The Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, 11(2), 196–
206.  
Reeves, T. C., & Reeves, P. M. (1997). Effective dimensions of interactive learning on the World Wide 
Web. In Khan, B. D. (Ed.). Web-based instruction. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology.  
Shih, J.-L., Chu, H.-C., Hwang, G.-J., & Kinshuk. (2010). An investigation of attitudes of students and 
teachers about participating in a context-aware ubiquitous learning activity. British Journal of 
Educational Technology, 42(3), 373–394. 
Shotsberger, P. G., & Vetter, R. (2000). How mobile wireless technologies will changes web-based 
instruction and training. Educational Technology, 40(5), 49–52. 
Song, Y. M., Kim, S. H., & Jung, H. J. (2009). The effect of m-Learning environment on perceived 
usefulness, satisfaction, and performance in English learning. Business Education Review, 57, 275–302. 
Sun, P.-C., Tsai, R. J., Finger, G., Chen, Y.-Y, & Yeh, D. (2008). What drives a successful e-Learning? 
An empirical investigation of the critical factors influencing learner satisfaction. Computers & Education, 
50, 1183–1201. 
Taris, T. W., & Kompier, M. A. J. (2005). Job demands, job control, strain and learning behavior: Review 
and research agenda. In A. Stamatios Antoniou, & C.L. Cooper (Eds), Research companion to 
organizational health psychology (pp. 132–150). London, UK: Edward Elgar. 
Thornton, P., & Houser, C. (2005). Using mobile phones in English education in Japan. Journal of 
Computer Assisted Learning, 21(3), 217–228. 
Wang, H. (2006). A pragmatic framework for promoting interactivity in e-Learning. In T. Reeves & S. 
Yamashita (Eds.), Proceedings of World Conference on E-Learning in Corporate, Government, 
Healthcare, and Higher Education 2006 (pp. 158–163). Chesapeake, VA: Association for the 
Advancement of Computing in Education. 
Wangpipatwong, T. (2008). The influence of self-efficacy and attitude on constructivist e-learning 
environment. In K. McFerrin et al. (Eds.), Proceedings of Society for Information Technology & Teacher 
Education International Conference 2008 (pp. 3198–3205). Chesapeake, VA: Association for the 
Advancement of Computing in Education. 
Yahya, S., Ahmad, E. A., & Jalil, K. A. (2010). The definition and characteristics of ubiquitous learning: 
A discussion. International Journal of Education and Development using Information and 
Communication Technology, 6(1), 117–127 
Zangyuan, O. (2003). The application of adaptive learning environment on oxidation-reduction reactions 
Web-title. International Journal of Instructional Media, 30, 383–405. 
Zhang, D., & Nunamaker, J. F. (2003). Powering e-Learning in the new millennium: An overview of e-
Learning and enabling technology. Information Systems Frontiers, 5(2), 207–218. 
