Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/commentary.pdf 
June 2014, Volume 18, Number 2 
pp. 2–8 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 2 
SPECIAL ISSUE COMMENTARY 
DIGITAL GAME AND PLAY ACTIVITY IN L2 TEACHING AND 
LEARNING 
Jonathon Reinhardt, University of Arizona 
Julie M. Sykes, CASLS, University of Oregon 
Games and play dynamics are proliferating in social, professional, and educational 
domains. This special issue brings together a collection of articles examining game and 
play activity in second language teaching and learning. Each addresses the topic from a 
unique perspective and represents game and play as part of complex ecologies of practice. 
The approaches include observation of out-of-school L2 gaming practices, adaptation of 
commercial, off-the-shelf games in the classroom, application of a game-based L2 
learning environment, and the study of ‘gameful’ learning through play in social networks.  
Keywords: Digital Games, Language Play, Second Language Learning, Game-Based 
Learning. 
APA Citation:Reinhardt, J., & Sykes, J.M. (2014). Special Issue Commentary: Digital 
Game Activity in L2 Teaching and Learning. Language Learning & Technology, 18(2), 2–8. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/commentary.pdf 
Copyright: © Jonathon Reinhardt & Julie M. Sykes 
INTRODUCTION 
Games and play dynamics are being increasingly applied in social, professional, and educational domains. 
The globalization of the digital gaming industry, the diversification of games into new and culturally 
hybrid genres, a global increase in access to broadband, and increasing numbers of non-traditional game 
players have precipitated a notable expansion of digital game and play activity into new contexts and 
applications. These developments warrant consideration by practitioners and researchers for the potentials 
that digital games and play activity have for technology-enhanced L2TL.  
This issue brings together a collection of articles examining digital game and play activity in L2TL. Each 
article approaches the topic from a different angle and represents digital games and play as elements of 
complex L2TL ecologies. Contexts range from the informal use of commercial, off-the-shelf games for 
autonomous language learning to the playful ‘spinning off’ of L2 learning in a Twitter-enhanced 
classroom.  As such, this issue supports a broad interpretation of the notions of ‘game’ and ‘play’ and 
presents a variety of applications of digital games and playfulness to the learning and teaching of 
languages. Here, we briefly examine a framework for categorizing work in digital games and language 
learning (Reinhardt & Sykes, 2012) and then highlight ways in which each of the contributors have 
uniquely approached game and play dynamics. We conclude our commentary with a look towards the 
future.   
A FRAMEWORK FOR RESEARCH AND PRACTICE IN DIGITAL GAMES 
While the study of digital games and play in L2TL has a longer history than most realize (e.g. Hubbard, 
1991; Phillips, 1987), the amount of work in the area has grown considerably in the last five years, as 
measured by new edited volumes (e.g. Reinders, 2012), special issues (e.g., Cornillie, Thorne, & Desmet, 
2012; Thomas, 2011), and monographs (e.g. Peterson, 2013; Sykes & Reinhardt, 2012). In an effort to 
categorize this work, we have developed a framework for understanding L2TL research and practice 
involving digital games as game-enhanced, game-based, or game-informed (Reinhardt & Sykes, 2012; 
Jonathon Reinhardt & Julie Sykes Special Issue Commentary: Games and Play 
 
Language Learning & Technology  3 
Sykes & Reinhardt, 2012), roughly based on functional characteristics of the game under study. Each 
dimension seeks to answer distinct questions about learning and teaching (see Table 1).  
Table 1. A Framework for Examining Research and Practice in Digital Games. 
 Characteristics L2 Learning Questions L2 Teaching Questions 
Game-enhanced 
 
Use of vernacular, off-
the-shelf games (i.e., 
games designed for 
entertainment purposes) 
How does game-
mediated L2 learning 
occur ‘in the wild’? 
How can vernacular games be 
pedagogically-mediated for L2 
learning and teaching? 
Game-based Use of educational or 
learning-purposed games 
(i.e., synthetic immersive 
environments) 
How do specific game 
designs afford 
particular L2 learner 
behaviors? 
How can game-based 
environments be designed to 
incorporate and/or 
complement L2 pedagogical 
uses? 
Game-informed Game and play principles 
applied in digital and 
non-digital contexts 
outside the confines of 
what one might typically 
consider a game 
How can insights from 
the study of games and 
play inform our 
understanding of L2 
learning? 
How can insights from the 
study of games and play 
inform our understanding of 
L2 teaching and the design of 
all L2 learning environments? 
Note. Adapted from Sykes & Reinhardt (2012, p. 33) 
Game-enhanced research seeks to investigate how commercial games not purposed for learning (i.e. 
‘vernacular’) can afford L2 learning and how those affordances might be realized in formal pedagogical 
environments. Game-based perspectives investigate the application of digital games that are explicitly 
designed for pedagogical purposes, and game-informed perspectives apply insights from the study of 
games and play to teaching and learning outside of traditional game spaces, that is, the phenomenon of 
‘gamification’ (Kapp, 2012) or ‘gamefulness’ (McGonigal, 2013). While notable work has been done in 
each of these areas, there remain significant gaps in our understanding of game and play perspectives on 
L2 learning and teaching. Collectively, the articles in this special issue illustrate a breadth and depth of 
perspective, as well as parameters afforded by the framework.  
Game-enhanced L2 learning and teaching 
The use of commercial, off-the-shelf games for learning and teaching offer a number of potential benefits 
(e.g. Gee, 2007). In terms of learning, this includes the benefits of authenticity and learning community 
(e.g. Peterson, 2012), opportunity for intercultural learning (e.g. Thorne, 2008), access to diversity and 
complexity of written and spoken discourse (e.g., Thorne, Fischer, & Lu, 2012), and affordances for the 
socio-cognitive processes of learning and language socialization (e.g. Piiranen-Marsh & Tainio, 2009; 
Zheng, Young, Wagner, & Brewer, 2009), especially of lexis (e.g. deHaan, Reed, & Kuwada, 2010; 
Sundqvist & Sylvén, 2012). Game-enhanced research shares the belief that by investigating how 
commercial digital games are used outside of class, and how they maybe adapted for learning purposes in 
class, we might enhance  our understanding of L2 learning and transform our practice of L2 teaching.  
In this issue, Alice Chik’s article Digital gaming and language learning: Autonomy and community, 
contributes to this strand of research through in-depth case studies of how, when, and with whom 
autonomous digital game-enhanced English and Japanese learning takes place outside of formal 
classroom contexts ‘in the wild’ of Hong Kong. In the piece, she examines data including gameplay 
session transcripts, stimulated recall interviews, focus group discussions, and online discussion forums to 
Jonathon Reinhardt & Julie Sykes Special Issue Commentary: Games and Play 
 
Language Learning & Technology  4 
explore the role of autonomy, community, and identity or role as related to second language learning. 
Patterns from case studies of ten learners indicate notable insights across five dimensions – location, 
formality, pedagogy, locus of control, and trajectory (Benson & Chik, 2011). The author reports on 
complex individual and social factors that facilitate (or hinder) game-enhanced L2 learning. The findings 
confirm previous work suggesting that game-enhanced learning outside of formal instructional contexts is 
a rich, but under-researched, phenomenon worth our attention. Chik’s contribution adds to this work not 
only through examination of in-game discourses, but also through the ecologically valid and principled 
consideration of digital game-related socio-literacy practices outside of formal educational contexts. 
While Chik’s previous research shows that some teachers are unaware of what their students are up to 
when they are playing games, this study shows that some students are engaging in productive, 
autonomous L2 learning activity.  
In addition to the study of out-of-class, autonomous game-enhanced L2 learning, other researchers have 
recognized the educational potential of vernacular games and have forged ahead to exploit them as 
pedagogical resources. As cultural products, digital games are arguably authentic cultural texts (Squire, 
2008; Reinhardt, 2013), and gaming is an authentic socio-literacy practice (Steinkuehler, 2007; Thorne, 
Black, & Sykes, 2009). Bringing commercial digital games into the L2 classroom requires consideration 
of curriculum fit, learner (and teacher) attitudes, and appropriateness of content. Furthermore, just as 
novels, magazines, websites, and movies must be pedagogically mediated to maximize learning, so must 
digital games.  
Hayo Reinders and Sorada Wattana add to game-enhanced pedagogy research by physically modifying a 
popular MMORPG, Ragnarok Online, and integrating it into an EFL curriculum in Thailand. In The 
effects of digital game play on willingness to communicate, the authors demonstrate ways in which 
gameplay can have an impact on learners’ willingness to communicate or “readiness to enter into 
discourse,” an important yet under-investigated learner affect. Two sets of questionnaires measuring 
willingness to communicate were administered to thirty Thai learners of English. Results show that while 
there was a reluctance to interact in the classroom and notable anxiety around speaking English, there was 
a statistically verifiable stronger willingness to communicate in the modified game space.  
Game-based learning and teaching 
Reinders and Wattana’s study challenges the boundaries of our categories by re-purposing an existing 
game into a tool that matches specific learning objectives, and we intentionally ordered that study second 
to illustrate the relationship between game-enhanced and game-based research. While game-enhanced 
research usually operates under the assumption that learner engagement and coherence of experience are 
naturally afforded by game authenticity, and thus it might be risky to pedagogically mediate the game, 
game-based research acknowledges that the design of a game is key to learning, and games are clearly 
designed objects (see, for example, Sykes, 2013; Holden and Sykes, 2011).  
In L2 writing practice: Game enjoyment as a key to engagement, Laura Varner and her colleagues show 
that assumptions about authenticity correlating to engagement are more complex than simple causation, 
and in fact, engagement and motivation are part of an interrelated suite of correlated constructs in 
research on games and learning. In their study, they explore how mini-games may be purposefully 
designed to teach writing strategies, and how L1 and L2 English participants perceive engagement and 
learning in them. Varner et al. collected daily self-reports of motivation, performance perceptions, and 
engagement as well as performance indicators for high school aged native English users and ESL learners 
as they interacted with a self-directed, partially game-based digital writing tutor called Writing Pal (W-
Pal). Results illustrate the complex relationships between actual writing improvement, perception of 
engagement, challenge, and boredom, and they indicate a strong correlation between enjoyment of game-
based learning and L2 learner engagement, suggesting the potential of designed game-based applications 
as tools for targeted L2 skills development.  
Jonathon Reinhardt & Julie Sykes Special Issue Commentary: Games and Play 
 
Language Learning & Technology  5 
Game- (and play-) informed learning and teaching 
While its exact definition is debated to no end, a ‘game’ is generally understood to be a goal-oriented, 
rule-based, playful (and usually voluntary) activity (Caillois, 1961; McGonigal, 2013). Play is understood 
in human development and anthropology research to be fundamental to human ontogenesis (Piaget, 1962; 
Vygotsky, 1978), and language play has been studied as fundamental to language learning (Cook, 2000; 
Lantolf, 1997). Interestingly, English distinguishes the word ‘game’ from ‘play,’ while other languages 
do not. When considering how the study of game-mediated social and cognitive activity might inform the 
design and practice of L2TL, it might seem logical to study the ludic, or rule-structured quality of 
gameplay, separately from the paedic, or playful quality of gameplay. However, in many senses they are 
inseparable, as implied by the very term ‘gameplay.’ On the other hand, having two words may help us 
see how we might think of ‘gamefulness’ (McGonigal, 2013) as a quality that can bring the 
transformative potential of play into the already goal-oriented and rule-based classroom. In this sense, 
‘gameful,’ ‘gamified,’ or in our terms ‘game-informed’ environments acknowledge and integrate 
gameplay as a means of learning in contexts where it makes sense to do so. As with any game-mediated 
application, it is critical to remind ourselves that the mere implementation of game-informed practice 
does not, in and of itself ensure a positive outcome. 
In our taxonomy, the purpose of game-informed research is to investigate how the activities of digital 
gaming and play in learning can inform L2TL that may not be embedded in traditional game structures. In 
other words, by studying these activities, we might better understand and design L2 learning 
environments, including tasks and assessments, to be more game-informed, even if they are not 
recognized as games. While there has been a solid and growing strand of research on language play in 
technology-enhanced environments (Belz & Reinhardt, 2004; Broner & Tarone, 2001; Liang, 2012; 
Warner, 2004), theoretically grounded descriptive work is still scant, especially with emerging 
technologies.  
In the final article of this issue, Microblogging activities: Tool transformation and language play, author 
David Hattem contributes to the study of technology-mediated gamefulness by demonstrating how social 
networking tools in L2 educational contexts may be ‘spun off’ or repurposed by users through language 
play. Grounding his study in Bakhtinian and other socially-informed frameworks, he examines how three 
students found agency by subverting the formal goals of grammar-focused Twitter-based classroom 
activities, using the tool for their own purposes at the same time meeting curricular objectives. In other 
words, through collaboration, structure, and playfulness, the students gamified their grammar activity and, 
in doing so, built a learning community, resulting in ‘expansive learning.’ The study illustrates how a 
delicate balance between learner agency and curricular objective may be struck through gameplay. 
CONCLUSION 
The selections in this special issue represent the complexity and diversity of approach to the study of 
digital games and play in L2TL and aims to highlight key areas for further exploration in game-enhanced, 
game-based, and game-informed research and practice.  As boundaries between the digital and physical 
world continue to blur, it is difficult to predict the ways in which technological behaviors and tools will 
transform one another. A transformation currently underway, and notably absent from this issue, is the 
way in which place and space are mediated by the presence (or absence) of mobile devices. With the 
almost ubiquitous existence of smart phones, we are seeing a remarkable shift in the ways in which 
people interact with the places they encounter (Squire, 2009). Moving language learning outside of the 
classroom and remediating learners’ experience with the local communities in which they interact is a 
logical, yet still relatively underexplored area (see Holden and Sykes, 2001; Sykes and Holden, 2012; and 
Thorne, 2013).  Place-based digital games, among other types and genres, hold a great deal of promise as 
we move forward into a new frontier of persistent connection and geo-located information.  
Jonathon Reinhardt & Julie Sykes Special Issue Commentary: Games and Play 
 
Language Learning & Technology  6 
As access to a diversity of digital games expands to new populations, it is important to develop a keen 
understanding of how in-class and ‘in the wild’ gameplay, with both commercial and educational games, 
may impact socialization, collaboration, and language use. This understanding can inform pedagogies that 
enhance formal L2 learning experiences with authentic digital games, as well as inform the purposed and 
targeted design of game-based spaces specifically for L2TL. Finally, as we begin to experience 
gamefulness and play across everyday places (e.g., collecting points at a local coffee shop) and social 
activities (e.g., city scavenger hunts in teams), we must develop a critical awareness of the role of games 
and play in everyday and academic life. Our hope is that a pro-active, empirical approach to these 
phenomena not only deepens our theoretical understanding of L2TL, but also transforms practice and 
ultimately informs development. Otherwise, we may find ourselves doing only reactionary research in 
response to market forces which, due to the growing size of the global game industry, set the agenda for us.  
 
ABOUT THE GUEST EDITORS 
Jonathon Reinhardt (PhD, The Pennsylvania State University) is Assistant Professor of English 
Language/Linguistics and affiliate with the PhD in Second Language Acquisition and Teaching program 
at the University of Arizona. His research interests lie in the relationship between technology and the 
epistemologies of CALL theory and practice, and focus on technology-enhanced second and foreign 
language pedagogy and learning, especially with emergent technologies like social media and digital 
gaming.  
E-mail: jonrein@email.arizona.edu  
Julie M. Sykes (PhD, University of Minnesota) is the Director of the Center for Applied Second 
Language Studies (CASLS) at the University of Oregon. Her research focuses on the use of emerging 
technological tools for the learning and teaching of interlanguage pragmatics. Her experience includes the 
design, implementation, and assessment of online immersive spaces and place-based, augmented reality 
mobile games to engage learners in a variety of non-institutional contexts.  
E-mail: jsykes@uoregon.edu  
 
REFERENCES 
Belz, J., & Reinhardt, J. (2004). Aspects of advanced foreign language proficiency: Internet-mediated 
German language play. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 14(3), 324–362. 
Benson, P., & Chik, A. (2011). Towards a more naturalistic CALL: Video gaming and language learning. 
International Journal of Computer-Assisted Language Learning and Teaching, 1(3), 1–13.  
Broner, M. & Tarone, E. (2001) Is it fun? Language play in a fifth-grade Spanish immersion classroom. 
Modern Language Journal, 85(3), 363–79. 
Caillois, R. (1961). Man, play, and games. Glencoe, IL: The Free Press. 
Cook, G. (2000). Language play, language learning. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Cornillie, F., Thorne, S. L., & Desmet, P. (eds.) (2012). Digital games for language learning: Challenges 
and opportunities. ReCALL Journal, 24(3). 
deHaan, J., Reed, W. M., & Kuwada, K. (2010). The effect of interactivity with a music video game on 
second language vocabulary recall. Language Learning and Technology, 14(2), 74–94. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num2/dehaanreedkuwada.pdf 
Jonathon Reinhardt & Julie Sykes Special Issue Commentary: Games and Play 
 
Language Learning & Technology  7 
Gee, J. P. (2007). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy (2nd ed.). New York, 
NY: Palgrave Macmillan.  
Hitosugi, C. I., Schmidt, M., & Hayashi, K. (2014). Digital game-based learning in the L2 classroom: The 
impact of the UN’s off-the-shelf videogame, Food Force, on learner affect and vocabulary retention. 
CALICO Journal, 31(1), 19–39. 
Holden, C. & Sykes, J. (2011). Leveraging mobile games for place-based language learning. International 
Journal of Game-based Learning. 1(2), 1–18. 
Hubbard, P. (1991). Evaluating computer games for language learning. Simulation and Gaming, June 
1991: 220–223. 
Kapp, K. (2012). The Gamification of Learning and Instruction: Game-based Methods and Strategies for 
Training and Education. San Francisco, CA: Pfeiffer.  
Lantolf, J. P. (1997). Language play and the acquisition of L2 Spanish. In W. Glass & A. T. Perez-
Leroux, eds., Contemporary Perspectives on the Acquisition of Spanish. Volume 2: Production, 
Processing and Comprehension (pp. 3–24). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla. 
Liang, M. (2012). Foreign lucidity in online role-playing games. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 
25(2), 455-473. 
McGonigal, J. (2013). Reality is broken: Why games make us better and how they can change the world. 
New York, NY: Penguin. 
Peterson, M. (2012). EFL learner collaborative interaction in Second Life. ReCALL, 24(1), 20–39. 
Peterson, M. (2013). Computer games and language learning. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Phillips, M. (1987). Potential paradigms and possible problems for CALL. System, 15(3), 275–287. 
Piaget, J. (1962). Play, dreams, and imitation in childhood. New York, NY: Norton.  
Piiranen-Marsh, A., & Tainio, L. (2009). Other-repetition as a resource for participation in the activity of 
playing a video game. Modern Language Journal, 93(2), 153–169. 
Purushotma, R. (2005). You’re not studying, you’re just ... Language Learning and Technology, 9(1), 80–
96. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num1/purushotma/default.html 
Reinders, H. (ed.) (2012). Digital games in language learning and teaching. New York, NY: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Reinders, H., & Wattana, S. (2012). Talk to me! Games and students’ willingness to communicate. In H. 
Reinders, ed., Digital games in language learning and teaching (pp. 156–187). New York, NY: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Reinhardt, J. (2013). Digital game-mediated foreign language teaching and learning: Myths, realities and 
opportunities. In M. Derivry-Plard, P. Faure, & C. Brudermann (Eds.), Apprendre les langues à 
l’université au 21ème siècle, 161–178. Paris, France: Riveneuve. 
Reinhardt, J., & Sykes, J. (2012). Conceptualizing digital game-mediated L2 learning and pedagogy: 
Game-enhanced and game-based research and practice. In H. Reinders, ed., Digital games in language 
learning and teaching (pp. 32–49). New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Reinhardt, J., & Zander, V. (2011). Social networking in an intensive English program classroom: A 
language socialization perspective. CALICO Journal, 28(2), 326–344. 
Squire, K. D. (2008). Video game literacy: A literacy of expertise. In J. Coiro, M. Knobel, C. Lankshear, 
D. Leu (Eds). Handbook of research on new literacies, 635–670. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Jonathon Reinhardt & Julie Sykes Special Issue Commentary: Games and Play 
 
Language Learning & Technology  8 
Squire, K. D. (2009). Mobile media learning: Multiplicities of place. Horizon, 17(1), 70–80.  
Steinkuehler, C. (2007). Massively multiplayer online gaming as a constellation of literacy practices. 
eLearning, 4, 297–318. 
Sundqvist, P., & Kerstin Sylvén, L. (2012). World of VocCraft: Computer games and Swedish learners’ 
L2 English vocabulary. In H. Reinders, ed., Digital games in language learning and teaching (pp. 189–
208). New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Sykes, J. (2013). Multiuser virtual environments: Learner apologies in Spanish. In N. Taguchi & J. Sykes, 
Eds. Technology in Interlanguage pragmatics research and teaching (pp. 71–100). Amsterdam, 
Netherlands: John Benjamins Language Learning and Teaching Series. 
Sykes, J., & Holden, C. (2011). Communities: Exploring digital games and social networking. In L. 
Ducate and N. Arnold, eds., Present and Future Promises of CALL: From Theory and Research to New 
Directions in Language Teaching, CALICO Monograph 2011 (pp. 311–336). 
Sykes, J. & Reinhardt, J. (2012). Language at play: Digital games in second and foreign language 
teaching and learning. Series on Theory and Practice in Second Language Classroom Instruction, J. 
Liskin-Gasparro & M. Lacorte, series eds. New York, NY: Pearson-Prentice Hall. 
Thomas, M. (ed.) (2011). Digital games and second languages in Asia. Digital Culture and Education, 
3(1). 
Thorne, S. L. (2008). Transcultural communication in open Internet environments and massively 
multiplayer online games. In S. Magnan, ed., Mediating discourse online (pp. 305–327). Amsterdam, 
Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Thorne, S. L. (2013). Language learning, ecological validity, and innovation under conditions of 
superdiversity. Bellaterra Journal of Teaching & Learning Language & Literature, 6(2), 1–27. 
Thorne, S. L., Black, R. W., & Sykes, J. (2009). Second language use, socialization, and learning in 
Internet communities and online games. Modern Language Journal, 93, 802–821. 
Thorne, S. L., Fischer, I., & Lu, X. (2012). The semiotic ecology and linguistic complexity of an online 
game world. ReCALL Journal, 24(3), 279–301.  
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
Warner, C. (2004). It’s just a game, right? Types of play in foreign language CMC. Language Language 
and Technology, 8(2), 69–87. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num2/warner/default.html 
Zheng, D., Young, M., Wagner, M., and Brewer, R. (2009). Negotiation for action: English language 
learning in game-based virtual worlds. Modern Language Journal, 93(4), 489–511. 
