Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/cowanchoolee.pdf 
October 2014, Volume 18, Number 3 
pp. 193–207 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 193 
ICALL FOR IMPROVING KOREAN L2 WRITERS’ ABILITY  
TO EDIT GRAMMATICAL ERRORS 
Ron Cowan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
Jinhee Choo, University of Illinois at Urbana- Champaign 
Gabseon Sunny Lee, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign 
This study illustrates how a synergy of two technologies–Intelligent Computer-Assisted 
Language Learning (ICALL) and corpus linguistic analysis–can produce a lasting 
improvement in L2 learners’ ability to edit persistent grammatical errors from their 
writing.  A large written English corpus produced by Korean undergraduate and graduate 
students enrolled at an American university was analyzed to determine four persistent 
grammatical errors in their writing assignments. An ICALL program was then designed to 
improve these L2 learners’ awareness of these errors in texts and provide practice in 
correcting them.  A pre-test/post-test experiment revealed a significant improvement in 
recognizing and correcting the four errors by Korean L2 learners who had taken the 
ICALL program over a matched control group that had received standard L2 writing 
instruction.  This improvement held up on a second post-test administered five months 
later. The implications of the results for L2 instruction and the design of iterative ICALL 
tutors are discussed. 
Keywords: CALL, Corpus Analysis, Persistent Grammatical Errors, L2 Writing 
APA Citation: Cowan, R., Choo, J. & Lee, G. S. (2014). ICALL for improving Korean 
L2 writers’ ability to edit grammatical errors. Language Learning & Technology, 18(3), 
193–207. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/cowanchoolee.pdf 
Received: October 10, 2012; Accepted: November 26, 2013; Published: October 1, 2014 
Copyright: © Ron Cowan, Jinhee Choo & Gabseon Sunny Lee 
INTRODUCTION 
This study has two purposes.  The first is to report on the effectiveness of an online Intelligent Computer- 
Assisted Language Learning (ICALL) program designed to improve Korean second language (L2) 
learners’ grammar awareness and grammatical correction skills. The second is to demonstrate how corpus 
analysis tools facilitate the selection of L2 writing errors targeted in the design of ICALL grammar 
correction courseware that addresses persistent/recurring errors in the writing of specific L2 populations. 
Background  
The program described in this study, The ESL Writing Tutor, falls within the domain of ICALL (formerly, 
Intelligent Language Tutoring Systems [ILTS]) tools, which utilize natural language processing (NLP) to 
provide individualized feedback to learners about their performance on exercises that support L2 
instruction (Meurers, 2012).  The exercises may be devoted to a number of language learning activities, 
such as vocabulary, comprehension, culture, and writing, but a central feature of most ICALL programs is 
raising L2 grammar awareness.  Activities designed for this purpose often take the form of asking 
students to produce a sentence based on a string of lexical items, (e.g. Heift, 2010) or as a response to a 
question about a previously presented context, (e.g. Nagata, 1996). The ability of ICALL systems to 
provide informative and meaningful feedback to the student is crucial to the success of these activities.  
Based on a number of studies (Bowles, 2005; Heift, 2004; Heift & Rimrott, 2008; Nagata, 1996; Nagata 
& Swisher, 1995; Pujola, 2001; Rosa & Lowe, 2004), designers of ICALL programs have concluded that 
explicit feedback, i.e. feedback that immediately identifies a grammatical error and then links the student 
Ron Cowan, Jinhee Choo, & Gabseon Sunny Lee ICALL for Editing Grammatical Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 194 
to information that can be used to correct it, is the most effective kind for students studying an L2 at all 
proficiency levels. An example of this is shown in Heift (2010, p. 447), where a student who has made a 
subject-verb agreement error is first alerted to this and then, as an aid to correction, shown an inflectional 
paradigm with the verb he or she used in the initial erroneous attempt to form a grammatical sentence.  
ICALL tutors can store students’ attempts at achieving correct grammatical output, and it has been 
suggested that this database, in addition to being useful for the improving the design of the materials, 
could have value for investigating interlanguage (IL).  
Like the ICALL tools described above, The ESL Writing Tutor also uses NLP and is designed for web-
based delivery, but it is not intended to support an L2 language course that encompasses multiple levels of 
proficiency.  Instead, it targets a specific population of learners whose L2 proficiency is well above that 
of students who complete such courses. The ESL Writing Tutor was intended as a response to a problem 
encountered by the consultants at the Writers Workshop, a unit of the library at a large mid-western 
university in the United States.  The consultants had found an inordinate number of grammatical errors in 
the writing of Korean graduate students, so it was decided to design ICALL courseware capable of 
improving the ability of these students to detect and correct these persistent grammatical errors. The 
courseware would, after testing, be improved and made available to all Korean undergraduate and 
graduate students at the university, and it could also be used in conjunction with the ESL remedial writing 
courses that most of these students are required to take.1  
Both the structure and feedback used in The ESL Writing Tutor also differ from the ICALL programs 
described above.  Since the Korean students had been using English for some time, it seemed likely that 
many of their grammatical errors would display systematic deviations from specific English structures, 
such as the order of determiners and quantifiers before head nouns, and the appropriate use of articles. For 
example, native speakers of Chinese (Yip, 1995), Korean (Ju, 1995), and Japanese (Oshita, 2001) have 
been shown to make the same type of passivization error with English ergative (unaccusative) verbs.   
Furthermore, Han (2000) found “pseudo-passive” errors (sentences like *The letter about graphics file is 
not received, where the intended form is assumed to be a passive structure in English) to be so persistent 
in the speech of two subjects he had studied–both Chinese academics who had been living in America for 
two years but had achieved TOEFL scores of over 600 ten years earlier—that he felt this error was likely 
to become fossilized. We reasoned that to be effective, the Tutor should focus on raising the learners’ 
consciousness of how their productions deviate from syntactic structures that they have been repeatedly 
exposed to in the past, and that the feedback in our courseware should prompt the learners to think about 
this difference.  Accordingly, when learners made errors, the Tutor feedback did not link them to 
information containing examples of correct forms; rather it prompted them to think about the instruction 
they had received on what to avoid when using one of these problem structures.  Our decision to build 
this kind of feedback into The ESL Writing Tutor was also influenced by a number of studies (Adams, 
Nuevo, & Egi, 2011; Kim, 2005; Lyster & Ranta, 1997; Sheen, 2004), which indicated that this 
metalinguistic prompting might enhance the prospect of L2 learners’ producing correct responses.  
Using a Learner Corpus to Identify Errors 
In order to develop a large database containing errors typical of those found for Korean students by the 
Writers Workshop, we followed the approach advocated by Granger (2003) and applied corpus analysis 
tools to a large written corpus produced by students who fit the target population: Korean students in the 
ESL remedial writing courses described above. The corpus, which was compiled over a number of years, 
comprises over 231, 228 words consisting of text files of essays, writing assignments, and diagnostic tests 
produced by Korean undergraduate and graduate students. To minimize the possibility of plagiarism, only 
first drafts of writing assignments were collected.  This corpus has the advantage of providing a large 
sample of written English for Korean native speakers writing academic English in various disciplines.  
Although similar to corpora like the French Interlanguage Database (FRIDA), the International Corpus of 
Learner English (ICLE) and the Varieties of English for Specific Purposes dAtabase (VESPA) corpus 
Ron Cowan, Jinhee Choo, & Gabseon Sunny Lee ICALL for Editing Grammatical Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 195 
compiled at the Center for English Corpus Linguistics (CECL) at the Université catholique de Louvain, it 
differs in one important way: it is indexed to two tests, the TOEFL and the English as a Second Language 
Placement Test (EPT), and hence affords the user a more accurate definition of the learners’ English 
proficiency.  The fact that the “advanced” level proficiency of the L2 learners is defined in terms of the 
parameters of a widely used international English proficiency test makes this corpus particularly useful 
for replications and other applied research on L2 writing.  It also facilitates investigation of SLA topics of 
current interest such as the reality of fossilizations (Long, 2003) and the nature of “hard” rules (DeKeyser, 
2003, 2005). 
To determine which errors could legitimately be considered persistent for our population of Korean 
learners of English, we began by manually inspecting our corpus and recording recurrent patterns.  From 
this initial inspection, four errors emerged which displayed consistent pattering and had the highest 
frequencies in both the undergraduate and graduate writing samples. We therefore decided to make these 
errors the focus of our investigation and proceeded to carry out an in-depth examination that would reveal 
their structure in greater detail as well as their relative frequency in much larger sample.  To do this, we 
applied error-tagging software to this larger sample: UCL Error Editor created by CECL.  This software 
allows users to insert error tags that denote the deviation from the correct version of a given structure in 
the text files. An example of this is the error code UED, which indicates omission of an obligatory 
definite article before a head noun.  The omission is shown in the tagged sequence 0$ the $ government, 
where 0 represents the omission of the article, and the two dollar signs surround the definite article, the, 
which should have preceded the head noun government.  Once the text files were tagged, we applied 
Wordsmith 3 text retrieval software (Scott, 2008), which allowed us to extract every instance of each 
error type from the texts in our samples.  Overall frequencies for individual error types were calculated 
and converted to percentages (number of errors/number of items in each syntactic category x 100). Inter-
rater reliability for this study was the ratio of error corrections agreed upon by two raters to the total 
number of errors identified.  For the purpose of this study, we decided to select only errors for inclusion 
in The ESL Writing Tutor that occurred over ten percent of the time in obligatory contexts. This base level 
was set to exclude the possibility that we might be selecting errors that were in the final stages of 
disappearing from the L2 learners’ interlanguages. 
Four Persistent Grammatical Errors  
The first persistent error was the passivization of English ergative (unaccusative) verbs (fall, die, drown 
etc.) and predicates of existing and happening (exist, happen, occur, last etc.).  This error type has been 
found for Chinese, Japanese, and Korean learners of English, and has been discussed by a number of 
researchers (Balcom, 1997; Hirakawa, 1995; Hwang, 1997; Ju, 1999; Oshita, 2001; Yip, 1995).  
Passivization of these two types of English verbs results in errors like *The lecture was lasted for three 
hours, and  *Our offspring will be suffered because we neglect the environment.  The corpus analysis 
revealed extremely high error rates, ranging from 25% to 66.7%.  Three “paired” ergative verbs (verbs 
which have transitive counterparts), improve, change and decrease, had error rates of 66.7%, 62.9%, and 
43.5%, respectively.2 
The second type of persistent error made by the Korean learners encompassed aspects of the usage of 
English articles.  Korean does not have an overt article system, and nouns can be unboundedly used as 
definite or indefinite without explicit grammatical markers.  As long as the context allows readers to 
understand what is being talked about, speakers of Korean tend to omit the closest equivalent to the 
English definite article.  In addition, Korean does have a concept of countability in nouns, but uses a 
different and optional system to express this.  Furthermore, some English non-count nouns, such as 
equipment, stuff, vocabulary, homework, education, information, and so forth are countable in Korean. 
The result of this combination of factors is that Koreans find English articles extremely difficult to 
master, and they frequently omit them in running discourse.  The corpus analysis revealed a consistent 
omission of obligatory occurrences of both definite and indefinite articles for both undergraduate and 
Ron Cowan, Jinhee Choo, & Gabseon Sunny Lee ICALL for Editing Grammatical Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 196 
graduate students, with no noticeable differences attributable to course level or essay length. The average 
number of omissions for graduate essays was 33% of all obligatory occurrences; the range was from 22% 
to 45%.  Overwhelmingly, definite articles constituted the most frequent omissions in obligatory contexts 
(e.g. *I had ø same experience for I had the same experience), but occasionally they were supplied in 
contexts where ø article is preferred, for example in referring to generic concepts.  So we found examples 
like *before starting the school in a context which clearly indicated the broader generic before starting ø 
school was the only appropriate choice.  None of the five main discourse contexts where definite articles 
are obligatory (Poesio & Viera, 1998) predominated.  Indefinite articles displayed the same pattern as 
definite articles. 
The form of noun phrases (NPs) with the prenominal quantifiers most, some, many and one constituted 
the third persistent error selected.  The Korean students mixed most of the nouns (Ns) with most Ns, 
producing errors like *Most of Americans like McDonald hamburgers and *Some of students didn’t go to 
school today.  Error rates ranged from 17% to 23% for some and most, and 12% for one. 
The fourth persistent grammatical error involved the choice of English demonstrative determiners before 
head nouns.  Korean has only one morphemic representation of each set of English demonstrative 
determiners, hence Koreans tend to produce English noun phrases (NPs) with singular demonstrative 
determiners before plural head nouns in their writing, for example,  *this mistakes, and the opposite, 
*those argument.  The rate of occurrence for these types of errors in obligatory contexts was lower than 
that of the other three rules: 12.7% in undergraduate essays and 11.6% in graduate essays.  There were 
twice as many errors involving plural noun forms than singular noun forms.   
The ESL Writing Tutor 
All of the units in The ESL Writing Tutor, which was developed by Doe-Hyung Kim, have the lesson 
structure shown in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1. The ESL Writing Tutor unit design. 
The individual sections in each grammar unit utilize a combination of explicit instruction and 
metalinguistic prompting feedback for error correction. Section A briefly presents a short review of the 
Ron Cowan, Jinhee Choo, & Gabseon Sunny Lee ICALL for Editing Grammatical Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 197 
salient facts regarding the correct formation of the grammatical construction targeted by each lesson. For 
example, Section A of the unit that addresses the passivization of ergative verbs presents a brief overview 
of how active sentences are transformed into the passive voice, part of which is shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Section A in “Passive Unit”. 
This overview is then followed by a grammaticality judgment task with five to ten sample sentences, 
some of which contain the error that is going to be addressed in the next section.  The grammaticality 
judgment task primes the students for what they will encounter in Section B.  When students declare an 
ungrammatical sentence grammatical, they receive explicit feedback that informs them of this and an 
explanation of why the sentence is ungrammatical.  For example, in the lesson that targeted passivization 
of ergative verbs, the students, having completed the short review of the passive voice in Section A, 
encounter a sentence shown in (1) below. If they click a “grammatical” alternative, they receive the 
message shown under it and an example of the correct sentence. 
(1) Most women in developing countries are suffered from extreme poverty. 
 Student clicks: Grammatical 
 Feedback:   This is not correct, Kim.  Suffer is a verb that only appears in active sentences. 
The task serves as an introduction to Section C, which describes how aspects of the learner’s L1 may lead 
to grammatical errors in their written English.  For example, staying with the same error, passivization of 
ergative verbs, Section C draws the learner’s attention to the fact that the Korean equivalents of many 
English verbs like seem, happen, occur, and so forth appear in Korean with passive morphemes or verbs.  
Next, students are told that these English verbs cannot appear in passive sentences, as shown in Figure 3.  
Finally, the problem of English paired ergative verbs is presented. Students are shown that English verbs 
like boil, bounce, break, change, and so forth can appear in active and passive sentences, and they are 
cautioned not to use the passive form of the verb when they want to write a sentence indicating that the 
Ron Cowan, Jinhee Choo, & Gabseon Sunny Lee ICALL for Editing Grammatical Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 198 
subject experiences the action.  
 
Figure 3. Section C in “Passive Unit”. 
After completing Section C, students proceed to Section D, where they read single sentences and then 
short passages of several sentences and examine them for errors. When they find an error, they highlight 
it. If the highlighted portion of a sentence contains no error, they receive a message telling them to 
continue examining the passage in relation to the grammar topic of that lesson. When they highlight an 
error, they are complimented (Good choice!) and told to correct it by typing changes in a box that appears 
below the sentence.  Here the feedback supplied to students differs from the explicit approach used in 
ICALL courseware described earlier.  Because the instruction they have just received in Section C 
focused on showing them what to pay attention to in order to avoid specific errors, the ICALL feedback 
in this section prompts the students to think about this, rather than immediately linking them to specific 
information that would be helpful in correction.  After each unsuccessful attempt, the original error 
reappears in the box, and students are encouraged to consider their answers in relation to the content in 
Sections A and C.  An example of this feedback is shown in (2) below.  Although the student has 
correctly highlighted the error, have been improved, he or she initially types in an inaccurate correction. 
(2) Sentence: 
Over the past three years relations between the United States and China have been improved considerably. 
This is due partly to an increase in trade between the two countries. 
 Attempt 1:  Student types: had been improved. 
  Feedback: Try to think of the kinds of problems we saw in “PASSIVE.” 
 Attempt 2: Student types: were improved 
  Feedback: Let’s try again.  Hint: Is a relationship “improved” or does it improve? 
 
Ron Cowan, Jinhee Choo, & Gabseon Sunny Lee ICALL for Editing Grammatical Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 199 
 Attempt 3: Student deletes been, leaving have improved. 
  Feedback: Good job! Check to see if there are any other errors in the sentences. 
Section E has the same format as Section D, but it presents an entire paragraph with multiple examples of 
the grammar topic in the unit.  After completing Section E, students are directed to Section F, where they 
are presented with sentences that require the choice of the appropriate form of the target grammar point. 
They then move to Section G, which contains translation tasks on the target grammar topic. Upon 
completing Sections A through G, students receive a summary of their performance that shows the correct 
and incorrect choices as well as the percentage of correct choices. 
All of the ungrammatical sentences in Sections D and E are taken from the error corpus, and about 
twenty-five percent of the sentences used in these two sections contain no errors.  Each time section D is 
selected, the sentences are randomly reordered.  The beta version of The ESL Writing Tutor tested in this 
study contains a teacher module shown on the navigation box in the top left hand corner of the 
screenshots shown in Figures 2 and 3. Teachers can enter sentences containing new examples of a 
particular error type that they find in a student’s compositions in the teacher module, which has two 
purposes: (1) to provide a constantly expanding database of sentences that can be used in Sections D and 
E, and (2) to afford teachers the possibility of customizing Sections D and E for individual students. As 
teachers using The ESL Writing Tutor become more familiar with the error types, they can tag newly 
discovered examples and add these to the database with cautionary messages to individual students.  
THE STUDY 
Method 
The effectiveness the ICALL program in raising Korean ESL students’ awareness of correct grammatical 
form and enhancing their ability to correct grammatical errors in English passages was tested in a 
controlled experiment.  The experiment compared the performance of a group of students who received 
four hours of supplementary instruction with The ESL Writing Tutor with another group that did not. The 
participants, who were randomly assigned to each group, were enrolled in the ESL remedial writing 
courses, where they continued to receive instruction on how to write academic English.  This instruction 
focuses on the rhetorical organization of academic papers, but teachers may enter grammatical corrections 
on writing assignments.  However, the type of feedback that the students in those classes receive is 
primarily about rhetorical organization such as topic and transitional sentences, paragraph development 
etc.  The group that did not receive instruction via The ESL Writing Tutor did not receive in-class focused 
grammatical feedback on the four errors described above.  
Instrument 
The assessment measure was designed to mirror the task for which the ICALL program had been 
designed: editing grammatical errors from written prose.  It consisted of a one and a half page English 
passage of 615 words.  Thirty-two test items (eight items in each of the four grammatical rules in the 
ICALL program) were embedded along with an equal number of correct examples of each.  Since the test 
replicated a task that the participants perform regularly in their remedial writing classes, that is, editing 
grammatical mistakes in their compositions before handing in a final version, it can be said to have good 
face and content validity. The same essay was used for three tests: the pretest, the first posttest, and the 
second posttest.  The topic of the passage was a current event related to environmental pollution.  An 
abridged example of the first two paragraphs of the essay with italicized errors is shown in (3).  The errors 
were not italicized on the test, and the null sign, ø, which indicates a missing indefinite article in this 
example, also did not appear on the test. 
(3) Most of scientists would agree that atmospheric pollution is being increased throughout the 
Ron Cowan, Jinhee Choo, & Gabseon Sunny Lee ICALL for Editing Grammatical Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 200 
world.  Governments are coming under increasing pressure to take measures to reduce these 
problem.  Interestingly, not all of scientists agree on how serious atmospheric pollution has 
become, and this has allowed nations that depend on heavy industry to claim that pollution will 
decrease without any special efforts by governments.  But all of nations who signed the Kyoto 
Protocol in 1997 believe that increased pollution will be resulted if industries that send harmful 
gases into the air are not subject to governmental controls. 
  New forms of pollution are discovered every year. Recently, using planes, ships and 
balloons, ø international team of scientists tracked a gritty, black cloud that was nearly two miles 
thick… 
Only corrections that demonstrated accuracy on both finding and correcting an error received a score of 
one.  Partial corrections (correct identification only) received a score of zero. 
Participants 
Forty Korean-speaking English learners volunteered for this experiment and were paid for their 
participation. Twenty-two of the L2 learners were assigned to the instructional treatment group, the 
ICALL group, and eighteen to a NO ICALL control group, which received no such instruction.  We also 
included a comparison group of nineteen native speakers of English, the NS group, for two reasons.  First, 
even though the test measure had been pre-tested extensively, variability clearly exists among native 
speakers on any proofreading task. We felt that the performance of the native speaker comparison group 
would provide a baseline competency in recognizing errors in running prose and, concomitantly, a 
measure of the test’s reliability.  Secondly, we wanted a means of determining whether any improvement 
found in the performance of the treatment group approached the level of native speaker competence.  
Because the grammatical rules selected for this study represented persistent errors made by L2 learners 
with advanced English proficiency, it was reasonable to assume that they might be near fossilizations and 
hence nearly impossible to eradicate.  Comparison of the L2 results with the NS scores would provide an 
indication of how much farther the ICALL courseware would have to be modified and extended to 
provide this particular group of L2 learners with the ability to achieve native speaker parity when editing 
their English writing.   
The NS group was made up of native speakers who taught English writing to either native or non-native 
speakers: three were writing teaching assistants in the English Department, thirteen were instructors from 
an Intensive English Institute at the university, and three taught in the ESL writing service courses.  All of 
the Korean participants were graduate students and were enrolled in one of the graduate writing courses 
described earlier. Their English proficiency fell within the TOEFL score range (scores of 550–610 Paper, 
213–253 CBT or 79–102 iBT, inclusive) that placed them in one of the three remedial writing courses.  
Language experience and biographical background were assessed by a brief questionnaire. All of the L2 
participants spoke Korean as their first language and had started learning English at the age of 12 in 
Korea.  Their ages at the time of the experiment and their majors varied. 
Procedure 
The experimental procedure consisted of a pre-test for all groups, computer delivered instruction for the 
CALL group, writing instruction without attention to grammar or correction for the NO CALL group, 
followed by two post-tests. The NS group took the editing test twice within a three-week interval. On 
their first visit, participants from all three groups were given a brief background survey questionnaire, 
examples of erroneous sentences, and examples of correction procedures prior to the pre-test. After they 
had completed the questionnaire and the correction procedure section, they were given the pre-test essay 
which had the following instructions:  
A friend of yours has written this passage and asked you to look it over and see that it doesn’t 
Ron Cowan, Jinhee Choo, & Gabseon Sunny Lee ICALL for Editing Grammatical Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 201 
contain any grammatical errors.   Help your friend out.  Correct any grammatical errors you find.  
You can insert words, cross them out and change them to make grammatical sentences.  Please 
read the passage very carefully. 
Below these instructions were two example sentences corrected with cross-outs and insertions of the type 
that the students had just practiced. Once all of the participants had completed the pre-test, they were 
randomly assigned to two groups, the CALL group and the NO CALL group.  Only the participants of the 
CALL group were given brief instructions about the computer administered instruction and correction. 
They were randomly assigned to orders for taking the four CALL lessons and came to a computer 
language lab in small groups on different days. 
In addition to their regular instruction, the CALL group received the computer delivered instruction once 
a week for four weeks in the language laboratory.  The duration of the sessions averaged about one hour. 
During the first week, half of the CALL group completed Sections A, B and C of the PASSIVE lesson 
and the same sections in the QUANTIFIERS lesson. The other half began with the same sections in the 
QUANTIFIERS lesson and then did the PASSIVE lesson. During the second week, the two groups 
worked through Sections C, D, E, F and G of these lessons. The same procedure was followed for weeks 
three and four with the remaining two ICALL lessons.  The CALL group also took a unit test that 
included a large paragraph in which all four grammar rules were embedded.  The NO CALL group 
received no explicit instruction on any of these grammar topics; rather they continued to receive the same 
instruction that the CALL group was getting in their regular classes.  This emphasized rhetorical 
organization, paragraph coherence, transitions and so forth. Corrections throughout their compositions 
were by and large related to these rhetorical issues and took the form of comments like: “Nice intro; more 
detail needed here; what’s your thesis?”  The participants in the CALL and NO CALL groups returned 
five weeks after the pre-test to take the first post-test.  Five months later they returned and took the test 
again. 
RESULTS 
Thirty-two items (eight items in each of the four syntactic error categories) were scored by two graders, 
who reached 97 percent agreement.  All cases of disagreement were then submitted to the judgment of a 
third rater for final decision. The Cronbach alpha value was .949 with all participants (n =59) and .893 
with the L2 learners. 
In order to examine the immediate effect of the CALL instruction, the scores of the pre and post-tests 
were initially submitted to a three-way (3x2x4) mixed analysis of variance with test time (pre-test and 
post-test) and syntactic category (articles, passives, quantifiers, and demonstrative determiners) as within-
subject factors, and with three groups (CALL group, NO CALL group, and NS group) as a between 
subject factor.  However, the assumption of homogeneity of variance was violated with all three groups 
(Box’s M = 174.37, F (72,8275) =1.91, p = .001) while the assumption was met without the NS group 
(Box’s M = 150.85, F (78, 4179), = 1.25, p = .05).  This means that the variance of the NS group was 
significantly different from that of the two non-native speaker groups, so ANOVA with three groups as a 
between groups factor cannot be performed.  We therefore undertook a series of two-way analyses 
between test time and syntactic category per group.  
The NO CALL group showed only a significant main effect for syntactic category, F (3, 168) = 20.91, p < 
.01.3  Post-hoc comparisons were performed using Fisher Hayter multiple comparison tests.  There were 
significant mean differences between demonstrative determiners and the other categories: articles, qFH 
(3, 168) = 2.22, p < .01, passives, qFH (3, 168) = 2.22, p < .01, and quantifiers, qFH (3, 168) = 2.36, p <  
.01.  Participants in this group displayed a much better knowledge of the rules for English demonstrative 
determiners than for the other three categories. 
Ron Cowan, Jinhee Choo, & Gabseon Sunny Lee ICALL for Editing Grammatical Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 202 
The CALL group showed dramatic improvement between the pre-test and the post-test in all four 
syntactic categories. Significant main effects for test time, F (1, 56) = 198.99, p < .01 and syntactic 
category, F (3, 168) = 12.85, p < .01, were found as well as a significant two-way interaction between test 
time and syntactic category, F (3, 168) = 13.39, p < .01.  A series of repeated measures one-way 
ANOVAs on the CALL group data revealed that all of the categories in the CALL group have significant 
mean differences between the pre-test and post-test:  articles, F (1, 168) = 23.48, p = .01, passives, F (1, 
168) = 146.78, p < .01, quantifiers, F (1, 168) = 169.62, p < .01, and demonstrative determiners, F (1, 
168) = 98.90, p < .01.  However, improvement in the articles between the pre-test and the post-test (M = 
1.96, SD = .28, p < .01) is smaller than that of the other three categories. 
The analysis for the NS comparison group showed a significant main effect for syntactic category, F (3, 
168) = 2.89, p = .04, but there were no significant differences in means between the pre-test and post-test 
for all the syntactic categories. There were significant differences between articles and passives, qFH (3, 
168) = 1.03, p < .01, and between passives and quantifiers, qFH (3, 168) = 1.13, p < .01.  Due to the 
violation of the homogeneity of variance assumption, a non-parametric ANOVA was performed by 
transforming the score data to global ranks in order to compare scores of the NS group and the CALL 
group.  Significant differences in means on all syntactic categories were found between NS and the CALL 
group on the pre- and post-test administrations, F (1, 39) = 329. 49, p < .001. 
To measure long-term retention of the instruction from the administration of post-test 1 to post-test 2, five 
months later, the mean scores from only the CALL and NO CALL groups were analyzed in a three-way 
(2x3x4) mixed analysis of variance with test time (pre-test, post-test 1 and post-test 2) and syntactic 
category (articles, passives, quantifiers, and demonstrative determiners) as within-subject factors and with 
two groups (NO CALL and CALL) as a between-subject factor. The overall means by group are 
displayed in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4. Means per Test Time and Syntactic Category for CALL and NO CALL groups. 
Three significant two-way interactions were found: test time x syntactic category, F (6, 228) = 3.20, p = 
.005, test time x group, F (2,76) = 30.97, p < .001, and syntactic category x group, F (3, 114) = 2.97, p = 
.04.  Significant main effects for test time, F (2,76) = 42.76, p < .001, syntactic category, F (3, 114) = 
29.57, p < .001, and group F (1, 38) = 50.28, p < .001 were also found. The significant interaction 
between test time and syntactic category for the treatment group, F (6, 228) = 5.11, p < .001 implies that 
there were significant means score differences of syntactic categories across all of the rest of the 
Ron Cowan, Jinhee Choo, & Gabseon Sunny Lee ICALL for Editing Grammatical Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 203 
administrations for the CALL group.  In contrast, the NO CALL group showed no improvement over all 
syntactic categories between test administrations. 
There were significant differences between test times for all syntactic categories in the CALL group: 
articles, F (2, 228) = 7.69, p < .01, passives, F (2, 228) = 53.20, p < .001, quantifiers, F (2, 228) = 58.72, 
p < .001, and demonstrative determiners, F (2, 228) = 47.42, p < .001.  Post-hoc comparisons revealed 
that the CALL group made significant improvement between the pre-test and post-test 1 in all the 
categories: articles, qFH (2, 228) = .83, p <  .01, passives, qFH (2, 228) = 2.13, p < .01, quantifiers, qFH 
(2, 228) = 2.4, p < .01, and demonstrative determiners, qFH (2, 228) = 1.63, p < .01. Moreover, there 
were still significant differences between pre-test and post-test 2 for three categories: passives qFH (2, 
228) = 1.75, p < .01, quantifiers, qFH (2, 228) = 1.82, p <  .01, and demonstrative determiners, qFH (2, 
228) = 1.4, p < .01.  No significant differences between post-test 1 and post-test 2 were found for articles, 
passives and demonstrative determiners. On the other hand, for quantifiers, there was significant 
difference between the post-test 1 and the post-test 2, qFH (2, 228) = .58. p < .05. This indicates that 
significant immediate impact of the instruction lasted up to five months after the initial instruction.  In 
addition, there was no significant long-term loss of knowledge gained from the instruction for three of the 
four categories. 
Figure 5 displays the time x group interaction for the two groups over three test administrations at 
different times. This simply reconfirms the previously reported results that the CALL group retains the 
effect of the instruction up to the second post-test without significant drop for a semester.  In contrast the 
NO CALL group displays a very minimal increase over time. 
 
Figure 5. Means per group over test times. 
DISCUSSION 
The native speakers did not achieve a perfect score on all four rules, but this was due largely to the 
substitution of a different grammatical alternative that was not allowed under the strict scoring criteria.   
For example, on demonstrative determiner items a few native speakers substituted such statements for 
those statements, and this was counted as an error under the scoring criteria.  Similarly, some vacillation 
was found for definite, indefinite, and zero article before nouns used in the generic sense, as noted by 
Kachru (2003), for example: the industrialist/an industrialist is primarily interested in profits vs. 
industrialists are primarily interested in profits.  Overall, however, variation in the performance of the 
NS group was minor, and performance on all four rules is nearly identical on the pre-test and post-test 1, 
an indication that the evaluation measure has good internal reliability. 
Ron Cowan, Jinhee Choo, & Gabseon Sunny Lee ICALL for Editing Grammatical Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 204 
The fact that the CALL group significantly improved their scores on the first post test, while the NO 
CALL group did not, supports the conclusion that the additional CALL instruction was effective in 
getting this group of advanced proficiency L2 learners of English to recognize and correct persistent 
errors in written drafts.  Furthermore, this improvement did not diminish substantially over five months.  
In contrast, as shown in Figure 5, the NO CALL group made, at best, only miniscule progress in 
recognizing and correcting any of the selected errors over time.  These results suggest that an effective 
pedagogical approach for addressing the problem of persistent grammatical errors found in the writing of 
advanced proficiency L2 learners may be through supplementing in-class writing instruction with ICALL 
courseware like The ESL Writing Tutor. Although there was still a significant difference between the 
performance of the CALL group and the NS group after only four hours of the computer delivered 
instruction, the overall improvement of the former was very encouraging, raising the possibility that a 
more extended version of the courseware, or repeating portions of it that target particularly recalcitrant 
errors, could produce gains that approach native speaker performance.  The article units would clearly 
require more refinement and expansion before similar improvement could be expected.  The improvement 
evidenced on overpassivization of ergative verbs was very encouraging, given the overall frequency of 
these and Han’s (2000) conclusions about their prevalence in the writing of L2 academics.  
Our results also suggest that the generally assumed superiority of explicit feedback incorporated in 
ICALL programs, which is supported by the studies cited earlier, should be modified to take into 
consideration the proficiency level of students and instructional goals. Whereas the conventional 
approach of identifying grammatical errors and then linking students to information that can be used to 
correct these errors has been shown to be effective for beginning and intermediate students, ICALL 
programs that target advanced level students, in particular remedial programs that attempt to eradicate 
persistent grammatical errors, will probably benefit more from the metalinguistic prompting strategies 
used in this study.  When coupled with instruction that draws advanced level students’ attention to the 
differences between their systematic ungrammatical renditions of certain L2 structures that they are 
familiar with, metalinguistic prompting appears to be quite effective.  
As we have shown in this study, a prerequisite for discovering persistent errors is a very large corpus of 
written samples produced by L2 students with advanced level proficiency.  In addition to providing a 
basis for ICALL instruction that raises students’ consciousness of their persistent grammatical errors, 
corpus analysis tools provide data that can refine our picture of what kinds of structures are most prone to 
becoming fossilizations in the interlanguage of L2 learners with different L1s.  This issue, which was 
broached in DeKeyser (2005), presents an interesting new area of exploration for L2 research. Currently 
interlanguage development is thought to proceed through different stages, but much remains to be learned 
about how factors like language typology affect the acquisition of different structures.  For example, 
Cowan (2008) catalogues and discusses documented errors made by L2 learners with different L1s 
attempting to acquire the major syntactic structures of English. The degree of difficulty that some of these 
errors present to learners with different L1s has been examined in a few SLA studies, but the potential 
problems presented in mastering others have not been explored.  Still, the widespread prevalence of such 
problems suggests that it might be worthwhile for developers of ICALL courseware to consider 
addressing them in special units that utilize the design described in this study.  The best source of data on 
errors that might be worth targeting is, in our opinion, not the production tasks currently used in ICALL 
programs, since these are somewhat artificial and restrict output.  Instead, free writing tasks used in 
conjunction with error identification tasks like the one shown in this study are preferable.  Compiling 
corpora containing written errors made by L2 learners with high intermediate to advanced proficiency can 
provide ICALL developers with a rich source of L2 learner language that can be used in the courseware, 
and it might also lead to the discovery of lesser known and/or yet undiscovered persistent errors made by 
learners with different L1s. Thus the important synergy between corpus linguistics and CALL, first 
broached by Granger (2003) as a means of improving L2 instruction, also has the possibility of expanding 
Ron Cowan, Jinhee Choo, & Gabseon Sunny Lee ICALL for Editing Grammatical Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 205 
our understanding of developmental stages and potential limits in second language acquisition.   
CONCLUSION 
This study has presented evidence that ICALL courseware can raise Korean graduate students’ awareness 
of specific recurrent grammatical errors in their writing, and this heightened awareness resulted in the 
ability of these L2 learners to detect and correct these errors in unfamiliar English passages of equivalent 
difficulty.  These results suggest that this type of ICALL courseware would be a valuable asset for 
advanced level L2 writing instruction in learning contexts where the goal is to prepare learners whose 
professions entail regular writing in the L2.  One such context that is widespread in the United States is 
ESL writing instruction for foreign students admitted to undergraduate and graduate programs.  These 
students have a command of English that enables them to read textbooks and participate in academic 
discussions with native speaker counterparts, but their written English betrays consistent grammatical 
errors that appear to be near-fossilizations.  
The courseware described in this study differs from that found in other ICALL tutors in that it is not 
linked to specific language courses, rather it targets specific errors made by a particular L2 learner 
population.  A basic prerequisite for the development of this type of ICALL tutor is therefore a large 
database that has been produced by L2 learners who fall within the targeted population.  In this study we 
described how corpus analysis tools were applied to a large written corpus produced by L2 learners with 
the same L1 and a specific, independently determined proficiency level to yield a representative picture of 
which grammatical errors should be targeted in the ICALL tutor. This picture is greatly enhanced if the 
learner corpus is as large as the one described in this study and contains samples from a variety of writing 
assignments.  The results of this study therefore represent yet another example of the promising synergy 
between CALL instruction and corpus linguistic analysis for improving L2 instruction as discussed in 
Granger (2002).  
 
NOTES 
1. All international students admitted to university whose native language is not English are required to 
submit their Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) or International English Language Testing 
System (IELTS) scores.  If their TOEFL scores indicate that further English is needed (scores of 550-
610 Paper, 213-253 CBT, or 79-102 iBT, inclusive), they are required to take an English as a Second 
Language Placement Test (EPT) upon arrival at the university.  Then, based on the EPT results, they are 
assigned to one of several remedial ESL writing courses, which are intended to teach them how to write 
academic English.  
2. An example of an error of this type would be: *From last year until now, politics have been changed 
rapidly. 
3. All p-values were adjusted using the Greenhouse-Geisser (G-G) epsilon correction factor for the 
violation of the sphericity assumption for the repeated measures ANOVA. The corrected p-values 
together with uncorrected degrees of freedom are reported.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to thank Laura Collins and Pavel Trofimovich for their comments on an earlier 
version of this article and two anonymous readers, whose comments led to several improvements in the 
version that appears here. 
Ron Cowan, Jinhee Choo, & Gabseon Sunny Lee ICALL for Editing Grammatical Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 206 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS  
Ron Cowan is Associate Professor Emeritus of Linguistics at the University of Illinois at Urbana- 
Champaign.  His research interests include Second Language Acquisition, language processing, L2 
grammar instruction, and applications of CALL to the teaching L2 writing.  
E-mail: jcowan@illinois.edu 
Jinhee Choo is a Visiting Lecturer teaching ESL writing at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign. She has a PhD in Educational Psychology specializing in SLA and masters degrees in 
TESOL and Applied Statistics. Her research interests include ESL writing, CALL, and teacher education 
for online education and technology integration.  
E-mail: jchoo@illinois.edu 
Gabseon Sunny Lee has BAs in East Asian Languages and Cultures and English from Indiana University 
at Bloomington, an MA in TESOL and a Certificate of Advanced Study in Educational Psychology from 
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.  She has taught English rhetoric and ESL courses and 
managed interactive web courses. 
E-mail: sunnyglee2@gmail.com 
 
REFERENCES 
Adams, R., Nuevo, A. M. & Egi, T. (2011). Explicit and implicit feedback, modified output, and SLA: 
Does explicit and implicit feedback promote learning and learner-learner interactions? Modern Language 
Journal, 95(1), 42–63. 
Balcom, P. (1997). Why is this happened? Passive morphology and unaccusativity.  Second Language 
Research, 13(1), 1–9. 
Bowles, M. (2005). Effects of verbalization condition and type of feedback on L2 development in a CALL 
task. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Georgetown University, Washington, D.C. 
Cowan, R. (2008). The teacher’s grammar of English. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
DeKeyser, R.M. (2003). Implicit and explicit learning. In C. Doughty & M. Long (Eds.), The handbook of 
second language acquisition (pp. 313–348). Oxford, UK: Blackwell. 
DeKeyser, R. M. (2005). What makes learning L2 grammar difficult? Language Learning, 55, 1–25. 
French Interlanguage Database. (FRIDA). Retrieved from http://www.uclouvain.be/en-cecl-frida.html 
Granger, S. (2003). Error-tagged learner corpora and CALL: A promising synergy. CALICO Journal, 20, 
465–480. 
Han, Z.-H. (2000).  Persistence of the implicit influence of NL: The case of the pseudo-passive. Applied 
Linguistics, 21(1), 78–105. 
Heift, T. (2004). Corrective feedback and learner uptake in CALL. ReCALL, 16, 416–431.  
Heift. T., & Rimrott, A. (2008). Learner responses to corrective feedback for spelling errors in CALL. 
System, 36, 196–213.  
Heift. T. (2010). Developing an intelligent language tutor. CALICO Journal, 27(3), 443–459. 
Hirakawa, M. (1995). L2 acquisition of English unaccusative constructions. In D. MacLaughlin & S. 
McEwen (Eds.), Proceedings of the 19th Boston University conference on language development (pp. 
Ron Cowan, Jinhee Choo, & Gabseon Sunny Lee ICALL for Editing Grammatical Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 207 
291–302). Summerville, MA: Cascadilla. 
Hwang, J.-B. (1997).  Implicit and explicit instruction for the L2 acquisition of English unaccusative 
verbs. (Unpublished manuscript). University of Oregon at Eugene, Eugene, Oregon. 
International Corpus of Learner English (ICLE) Retrieved from http://www.uclouvain.be/en-cecl.html 
Ju, M.-K. (1999). Overpassivization errors by second language learners: The effect of conceptualizable 
agents in discourse. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 22, 85–111. 
Kachru, Y. (2003). On definite reference in world Englishes. World Englishes, 22, 497–510. 
Kim, D.-H. (2005). Finding feedback: An effective computer assisted language learning model for second 
language acquisition. (Unpublished masters thesis). University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Urbana, 
Illinois. 
Long, M. H. (2003). Stabilization and fossilization in interlanguage development.  In C. J. Doughty & M. 
H. Long (Eds.), The handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 487–536). Oxford, UK: Blackwell. 
Lyster, R., & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learner uptake: Negotiation of form in 
communicative classrooms. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 37–66. 
Meurers, D. (2012). Natural language processing and language learning. In C. A. Chapelle, (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of applied linguistics. Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Nagata, N. (1996). Computer vs. workbook instruction in second language acquisition. CALICO Journal, 
14, 53–75. 
Nagata N., & Swisher, M. V. (1995). A study of consciousness-raising by computer: The effect of 
metalinguistic feedback on second language learning. Foreign Language Annals, 28, 337–347. 
Oshita, H.  (2001). The unaccusative trap in second language acquisition.  Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 23(2), 279–304. 
Poesio, M. & Vieira, R. (1998). A corpus based investigation of definite description use. Computational 
Linguistics, 24(2), 183–216. 
Pujola, J.-T. (2001). Did CALL feedback feed back? Researching learners’ use of feedback. ReCALL, 13, 
79–98. 
Rosa. H. M., & Lowe, R. P. (2004). Computerized task-based exposure, explicitness, type of feedback, 
and Spanish L2 development. Modern Language Journal, 88, 192–216. 
Scott, M. (2008). WordSmith Tools (Version 5) [computer software]. Liverpool: Lexical Analysis 
Software. Available from http://www.lexically.net/wordsmith/ 
Sheen, Y. (2004). Corrective feedback and learner uptake in communicative classrooms across 
instructional settings. Language Teaching Research, 8, 263–300. 
Varieties of English for Specific Purposes dAtabase (VESPA). Retrieved from 
http://www.uclouvain.be/en-cecl-vespa.html 
Yip, V. (1995).  Interlanguage and learnability: From Chinese to English. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins. 
