Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/review3.pdf 
June 2014, Volume 18, Number 2 
pp. 70–74 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 70 
REVIEW OF MULTILINGUAL CORPORA AND MULTILINGUAL CORPUS 
ANALYSIS 
Multilingual Corpora and Multilingual Corpus Analysis 
Thomas Schmidt and Kai Wörner (Eds.) 
2012 
ISBN: 978-9-027-21934-3 
US $113.00 
407 pp. 
John Benjamins 
Amsterdam 
  
 
Review by Nina Vyatkina, University of Kansas 
Multilingual Corpora and Multilingual Corpus Analysis is an edited volume that appeared in the 
Hamburg Studies on Multilingualism series published by John Benjamins. The series focuses on 
linguistic aspects of multilingualism and primarily publishes studies conducted at the Research Center on 
Multilingualism at the University of Hamburg, Germany, but also includes outside contributions. This 
407-page-long volume edited by Schmidt and Wörner is not an exception in that it comprises 13 studies 
conducted at the Center and nine studies from external projects. The book is mainly targeted at corpus 
linguists interested in multilingualism and at learner corpus researchers, which explains the fairly 
technical language of most studies. However, the volume may also attract attention of multilingualism 
scholars who are not corpus experts but are looking for empirical data and tools for their research.  
Furthermore, although several studies report on projects conducted with first language (L1) and/or second 
language (L2) German corpora, the book also covers a range of other language backgrounds, which 
expands its target readership. 
The book starts with a brief editors’ introduction, which is followed by 22 chapters in five sections on 1) 
learner and attrition corpora; 2) language contact corpora; 3) interpreting corpora; 4) comparable and 
parallel corpora; and 5) corpus tools. The volume concludes with a general index and also, importantly, a 
corpora index as well as a language index. Regrettably, the corpora index does not provide internet links 
for accessing the corpora or relevant proprietary information making it necessary for the reader to search 
the respective chapters in order to find this information. 
The introduction begins with an editors’ definition of multilingual corpora that is broader than the one 
commonly accepted, which mainly refers to parallel corpora with translations of the same texts into 
different languages. In fact, Schmidt and Wörner’s volume includes only one chapter on parallel corpora. 
The editors expand the definition of a multilingual corpus by referring to “any systematic collection of 
empirical language data which enables linguists to carry out analyses about multilingual individuals, 
multilingual societies or multilingual communication” (p. xi). Next, the editors state that their main focus 
is on methodological issues of corpus design and analysis. Accordingly, the bulk of the volume is devoted 
Nina Vyatkina                           Review of Multilingual Corpora  
 
Language Learning & Technology  71 
to descriptions of available multilingual corpora, presentations of their architecture, and discussions of 
issues related to corpus design, whereas examples of empirical corpus-based studies are sparse. The 
editors continue their introduction with a listing of the studies included in each of the five sections. They 
conclude with a statement that the classification of multilingual corpora reflected in section titles is their 
own and that the 22 studies comprising the volume could have been arranged differently if other facets of 
the topic “corpora and multilingualism” were brought to the foreground. 
Section 1 is the largest with nine studies and is most directly relevant for language learning research given 
that it focuses on corpora that comprise L2 data collected from various learner groups in diverse contexts. 
Studies in sections 2, 3, and 4 may seem more peripheral to language learning research. However, some 
language learning scholars and language teachers may find the corpora described in these sections useful 
as a source of linguistic data collected from a variety of multilingual populations. Finally, section 5 
describes corpus tools that can be used by scholars who would like to collect or analyze corpora. 
Section 1. Learner and Attrition Corpora 
The first four studies in this section focus on learner corpora containing data from adult learners in 
instructed acquisition settings. All these corpora include L2 (or L3) German data, but some of them also 
contain other L2 data or comparison L1 data. Gut’s opening chapter presents the LeaP (Learning Prosody 
in a Foreign Language) corpus of spoken learner German and learner English. The LeaP corpus is unique 
in that it includes spoken samples produced by both native and non-native speakers of two languages in 
four different speaking styles (free speech, story retelling, and reading-out-loud a story and a list of 
nonsense words) and is annotated for multiple phonetic, phonological, and prosodic features. More 
specifically, all speech is graphically represented in a waveform and a spectrogram as well as transcribed 
orthographically and phonetically. Furthermore, each speech segment is aligned with multiple layers of 
annotation for: syllable boundaries; consonants, vowels, and pauses; and high and low pitch intervals. 
Finally, all orthographic words are annotated for parts of speech and lemmas. Gut also shares some 
research findings enabled by this corpus, namely phonetic correlates of L2 fluency and factors influencing 
fluency. Hedeland and Schmidt report on methodological issues connected with the creation and 
annotation of another spoken L2 German corpus (Hamburg Map Task Corpus, or HAMATAC) in the 
second chapter. In particular, they focus on inter-annotator reliability in manual interpretive annotation 
and create a detailed taxonomy of annotator disagreements. This meticulous analysis shows the 
importance of reliable annotations for corpus reusability. Ott, Ziai, and Meurers, in the following chapter, 
also focus on the annotation procedure and inter-annotator agreement as applied to a learner German 
corpus, but this time to a written Corpus of Reading Comprehension Exercises in German (CREG). The 
unique features of CREG are that it contains L2 data at various levels of proficiency, rich task and prompt 
metadata, and annotations of student responses for comprehension errors based on a compositional 
semantics taxonomy. The researchers propose ways of improving inter-annotator agreement and call for 
collecting more task-based corpora that would be valuable for second language acquisition researchers. 
The next fourth chapter, authored by Zinsmeister and Breckle, focuses on the ALeSKo corpus 
(Annotiertes Lernersprachenkorpus, or Annotated Learner Language Corpus) that comprises L3 German 
argumentative essays written by advanced learners (with L1 Chinese and L2 English) as well as a 
comparison subcorpus of L1 German essays. The authors first present the annotation layers of ALeSKo: it 
is automatically annotated for word classes and lemmatized as well as manually annotated for some 
discourse phenomena such as local coherence. Next, they report on the results of a comparative study 
showing that essays written by these fairly proficient learners are still lexically simpler and contain 
shallower syntactic embedding than native speaker essays.  
The next three chapters describe corpora comprised of L2 data produced by young learners. Ulloa, Lleó, 
and Sánchez describe a collection of L2 Spanish language contact corpora, including spoken data 
recorded from bilingual children living either in Germany or in Spain, L2 Spanish German children, and 
monolingual Spanish children. In the next sixth chapter, Lleó adds to this collection by describing two 
Nina Vyatkina                           Review of Multilingual Corpora  
 
Language Learning & Technology  72 
more corpora: one collected from German and Spanish monolingual children and another produced by 
German-Spanish bilingual children. These corpora are especially valuable because they are longitudinal, 
spanning data collection periods from two to six years, and are transcribed and annotated for phonetic 
features, with some annotated for morphosyntactic features as well. Herkenrath and Rehbein address a 
bilingual Turkish-German and a monolingual Turkish corpus of spoken child language in chapter seven. 
These three chapters do not report any results of empirical studies, although Herkenrath and Rehbein 
attempt to present “a methodology for empirical multilingual data analysis” (p. 123). However, due to 
unconventional terminology use (e.g., “Pragmatic Corpus Analysis”), the value of their chapter for L2 
researchers is limited beyond some illustrative snapshots from the corpus.  
The final two chapters in Section 1 focus on attrition corpora, defined in Schmidt and Wörner’s 
introduction as “corpora documenting adult speakers’ use […] of a first language after a prolonged 
exposure to a dominant second language” (p. xii). Czachór describes the design of a corpus of Polish data 
from three groups of L1 Polish speakers: two groups living in Germany, those who had had and those 
who had never had formal schooling in Poland, and the third being a group of Polish monolinguals living 
in Poland. The corpus contains a variety of data (spontaneous and elicited speech production, 
grammaticality judgment, assessment and self-assessment of proficiency, and ethnographic metadata) and 
is balanced on group size and the amount of data collected per participant. The spoken data is stored as 
both audio files and transcriptions. Finally, Kupisch, Barton, Bianchi, and Stangen provide an overview 
of a corpus of audio-recorded and transcribed semi-structured interviews elicited from balanced German-
French and German-Italian bilinguals as well as from adult L2 learners. No empirical studies are 
presented in either chapter on attrition corpora, but interested researchers will find detailed specifications 
of corpora as well as access information. Notably, all language corpora described in this section are freely 
available for research with the data owner’s consent.  
Section 2. Language Contact Corpora 
This section focuses on corpora “documenting varieties of languages whose present or historical situation 
is characterized by language contact” (Schmidt & Wörner, p. xii). It begins with Gabriel’s description of a 
corpus of spoken Argentinian Spanish and a report on some empirical results showing transfer effects 
from Italian on the speakers’ prosody. Next, Kühl presents a corpus containing spoken and written data in 
Faroese, Danish, and Faroese Danish collected from multilingual speakers of the Faroese Islands. Kühl 
also reports on a case study showing that language contact effects differ depending on the medium and 
register (informal spoken versus formal written). In the third chapter, Benet, Cortés, and Lleó describe a 
corpus of spoken Catalan annotated for auditory and acoustic phonetic features. This corpus contains data 
from three different age groups (3-5, 19-23, and 32-40 years old) and from two different areas of 
Barcelona, one characterized by a high degree of contact with Spanish and the other one by a low degree 
of such contact. The authors also present some research findings showing that the language contact effects 
were strongest in younger subjects who lived all their life in one district. The fourth chapter by Putz 
focuses on German dialects of the South Tyrol spoken in the context of contact with Italian, standard 
German, and Ladin. The production data is comprised of recorded and transcribed medical interactions 
between dialect-speaking patients and standard-German-speaking physicians, and is manually annotated 
for instances of misunderstanding occurring due to linguistic factors. The section concludes with Höder’s 
chapter that discusses applications of a syntactically parsed diachronic corpus of Old Swedish to the field 
of historical linguistics. 
Section 3. Interpreting Corpora 
This section comprises three chapters describing corpora of recordings and transcriptions of simultaneous 
or consecutive interpreting. Angermeyer, Meyer, and Schmidt report on the results of a project that 
involved publishing and sharing community-interpreting corpora in two different settings (doctor-patient 
communications and court proceedings) and multiple combinations of languages (including English, 
Nina Vyatkina                           Review of Multilingual Corpora  
 
Language Learning & Technology  73 
German, Haitian Creole, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, and Turkish). The authors do 
not report on any empirical studies but describe challenges connected with integrating, archiving, and 
annotating heterogeneous data and propose methods for dealing with these challenges. They conclude 
with an appeal for sharing community- interpreting data from different projects via a common platform in 
order to foster interdisciplinary exchange between researchers. House, Meyer, and Schmidt present a 
smaller specialized corpus of speeches by a Brazilian expert on the topic of genetically modified seeds 
and their translations into German from Portuguese by different professional interpreters. The corpus 
contains audio recordings, transcriptions, and annotations for some prosodic phenomena and is freely 
available. Finally, Bührig, Kliche, Meyer, and Pawlack present a brief description of a corpus of ad-hoc-
interpreting in German hospitals. The corpus includes recordings and transcriptions of German-
Portuguese and German-Turkish speech samples. The authors also suggest a practical application of the 
described corpus for training in bilingual workplace communication. 
Section 4. Comparable and Parallel Corpora 
As the editors explain in their introduction, they include under this subheading corpora that contain texts 
produced in similar settings but with different languages or language varieties as well as parallel corpora 
in which original texts are aligned with their translations into other languages. This section begins with 
the contribution by Fandrych, Meißner, and Slavcheva, who describe a corpus of spoken (monologic and 
dialogic) L1 academic German, English and Polish, as well as L2 German, currently under construction.  
This corpus (titled GeWiss) is balanced by genre (academic presentations and oral examinations), 
sociolinguistic context (native language, second language, and foreign language), and speaker status 
(academics and students). As the authors point out, this is the first corpus of spoken academic German 
that can be used for contrastive investigations both with its own sub-corpora and with other academic 
language corpora such as MICASE (Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English) or BASE (British 
Academic Spoken English). The C4 corpus described in the second chapter by Dittmann, Ďurčo, Geyken, 
Roth, and Zimmer does not contain L2 data but is a freely and publicly available reference corpus that 
documents four standard varieties of written German (used in Germany, Switzerland, Austria, and South 
Tyrol in Italy). It is diachronic as it comprises language samples collected over the course of the 20th 
century, balanced by decade and text type (journalism, literary texts, scientific literature, and other non-
fiction). Furthermore, the corpus is annotated for word classes and is syntactically parsed as well as 
equipped with integrated search and visualization tools. All these features make the C4 corpus a valuable 
resource for lexicographic, sociolinguistic, and other linguistic studies as well as German language 
teaching. Finally, Čulo and Hansen-Schirra describe a parallel corpus that consists of English and German 
texts from eight different registers with their respective German and English translations. The corpus is 
annotated for parts of speech, morphological structure, phrase structure, and syntactic dependencies, 
which makes it suitable for a multitude of linguistic analyses. This chapter is primarily devoted to a 
technical description of a specific method of syntactic parsing and is oriented toward syntacticians and 
computational linguists.    
Section 5. Corpus tools 
The two chapters in this final section do not focus on specific corpora but rather “deal with software tools 
which can support linguists in compiling and managing multilingual corpora in general” (Schmidt & 
Wörner, p. xiii). In the first chapter, Rose describes the PhonBank tool that has been developed within the 
framework of the CHILDES project. This free and open-source tool can facilitate corpus building, oral 
data transcription and annotation, and phonological analyses of multilingual corpora. In his concluding 
chapter, Wörner describes the EXMARaLDA corpus building and management tool, specifically focusing 
on managing metadata (i.e., all data other than primary language data such as information about data 
sources, data annotations, etc.). This tool is freely and publicly available and allows researchers to add 
new metadata types to their databases. Notably, most of this volume’s authors have used EXMARaLDA 
for designing their corpora. 
Nina Vyatkina                           Review of Multilingual Corpora  
 
Language Learning & Technology  74 
To summarize, Multilingual corpora and multilingual corpus analysis is primarily a manual for 
researchers who wish to design multilingual corpora. It provides detailed descriptions of many corpora 
that have been collected or are currently being collected in this area. Researchers can choose a model 
from the many described in this book to suit their specific purposes. However, the book can also serve as 
a reference book for language learning researchers who wish to use corpora for their data and corpus tools 
for their analysis. All of the completed corpora described in the book are publicly available on the internet 
with open access (some of them with the data owner’s permission), representing an invaluable resource 
for researchers. Although many corpora presented here deal with different varieties of German as a first 
or second language, many other language backgrounds are represented as well. Importantly, all spoken 
corpora described in the volume (and it predominantly focuses on spoken corpora) include transcriptions 
and linguistic annotations along with recorded audio data, which makes the spoken data readily available 
for analysis by external researchers without the need to perform these highly time-consuming activities. 
Last but not least, corpora described in this book can be used in language teaching as sources of authentic 
examples or for various language analysis activities that can be designed with corpus tools (see, e.g., 
Bennett, 2010; McCarthy, 2004; O’Keeffe, McCarthy, & Carter, 2007; Vyatkina, 2013). 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Nina Vyatkina is an Associate Professor of German Applied Linguistics and coordinator of the German 
language proficiency sequence at the University of Kansas. Her research interests include longitudinal 
learner language development, learner corpus analysis, language corpora in language teaching, and 
interlanguage pragmatics. She is a winner of the 2009 Paul Pimsleur Award for Research in Foreign 
Language Education (American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages / The Modern Language 
Journal). 
E-mail: vyatkina@ku.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Bennett, G. R. (2010). Using corpora in the language learning classroom: Corpus linguistics for 
teachers. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.  
McCarthy, M. (2004). Using a corpus in language teaching. CALPER Professional Development 
Document (CPDD-0410). University Park, PA: The Pennsylvania State University, Center for Advanced 
Language Proficiency Education and Research. Retrieved from 
http://calper.la.psu.edu/publication.php?page=pdd1 
O’Keeffe, A., McCarthy, M., & Carter, R. (2007). From corpus to classroom: Language use and 
language teaching. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Vyatkina, N. (2013). Discovery learning and teaching with electronic corpora in an advanced German 
grammar course. Die Unterrichtspraxis/Teaching German, 46(1), 44–61. 
