Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/news.pdf 
June 2014, Volume 18, Number 2 
pp. 57–60 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 54 57 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC) 
 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
4TH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON LANGUAGE DOCUMENTATION 
& CONSERVATION (ICLDC) 
February 26-March 1, 2015 • Honolulu, HI 
The Department of Linguistics and the National Foreign Language Resource Center at the University of 
Hawaiʻi at Mānoa are pleased to host the 4th ICLDC. The conference program will feature two keynote 
talks, an integrated series of Master Class workshops, and four Special Sessions on Pedagogy in 
Language Conservation. An optional Hilo Field Study (on the Big Island of Hawaiʻi) to visit Hawaiian 
language revitalization programs in action will immediately follow the conference (March 2-3). 
The theme of the 4th ICLDC, “Enriching Theory, Practice, and Application,” highlights the need to 
strengthen the links between language documentation (practice), deep understanding of grammatical 
structure (theory), and methods for teaching endangered languages (application). At this conference, we 
intend to focus on language documentation as the investigation of grammar and linguistic structure, on 
the one hand, and the development of that investigation into sound pedagogy for endangered languages, 
on the other. 
We aim to build on the strong momentum created by the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd ICLDCs to discuss research 
and revitalization approaches yielding rich records that can benefit both the field of language 
documentation and speech communities. We hope you will join us. 
Call for Proposals deadlines are May 31, 2014 (Special Sessions on Pedagogy in Language Conservation) 
and August 31, 2014 (general papers, posters, and electronic posters). See the conference website for 
more information: http://icldc4.icldc-hawaii.org 
STAY IN TOUCH WITH SOCIAL MEDIA 
Did you know that the NFLRC has its own Facebook page with over 1,900 fans? It’s one of the best ways 
to hear about the latest news, publications, conferences, workshops, and resources we offer. Just click on 
the “Like” button to become a fan. For those who prefer getting up-to-the-minute “tweets,” you can 
follow us on our Twitter page. Finally, NFLRC has its own YouTube channel with a growing collection 
of free language learning and teaching videos for your perusal. Subscribe today! 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology  58 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
The National Foreign Language Resource Center released three new titles in June: 
 
Noticing and second language acquisition: Studies in honor of Richard 
Schmidt 
by Joara Martin Bergsleithner, Sylvia Nagem Frota, &  
Jim Kei Yoshioka, (Eds.)  
(2013)  
374pp 
Download/view the table of contents. 
This volume is a collection of selected refereed papers presented at the Association of Teachers of 
Japanese Annual Spring Conference held at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa in March of 2011. It not 
only covers several important topics on teaching and learning spoken and written Japanese and culture in 
and beyond classroom settings, but also includes research investigating certain linguistic items from new 
perspectives. 
 
Practical Assessment Tools for College Japanese 
by Kimi Kondo-Brown, James Dean Brown, & Waka Tominaga (Eds.)  
(2013)  
162pp 
Download/view table of contents 
Practical Assessment Tools for College Japanese collects 21 peer-reviewed assessment modules that were 
developed by teachers of Japanese who participated in the Assessments for Japanese Language 
Instruction Summer Institute at University of Hawai‘i at Manoa in summer 2012. Each module presents a 
practical assessment idea that can be adopted or adapted for the reader’s own formative or summative 
assessment of their Japanese language learners. For ease of use, each module is organized in 
approximately the same way including background information, aims, levels, assessment times, 
resources, procedures, caveats and options, references, and other appended information. 
 
Check out our many other publications. 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology  59 
Save the trees! Check out our other two online journals: 
  
Language Documentation & Conservation is a 
refereed, open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC 
and published by University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to 
language documentation and conservation, as well 
as book reviews, hardware and software reviews, 
and notes from the field. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed 
international journal of issues in foreign language 
reading and literacy, published twice yearly on the 
World Wide Web and sponsored by NFLRC and 
the University of Hawai‘i College of Languages, 
Linguistics, and Literature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology  60 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
  
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language research. 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
CLEAR is pleased to announce its professinoal development offerings for July 2014. The topics are: 
•  July 14-16 The Basics of Creating Assessments: From Principles to Practice 
•  July 17-19 Rich Internet Applications for Language Learning: Introductory Techniques 
•  July 21-23 Speaking Activities for Oral Proficiency Development 
•  July 24-26 Using Authentic Materials in all Levels of Foreign Language Classes 
Online registration is open on our Web site. 
BETA TESTERS NEEDED 
In the coming months, we plan to launch a newly designed RIA home page with improved user interface 
and documentation. If you are interested in helping us beta test the new environment and provide 
feedback, we would love to hear from you. Please email clear@msu.edu and let us know if you’re willing 
to be a technology guinea pig!  
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We enjoyed seeing many of you at the 
Central States Conference on the Teaching of Foreign Languages (CSCTFL) in St. Louis in March, and 
look forward to connecting with others at the annual conference of the Computer-Assisted Language 
Instruction Consortium (CALICO) in Athens, Ohio this month. 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/ 
