Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/xuding.pdf 
October 2014, Volume 18, Number 3 
pp. 80–96 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 80 
AN EXPLORATORY STUDY OF PAUSES IN COMPUTER-ASSISTED 
EFL WRITING 
Cuiqin Xu, Nanjing University 
Yanren Ding, Nanjing University 
The advance of computer input log and screen-recording programs over the last two 
decades has greatly facilitated research into the writing process in real time. Using 
Inputlog 4.0 and Camtasia 6.0 to record the writing process of 24 Chinese EFL writers in 
an argumentative task, this study explored L2 writers’ pausing patterns in computer-
assisted writing settings and how their pausing patterns related to writing time allocation, 
writing fluency, and text quality. Results suggest that while the skilled writers allocated 
significantly less time to the prewriting stage, they paused significantly longer yet less 
frequently than the less-skilled group in this stage; however, the two groups displayed no 
significant difference in pause frequency or duration in the composing stage. Text quality 
was found to correlate positively with prewriting pause duration and writing fluency but 
negatively with the prewriting time. Web search and dictionary use were identified as 
important extra writing activities that gave rise to the observed time allocation and pausing 
patterns. These findings suggest that computer-assisted L2 writing has features distinct 
from pen-and-paper writing and that L2 writers need to be informed of how to coordinate 
and regulate writing resources in an electronic environment. 
Keywords: Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Individual Learner Differences, L2 
Writing 
APA Citation: Xu, C. & Ding, Y. (2014). An exploratory study of pauses in computer-
assisted EFL writing. Language Learning & Technology, 18(3), 80–96. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/xuding.pdf 
Received: April 4, 2013; Accepted: September 10, 2013; Published: October 1, 2014 
Copyright: © Cuiqin Xu 
INTRODUCTION 
The working memory model of writing (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974; Kellogg, 1996) posits that written 
language production draws on a single, limited pool of attentional resources with different writing 
processes competing for such resources under the constraints of a central executive. If the resources are 
exceeded, some processes will be suspended or even sacrificed to accommodate the immediate call for 
other processes (DeKeyser, 2001). A possible strategy writers adopt at such moments is pausing, by 
which they may free up attentional resources for the processes that call for priority in writing. For 
researchers, pausing opens a window to gain insights into problems writers encounter in the course of 
language production (Wengelin, 2006), such as “phrasing, memory search, decision, feedback, conceptual 
integration, and so forth” (de Beaugrande, 1984, p. 166).  
With the advent of computer keyboard writing, computer input log programs have helped make the 
logging and analysis of pausological features in writing much easier. Yet the writing process in an 
electronic environment may be more complex as writers have quick access to ample online resources, 
which also entails the demanding task of managing these resources. In the case of pausing, it is no longer 
confined to the halt of text production in a word processor but becomes an observable period of inactivity 
in any of the writing-related windows. In the research on online writing pauses, although various input 
log programs help to quantify pauses, there is still a need to examine pauses in their dynamic features and 
to explore the activities that may give rise to the observed pausing patterns. Screen Recorder, by running 
Cuiqin Xu and Yanren Ding Pauses in Computer-Assisted EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
backstage, can record the writing process in an unobtrusive manner and may permit possible explanations 
for the pausing behavior. Of particular interest to the present study is to take advantage of two computer 
programs, Inputlog 4.0 (Leijten & Van Waes, 2006) and Camtasia 6.0, a screen-recording program 
developed by TechSmith© Cooperation, to examine how writing skill affects the pausological features of 
second language (L2) learners in computer-assisted writing settings and the extra writing activities such 
as web search and dictionary use that may give rise to these features. 
RELATED LITERATURE 
Writing Pauses 
Previous pausological studies in pen-and-paper settings tend to have long pausing thresholds for practical 
reasons and have focused on the linguistic locations of pauses. Schumacher, Klare, Cronin, and Moses 
(1984) videotaped the writing process of 22 high school graduates and 20 college students in a 30-minute 
writing assignment. Setting the pause threshold at 10 seconds, the study found no difference in pause 
frequency for the two groups but the college group paused shorter on average than the high school group. 
Further dividing the writing session into equal intervals, the average pause duration remained unchanged 
for both groups. The posttask interview showed the college group carried out more cognitive activities 
instead of grammatical activities per pause break and produced final texts of better quality than the high 
school group.  
Other studies (Matsuhashi, 1981, 1987; Schilperoord, 1996) largely focused on first language (L1) and L2 
writing pauses or the grammatical locations of pauses, such as pauses at the clause, sentence and t-unit 
boundaries, leaving the temporal features of pausing such as pause frequency and duration to future 
research. A more recent study by Beauvais, Olive, and Passerault (2011) examined pauses at different 
writing stages. By employing think-aloud protocols and reaction-time (RT) tasks, the researchers 
investigated the relationship between students’ online management of the writing processes and text 
quality in pen-and-paper settings. The study found that text quality positively correlated with the 
prewriting pause length and the amount of time spent on planning, suggesting that “students composing 
an argumentative text benefit more from spending time on the planning processes, in other terms, in 
conceptual processing, than creating formal text using the translating processes” (p. 420). 
Enlightening as these findings on writing pauses are, different pause thresholds make it difficult to 
compare results across various studies. In addition, researchers of L2 writing processes have raised 
methodological concerns about the reactivity issue of think-aloud protocols (Stratman & Hamp-Lyons, 
1994), the intimidating nature of video cameras (Levy & Ransdell, 1996) and the reliability issue of self-
generated interview data (Spelman Miller, Lindgren, & Sullivan, 2008). 
With computer input log tools, researchers have further pushed the boundaries of writing pause research 
by setting shorter pausing thresholds. Using Keytrap1, Van Waes and Schellens (2003) examined how 
writing mode, computer keyboard writing or pen-and-paper writing, affected the pausing behavior of 
experienced writers. Defining pauses as inactive periods of three seconds or longer and dividing writing 
into segments of 10 minutes, the researchers found that the long pauses for keyboard writing evenly 
distributed throughout the writing process while for pen-and-paper writing, half of the long pauses were 
concentrated at the beginning of the process. The study suggests that keyboard writers tend to start 
writing sooner and pause more frequently than pen-and-paper writers, leading to the speculation that the 
use of a word processor may result in a more fragmented writing process.  
Using JEdit, Spelman Miller and her colleagues conducted a series of studies on writing pauses by setting 
the pausing threshold at two seconds. Spelman Miller (2000) contrasted the pausing patterns of L1 and L2 
writers and found that L2 writers paused longer across all grammatical locations and that key lexical 
items caused L2 writers to pause more as well as caused them considerable difficulty. In 2005, Spelman 
Cuiqin Xu and Yanren Ding Pauses in Computer-Assisted EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
Miller reported a case study on how language backgrounds affected writers’ pausing and formulating 
behavior. The study confirmed previous findings that L2 writers tend to plan less globally (Jones & 
Tetroe, 1987) and that L2 writers were less productive (Hall, 1990). A more recent study by Spelman 
Miller et al. (2008) adds to the mixed findings about pause frequency and duration in L2 writing. By 
tracking how year(s) of study affected the pausing behavior of EFL writers over a 3.5-year period, the 
study found that as the writing abilities increased,  “the writers required fewer, but equally long pauses 
and decreased their total pause time over the period” (p. 444). 
Illuminating as it is, the existing literature seems to have overlooked the individual differences in 
pausological features of L2 writing (Ackerman, 2003; Robinson, 2005; for a review, see Kormos, 2012). 
An indiscriminative analysis of the general pausing behavior throughout the writing event or in preset 
time segments may not be sensitive to pausing features unique to the functional stages like prewriting and 
composing. To gain a comprehensive view of L2 writing pauses, research is needed to examine pauses at 
the prewriting and composing stages separately. 
A second observation from the literature is that pause has been defined as a nonproductive period in text 
production. However, in keyboard writing settings, writers may actively engage in web searching and 
reading efforts when writing in the word processor is suspended. These activities may place considerable 
demands on working memory, and pauses in the word processor are no longer confined to planning or 
revising contemplation (Alves, Castro, & Olive, 2008). As online management of writing processes is a 
fundamental component of writing skill (Levy & Ransdell, 1996), it is necessary to examine pauses in 
multiwindow settings since online resources may affect writing processes and consequently change the 
nature of these pauses. 
Extra Writing Activities 
Another unanswered question in L2 writing is how writers manage various writing resources in addition 
to text production on paper or on a word processor. This becomes more complex in online writing 
settings, where abundant resources are made instantly accessible by computer and particularly, Internet 
technology. Research on activities for managing writing resources focuses mainly on dictionary use and 
pertinent to the current study is research on L2 writers’ strategies with electronic dictionaries. Using 
Système-D, Scott and New (1994) investigated dictionary use by intermediate American learners of 
French in their L2 writings. They found that the participants were “clearly English-French dictionary 
dependent” (p. 44) and that writers who produced better texts were either less dependent on the dictionary 
or used the French-English dictionary more creatively than those who wrote poorly. 
Using think-aloud protocols, Chon (2008) investigated the electronic dictionary use of 10 Korean 
university students in two computer-assisted writing tasks. The results suggest that the dictionary did not 
help writers solve lexical problems immediately due to their lack of knowledge of the L2 words offered; 
rather, it prompted follow-up lexical problems within the dictionary entry. In summary, most studies on 
dictionary use reported the misuse or hindering effects of dictionary rather than its scaffolding effects 
(Chun, 2001; Rundell, 1999; Sun & Chang, 2012). 
As an exception to the research focus on dictionary use, Stapleton (2010) reported a case study on the 
writing processes of a 23-year old graduate student in a 4000-word L2 essay-writing task. The study 
found that web search took up 24% of the total task time, proving itself an indispensable part of 
computer-assisted writing. Nevertheless, the actual effects of web search on L2 writing await further 
research. The present study aimed to examine both dictionary use and web search in computer-assisted L2 
writing and more importantly, to relate these activities to writing pauses, writing fluency and text quality. 
The Present Study 
Using Inputlog 4.0 and Camtasia 6.0 to record the writing process, this study set out to investigate the 
Cuiqin Xu and Yanren Ding Pauses in Computer-Assisted EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
pausing behavior of 24 Chinese EFL writers in a computer-aided argumentative writing task. It 
specifically examined how writing skill affected pausing in the prewriting and composing stages. 
Following the pause threshold in previous studies (Spelman Miller, 2000, 2005; Sullivan & Lindgren, 
2002; Wengelin, 2002), pause was defined as inactivity of two seconds or longer in any window, 
including the word processor. The study attempted to address the following research questions: 
1. Do skilled and less-skilled EFL writers differ in their writing time allocation, pausing patterns, 
writing fluency, and text quality?  
2. How do pausing patterns relate to writing fluency and to text quality? 
3. How do web search and dictionary use relate to the pausing patterns of both skilled and less-
skilled EFL writers? 
METHOD 
Participants 
As computer experience may substantially affect strategy use in computer-assisted writing, 24 students 
with at least four years of computer experience were recruited from a pool of 116 first-year full-time 
undergraduate science majors at a Chinese university. The students were selected according to their 
writing scores in the English placement test they took upon entering college. The test was modeled on 
CET 4, a nation-wide English proficiency test given biannually for college students across China. The test 
has an essay writing section with a total score of 15 points. Guided by the rating rubric for CET 4 writing 
(See Appendix), experienced CET 4 writing raters holistically marked the students’ writings. Eventually, 
11 students who scored 12 or above were selected to form the skilled group and 13 students who scored 
eight or below formed the less-skilled group. For the qualitative part of the study, 10 participants, five 
from each group, were selected on a voluntary basis and their writing processes, as shown by the 
Camtasia video, were examined for web search and dictionary use.  
All the participants were 17 to 19 years old at the time of data collection and they had been learning 
English as a foreign language in the Chinese context for a minimum of six years. Generally, the 
participants had few opportunities to use English for communicative purposes outside the classroom and 
their English writing practice was largely limited to classroom instruction and assignments. To better 
motivate the participants, the researchers promised to provide individual feedback on their writing 
problems after the study. 
Writing Task 
The writing task was to develop an argumentative essay on whether drunk drivers should be imprisoned 
for their first offense. This topic was chosen because just before this study, there had been a serious drunk 
driving case in town, in which five people were killed and four injured. The case was widely covered by 
local and national media and aroused great social concern. In addition, before the study, the participants 
had not been exposed to classroom instruction on English argumentation. 
Procedures 
All the data were collected in the computer lab where the participants regularly had their classes. They 
were told to write on the computer and to access the Internet and local resources on the computer 
whenever they felt necessary. Other resources, however, were prohibited to preclude activities that could 
not be captured by Inputlog or Camtasia (e.g., pen-and-paper drafting, paper dictionary consultation, 
and/or peer discussion). 
The participants were told to take as much time as they needed to complete an essay of whatever length 
they liked. To avoid possible misunderstanding, all the instructions were given in the participants’ L1, 
Cuiqin Xu and Yanren Ding Pauses in Computer-Assisted EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
Mandarin Chinese.  
Prior to data collection, Inputlog and Camtasia were installed on the desktop computers and set on stand 
by. After showing the topic and task instructions on the projection screen, the teacher started Camtasia 
recording on all desktops from the monitoring computer. At the same time, the participants were asked to 
activate Inputlog by clicking the “Start Recording” button and click the “Stop Recording” button when 
they finished, which marked respectively the beginning and ending of the writing session. After the 
writing event, all the participants were informed of the Inputlog and Camtasia recording procedures and 
signed the agreement of participation on a voluntary basis. 
Quantitative Data Coding and Analysis 
Identifying Pauses at the Prewriting and Composing Stages 
The Inputlog and Camtasia files of each writing session were examined to identify the prewriting and 
composing stages for each participant. The prewriting stage is routinely defined as the generation and 
arrangement of ideas before a writer starts drafting. In this study, it was operationalized as the period that 
spanned from the beginning of a writing event (the initial logging of Inputlog) to the logging of the first 
letter of any complete sentence other than a restatement of the given topic. A restatement of the topic was 
not recognized as the beginning of the composing stage because most participants typed the topic in the 
word processor as a first step, followed by an observable period of inactivity or web browsing for topic-
related information. The composing stage was defined as the period following the prewriting stage up to 
the end of the writing event.  
Pause frequency and pause duration were examined both globally in each writing event and separately for 
the prewriting and composing stages. To make pauses at the two stages comparable, pause frequency at 
each stage was standardized to the number of pauses in a 10-minute segment by following the formula 
below: 
Stage pause frequency = (Raw Number of Pauses/ Stage Length (seconds)) * 600(seconds) 
Computing Writing Fluency and Scoring Texts 
Writing fluency was calculated as the number of words produced per minute (Chenoweth & Hayes, 2001) 
in pen-and-paper settings. Although letter was an easier unit to calculate in keyboard writing, writing 
fluency was denoted by the number of words produced per minute in this study to align with possible 
findings from previous studies in pen-and-paper settings and more importantly, to relate to text quality. 
Two experienced writing raters independently scored the final texts and the rating rubric for CET 4 was 
provided to both raters (see Appendix). The interrater reliability using Cronbach’s alpha was performed to 
check consistency between the two raters and it reached .94. The two scores for each text were then 
averaged and used as the final text score for further analysis. 
Statistical Analysis 
As nonparametric tests do not require any particular distribution of the data and the current study has a 
small sample size, a series of Mann-Whitney U tests were run to check if the two groups differed 
significantly and correlations were computed to see how text score related to pausing patterns and writing 
fluency.  
Qualitative Data Coding and Analysis 
The Camtasia video data were designed to supplement the Inputlog data on the writers’ two specific 
activities, web search and dictionary use. Web search was defined as the participants’ engagement in 
accessing web information for task completion. Each web search was identified by being preceded and 
followed by another website or window. One dictionary use referred to one look-up entry in the 
dictionary during the writing event. Dictionary use was further categorized into Mandarin-English 
Cuiqin Xu and Yanren Ding Pauses in Computer-Assisted EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
dictionary use (hereafter referred to as L1-L2 dictionary use) and English-Mandarin dictionary use 
(hereafter referred to as L2-L1 dictionary use). L1-L2 dictionary use referred to the student writer’s 
behavior of inputting a Chinese item to look for its corresponding English expression and L2-L1 
dictionary use referred to the behavior of looking up an English item for its Chinese meaning or usage.  
As a measure of reliability, three researchers first discussed the coding procedures for web search and 
dictionary use, and two of them coded the video data for one participant as a trial run. Differences in 
coding were then discussed and resolved. By dividing each video file into clips of 10 minutes, the two 
researchers coded the remaining 9 student writers separately and the interrater reliability reached .87. 
Then differences were resolved for each 10-minute segment through discussion and full agreement was 
reached. 
RESULTS 
Writing Time Allocation 
Table 1 summarizes the descriptive statistics for the participants’ time allocation throughout the writing 
event and separately for the prewriting and composing stages. As the sample size for this study was small 
and the data spread out widely, the means did not suggest a good measure of the central tendency and 
some SDs were large. Therefore, mean ranks instead of means were compared in Mann-Whitney U tests 
to examine group differences. A Mann-Whitney U test on the writing event time showed that the two 
groups did not differ significantly, (U = 54, z = -1.01, p = .31 >.05, r = .21), suggesting that the two 
groups spent similar amount of time on the task.  
Table 1. Writing Time for Skilled and for Less-Skilled Groups 
 Skilled group (n = 11) Less-skilled group (n = 13) 
 Mean SD Mean SD 
Event time* 3962 496 3774 563 
Prewriting time   479 157   943 393 
Composing time 3483 487 2831 421 
*Note: time shown in seconds  
Table 1 also shows that the two groups allocated different amounts of time to different writing stages. The 
mean of the prewriting time was 6’59” (479 seconds) for the skilled group and 15’43” (943 seconds) for 
the less-skilled group, but the skilled group had longer composing stages (Mean =3483, SD = 487) than 
the less-skilled group (Mean= 2831, SD = 421). The Mann-Whitney U tests on the prewriting time and 
the composing time confirmed that, compared with the less-skilled group, the skilled group allocated 
significantly less time to prewriting (U = 25, z = -2.69, p = .007 < .05, r = .55) but significantly more time 
to composing (U = 20.5, z = -2.96, p = .003 < .05, r = .60). 
This suggests that, although skilled and less-skilled L2 writers spent a similar amount of time on the task, 
they allocated a significantly different amount of time to their prewriting and composing stages. In 
general, the less-skilled writers experienced longer prewriting stages while the skilled writers had longer 
composing stages. 
Pausing Patterns 
Table 2 summarizes the pause frequencies and durations of the two groups throughout the writing event. 
Mann-Whitney U tests suggest the two groups did not differ significantly in terms of pause frequency (U 
= 64, Z = -.44, p = .66 > .05, r = .09) or pause duration (U = 45.5, z = -1.51, p = .13 > .05, r = .31). 
Cuiqin Xu and Yanren Ding Pauses in Computer-Assisted EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
Table 2. Pause Frequencies and Durations for Skilled and for Less-skilled Groups 
 Skilled group (n = 11) Less-skilled group (n = 13) 
 Mean SD Mean SD 
Total pause frequency 39.4 6.4 40.9 7.5 
Total pause duration   7.6 2.2   6.3 1.0 
*Note: frequency is shown as number of pauses of two and more seconds; duration is shown in seconds.  
The pausing behavior was further examined at the two functional stages and the descriptive statistics were 
summarized in Table 3. Mann-Whitney U tests suggest that at the prewriting stage, the skilled group 
paused significantly less frequently than the less-skilled group (U = 35, z = -2.12, p = .03 < .05, r = .43) 
and potentially longer than the less-skilled group as the group difference in pause duration approached the 
significance level, (U = 38.5, z = -1.91, p = .056, r = .39). In the composing stage, the two groups did not 
display any significant difference in pause frequency (U = 64.5, z = -.41, p = .69 > .05, r = .08) or pause 
duration (U = 51.5, z = -1.16, p = .25 > .05, r = .24).  
Table 3. Prewriting and Composing Pause Frequencies and Durations 
 Skilled group (n = 11) Less-skilled group (n = 13) 
 Mean SD Mean SD 
Prewriting pause frequency 27.5 11.0 35.5 8.3 
Prewriting pause duration 15.5 13.8   7.2 2.9 
Composing pause frequency 41.0   7.2 42.3 8.0 
Composing pause duration 7.2   2.0   6.1 1.1 
*Note: frequency is shown as number of pauses of two and more seconds; duration is shown in seconds. 
Writing fluency, text quality and pausing 
Table 4 presents the means and standard deviations of writing fluency and text score. Mann-Whitney U 
tests suggest that the skilled group wrote significantly more fluently than the less-skilled group (U = 37, Z 
= -2.00, p = .047 < .05, r = .41) and produced significantly better final texts (U = 31, Z = -2.36, p = .02 
< .05, r = .48).  
Table 4. Writing Fluency and Text Score for Skilled and for Less-skilled Groups 
 Skilled group (n = 11) Less-skilled group (n = 13) 
 Mean SD Mean SD 
Writing Fluency 3.9 1.1 3.2 0.7 
Text Score 9.5 2.4 7.2 1.8 
Two-tailed Pearson Correlation Coefficients were computed to assess the relationship between writing 
fluency, text score and pausing statistics. The results suggested that text scores correlated positively with 
prewriting pause duration (r = .43, N = 24, p < .05) and composing time (r = .57, N = 24, p < .05) but 
correlated negatively with prewriting time (r = -.42, N = 24, p < .05). In addition, the positive correlation 
between text score and writing fluency approached the significance level, (r = .39, N = 24, p = .06). To 
sum up, increases in prewriting pause duration and writing fluency result in increases in text score while 
Cuiqin Xu and Yanren Ding Pauses in Computer-Assisted EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
increases in prewriting time correlated with decreases in text score. 
Web Search and Dictionary Use 
Web search and dictionary use were examined respectively at the prewriting and composing stages. The 
skilled and less-skilled writers displayed very different priorities and strategies in the two stages, as 
indicated by both how frequently and for what purpose the participants departed from the word processor. 
Three observations were made. First, the two groups demonstrated different language preference in web 
use, with the skilled group having engaged in more L1 web search while the less-skilled group, more L2 
web search. Table 5 shows, in the prewriting stage, the ratio of L2/L1 web search for the skilled group 
was two to eight and the corresponding ratio for the less-skilled group was 29 to 19. In the composing 
stage, although both groups accessed L1 websites 13 times, the less-skilled group accessed L2 websites 
51 times while the skilled group did not access any L2 website. 
Table 5. L2 and L1 Web Search for Skilled and Less-skilled Writers 
 Skilled Writers (n=5) Less-skilled Writers (n=5) 
Prewriting L2 web   2 29 
Prewriting L1web   8 19 
Composing L2 web   0 51 
Composing L1 web 13 13 
 
Second, the two groups displayed different degrees of dependence on web information. As shown in 
Table 5, during the prewriting stage, the skilled group initiated fewer web searches, but exhibited more 
focused reading of the websites as shown by the Camtasia video. In contrast, the less-skilled group 
featured more web searches, more websites visited, quick shifts between different websites and 
consequently, less focused reading of web content. In the composing stage, the skilled group mainly 
focused on text production in the word processor, with occasional reference to previously visited L1 
websites for specific information. However, the less-skilled group engaged in new searching efforts and 
displayed observable writing anxiety by their quick shifts between different websites and the word 
processor, focusing neither on website reading nor on writing in the word processor. 
Take the Skilled Writer One (hereafter referred to as S1) and the Less-skilled Writer Four (hereafter 
referred to as LS4) to exemplify the differences between the two groups. S1, whose prewriting stage 
spanned 13’21” (801 seconds), visited five websites in total, two in English and three in Mandarin. After 
the writing event began, following some long pauses in the word processor, S1 used Drunk drivers should 
be imprisoned on their first offense as the keywords to search in Google. He quickly decided on one link, 
clicked it and stayed on it for 5’1” (301seconds) to do detailed reading, as shown by his occasional 
highlighting some of the sentences. For his second search, S1 used Mandarin keywords on drunk driving 
and displayed attempts to access three links. For the first link, when opened, he saw it was a video clip 
and immediately turned it off. Then he tried a second link, but the website did not pop up quickly enough 
before he turned it off. He then went back to the video-clip link that he had accessed earlier. Without 
watching the video clip, he directly scrolled down for the written description for 23 seconds and then 
resumed the word processor for focused writing, marking the end of his prewriting stage. In this stage, S1 
referred to an L2-L1 dictionary once. In his composing stage, S1 did not initiate any new web search but 
did refer back to the L1 web, leaving this stage focused on text production, with frequent references to L1 
and L2 dictionaries.  
LS4, by contrast, initiated six new web searches, and used the web 16 times in the prewriting stage, which 
lasted for 23’53’’ (1,433 seconds). First, he searched in English Drunk drivers should be imprisoned on 
Cuiqin Xu and Yanren Ding Pauses in Computer-Assisted EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
their first offense on Baidu, a popular search engine in China. With a glance over the many links on the 
screen, he scrolled down to the searches relevant option at the bottom of the webpage and clicked drunk 
drivers to launch a new search. Again, he did not access any website but went to searches relevant. This 
time, he clicked Compositions on drunk driving, for which he still did not access any website before 
turning it off. After a quick and unproductive shift on the word processor, he used Drunk drivers should 
be imprisoned on their first offense as keywords to search in Google. Interestingly, he chose the same 
website as S1, but he closed it 10 seconds later in an attempt to access the translated version of the same 
website, which unfortunately did not pop up. Thus, LS4 went back to access the English website again 
and spent the next 3’18” (198 seconds) on about one third of the webpage, which S1 seemed to have 
covered more thoroughly. During this reading, LS4 referred to L2-L1 dictionary nine times for unknown 
words on this website. This was only part of his web use in the prewriting stage. In the composing stage, 
LS4 accessed L2 websites six times and an L1 website once, without slowing down to read any of them. 
For dictionary use, he used his L1-L2 dictionary 21 times and his L2-L1 dictionary 17 times. 
Consequently, the composing stage of LS4 frequently broke down due to shifts back and forth between 
different websites, dictionaries and the word processor.  
Finally, both groups displayed heavy reliance on dictionaries during the writing event, indicating that 
language frequently posed problems for L2 writers.  As shown in Table 6, in the prewriting stage, the 
skilled group consulted L2-L1 dictionaries five times and L1-L2 dictionaries seven times. The 
corresponding figures for the less-skilled group were 26 and 10 respectively. The composing stage 
featured frequent dictionary consultation by both groups. The skilled group referred to L2-L1 dictionaries 
28 times and L1-L2 dictionaries, 74 times, while the numbers for the less-skilled group were 45 and 105 
respectively.  
Table 6. Dictionary Use for Skilled and for Less-skilled Writers 
 Skilled Writers (n=5) Less-skilled Writers (n=5) 
Prewriting L2-L1 Dictionary 5 26 
Prewriting L1-L2 Dictionary 7 10 
Composing L2-L1 Dictionary 28 45 
Composing L1-L2 Dictionary 74 105 
*Note: L2-L1 Dict.: English-Mandarin Dictionary Use; L1-L2 Dict.: Mandarin-English Dictionary Use. 
Nevertheless, the Camtasia video suggests that the two groups had different strategies for their dictionary 
use. First, the skilled writers bypassed the language barrier in the prewriting stage by taking advantage of 
L1 websites and thus relied less on dictionaries while the less-skilled writers had to depend on L2-L1 
dictionaries for L2 website reading. In this stage, the less-skilled group referred to L2-L1 dictionaries 26 
times, far outnumbering the five times of the same kind for the skilled group. Second, in the composing 
stage, the skilled writers exhibited a tendency to look up words or short expressions. In contrast, the less-
skilled writers seemed to be hoping that the “whole text translation” function, supported by some online 
dictionaries, would do the language magic. The less-skilled group typically typed long strings of Chinese 
characters such as complete Chinese sentences or even a Chinese paragraph for translation. Finally, the 
two groups differed in their dictionary consultation process. The skilled writers decided quickly on 
options suggested by a dictionary. As Camtasia video reveals, they also used dictionaries for spelling 
check and collocation check after they had produced the right expressions in the word processor. 
Consequently, the dictionary-consultation process of this group was brief and efficient. In contrast, the 
less-skilled group exhibited difficulties in deciding among the options suggested in L1-L2 dictionaries. 
These student writers, more often than not, found a possible English equivalent to a Mandarin expression 
Cuiqin Xu and Yanren Ding Pauses in Computer-Assisted EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
first, and used it as a new look-up entry in the L2-L1 dictionaries for its possible usages, which resulted in 
frequent and time-consuming dictionary consultations for this group. 
DISCUSSION 
The analyses of writing time allocation, pauses, writing fluency, final text, and extra writing activities 
reveal interesting differences in the writing behavior of both the skilled and less-skilled EFL writers in 
computer keyboard writing settings.  
Writing Time Allocation 
What appears striking and unexpected in this study is that, although the two groups spent similar amounts 
of time on the writing event, the less-skilled writers allocated significantly more time to the prewriting 
stage than the skilled writers. Compared with previous findings in pen-and-paper L2 writing studies that 
experienced writers spent more time on prewriting planning than novice writers (de Larios, Manchón, 
Murphy, & Marín, 2008; de Larios, Marín, & Murphy, 2001; Sasaki, 2000, 2004), this study suggests an 
almost reversed time allocation pattern for prewriting and composing between the skilled and less-skilled 
writers, showing that time allocation in computer-assisted L2 writing is potentially different from that in a 
pen-and-paper setting (Silva, 1993).  
There could be two reasons for the observed time allocation pattern. First, the less-skilled writers could 
have realized the importance of clear planning for good writing and strived hard for it by engaging in 
extensive online searching. However, this goal was hindered by their lack of ability to make a choice over 
different websites and to engage in focused reading once a choice is made. Another possibility is that the 
less-skilled writers may lack control over information mining on the Internet and become information-
drowned with neither efficient screening of websites nor proper management of web information.  
Whatever the case may be, the fact that the prewriting time negatively correlated with writing fluency 
suggests that although the less-skilled group spent significantly more time in the prewriting stage, this 
time was not rewarded in the composing stage, as demonstrated by their less focused text production in 
the word processor, quick shifts between different windows and observable writing blocks. In sum, the 
less-skilled L2 writers may need more guidance on management of writing resources in an electronic 
environment to make their prewriting stage more rewarding and their composing stage more productive. 
Pausing, Writing Fluency, and Text Quality 
Another interesting finding of this study is how pauses might be affected by writing skill. While 
confirming the previous finding that writing skill did not affect the overall pause frequency and duration 
(Schumacher et al., 1984), this study found that writing skill did affect pausing in different writing stages. 
The skilled writers paused longer and less frequently in the prewriting stage than the less-skilled group, 
but the two groups were not statistically different in either pause frequency or pause duration in the 
composing stage. The positive correlation between the prewriting pause duration and text score further 
suggests that L2 writers may benefit from long pauses in the prewriting stage (Beauvais et al., 2011).  
The Camtasia videos showed that long pauses in the prewriting stage frequently involved 
conceptualization and planning on the global level and focused reading of web information, which 
produced positive effects in the composing stage. In the composing stage, the skilled group focused on 
text production on the word processor with frequent references to dictionaries for the translation of ideas; 
in contrast, the less-skilled group frequently departed from the word processor for new search efforts, 
showing insufficient global planning in their prewriting stage. This was also evidenced by their low 
writing fluency and less conceptually developed final texts. The correlation between writing fluency and 
text score confirms that writing fluency may be an important predictor of writing quality for university 
students (Ransdell & Levy, 1996; Thorson, 2000). 
Cuiqin Xu and Yanren Ding Pauses in Computer-Assisted EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
Two extra writing activities—web search and dictionary usage—help explain the relationship between the 
pausing patterns, writing fluency, and text score. By engaging in more focused reading of online 
resources and the conceptualization of ideas, the skilled writers paused longer but less frequently in the 
prewriting stage. This led to a more focused composing stage with less dependence on web resources, 
displaying short and frequent pauses in text production for local translation problems. However, the less-
skilled writers engaged in excessive web search and dictionary use in both stages, and such excessive 
engagement may have consumed much of the attentional resources that would otherwise have been 
available for global planning of content or organization. This resulted in a fragmented composing stage, 
marked by frequent departures from the word processor for web search or dictionary use, and 
consequently, short and frequent pauses in this stage.  
This result confirms previous findings that less-skilled L2 writers engaged in less global planning and 
their low-level linguistic concerns may overload their working memory (de Larios et al., 2001; Jones & 
Tetroe, 1987; Silva, 1993). The study also suggests pausing as a strategy for the skilled L2 writers to 
manage the competing demands of composing in the prewriting stage (de Beaugrande, 1984; Spelman 
Miller, 2005). One implication here for writing instruction is that L2 writers need to be taught about the 
practical goals of each writing stage and the possible means of meeting these goals so as to avoid 
cognitively overloading the working memory in the writing process.  
Web Search and Dictionary Use 
The participants’ use of websites both in L1 and in L2 shows that the two groups may have had different 
concerns and/or priorities guiding their language preference in web usage. For skilled EFL writers, web 
searches were aimed at information mining for global conceptualization at the prewriting stage. L1 
websites may help meet this purpose by freeing up attentional resources from L2 language processing. By 
contrast, the less-skilled EFL writers tried to search L2 websites for some ready-made L2 texts online that 
they could piece together to make their own compositions. For this purpose, this group strived to read L2 
websites with frequent use of L2-L1 dictionaries, displaying great concern over language priming even in 
the prewriting stage. As Lynch and McLean (2000) suggest that L2 proficiency level may mediate learner 
priority over form or content in oral production, the current study suggests a similar mediating function of 
writing ability on learner priority over content or form in written production, with skilled writers focusing 
on content planning in L1 and less-skilled writers struggling with their L2 for language priming.  
There have been both theoretical speculations and empirical findings that inhibition of conceptual 
processing occurs more often in L2 than in L1 writing (Kellogg, 1994; McCutchen, 1996; Stevenson, 
2005). In this study, by using L1 web sites, the skilled writers achieved conceptualization in the 
prewriting stage, leaving the composing stage more focused on the transformation of ideas. In contrast, 
the less-skilled writers tried to access and read L2 websites in the prewriting stage and repeatedly 
launched new web searches for topic-related information in the composing stage, suggesting that this 
group still confronted macro-conceptual issues in the composing stage. Although these students spent 
more time on the prewriting stage, the time spent was not awarded fruitfully as was demonstrated by their 
fragmented and unproductive composing stage. In addition, their language concern early in the prewriting 
stage was not rewarded in the final text.  
While Lay (1982) reported that more L1 use in L2 writing resulted in better text, it remains unclear what 
“more L1 use” actually means (van Weijen, van den Bergh, Rijlaarsdam & Sanders, 2009, p. 236). This 
study suggests that L1 use in the prewriting stage may help student writers bypass L2 language problems 
and concentrate on their conceptualization of ideas. The fact that the skilled group benefited from their 
conceptualization in L1 suggests that L2 writers should concentrate first on “how to make meaning” 
(Zamel, 1983, p. 180). This lends further support to previous findings that L1 may have a role to play in 
L2 writing to make it less cognitively loaded and more conceptually developed (Cohen & Brooks-Carson, 
2001; Knutson, 2006; Woodall, 2002). Although the literature does not provide a consensus on whether 
Cuiqin Xu and Yanren Ding Pauses in Computer-Assisted EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
L2 writers benefit more by planning in their L1 or their L2 (van Weijen et al., 2009; Wang & Wen, 2002), 
the fact that the skilled writers had a way with conceptualization in L2 writing while the less-skilled were 
striving for a method testifies to the scaffolding role of L1 in L2 writing.   
The finding that both groups relied heavily on L1-L2 dictionaries in the composing stage shows language 
continues to pose problems for L2 writers. Previous studies suggest that attention to lower-level linguistic 
demands during L2 writing may take up a large amount of the writer’s cognitive capacity, leaving less 
available for higher-level processing like content, audience and style (Scott, 1996; Whalen & Ménard, 
1995). This proves particularly true with the less-skilled writers in the current study, who encountered 
language difficulties early in the prewriting stage, resulting in less conceptualized writing plans. Moving 
to the composing stage, this group lacked sufficient L2 knowledge to decide among the options in the 
dictionaries, resulting in lengthy and inefficient dictionary-referencing process. The skilled group, 
nevertheless, stayed more focused on the transformation of ideas in the composing stage and displayed 
varied and efficient dictionary use.  
This finding confirms that low-proficiency L2 writers were more occupied with attempts to compensate 
for interlanguage deficits (de Larios, Manchón, & Murphy, 2006) and this could, to a large extent, inhibit 
conceptualization at the global level. One pedagogical implication here is that bilingual dictionaries, 
though a necessary part of L2 writing, is not always beneficial (Chon, 2008) and good timing for 
dictionary use could be an important factor in limiting excessive concern over language in L2 writing. 
CONCLUSION 
Through Inputlog and Camtasia, the present study explored the writing process of Chinese EFL writers at 
the skilled and less-skilled levels and in the prewriting and composing stages. It has yielded several 
important findings. First, when writing in an electronic environment, less-skilled writers may spend more 
time than skilled writers in the prewriting stage. The negative correlation between the prewriting time and 
text quality suggests that online resources may pose potential challenges for L2 writers with information 
mining and management. L2 writers need to better manage writing resources in the different stages of 
writing so as not to overload their working memory. The positive correlation between prewriting pause 
duration and text quality suggests that L2 writers are more likely to benefit from focused 
conceptualization and reading activities in the prewriting stage. Within the current writing theory and 
practice, this study suggests that computer-assisted L2 writing has placed more competing demands of 
attentional resources on the working memory and that L2 writers need strategic plans to meet these 
demands.  
Second, low-level linguistic concerns in the early stages of writing may distract L2 writers’ attention from 
global planning and result in fragmented composing stages and less-conceptually developed final texts. 
As writing is primarily about making meaning (Zamel, 1983), L2 writers need to meet this primary goal 
first. The “one at a time” problem-solving strategy may help avoid overloading the working memory with 
both conceptual planning and linguistic concern at the same time.  
Third, this study methodologically integrates input logging and screen recording in studying the L2 
writing process, showing that this method promises unobtrusive inquires into the online writing process 
both quantitatively and qualitatively. As L2 text quality may strongly correlate with efficiency of writing 
strategies (Whalen & Ménard, 1995) and that writing strategies can be promoted to a more conscious 
level to guide writing, the replay of the input log and screen video data may hold new pedagogical 
possibilities for promoting strategy use, learner self-assessment, metacognitive awareness, and learner 
autonomy in L2 writing. 
LIMITATIONS AND SUGGESTIONS 
First, findings of this exploratory study may not be generalized to other EFL writers in vastly different 
Cuiqin Xu and Yanren Ding Pauses in Computer-Assisted EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
settings. As Prior (1998) explicitly points out, the writing process is “locally situated, extensively 
mediated, deeply laminated and highly heterogeneous” (p. 275), factors like the participants’ background, 
motivation, anxiety, engagement in the task, task characteristics, and computer lab facilities may all have 
contributed differently to what was found in this study. Future research may take these factors into 
account and investigate to what extent or under what circumstances the findings of this study can be 
generalized. 
A second concern is that pause is defined in this study as an inactive period of two seconds and longer in 
multiwindow settings. While the data permit a comprehensive view of the genuine pausing patterns of the 
writing event, this study did not look into pauses that happened only in the word processor, making it 
difficult to align findings directly with previous pausological studies. Future studies could distinguish 
between pauses in the word processor and those in other windows.  
Finally, as pause threshold in this study was set at two seconds, a relatively inclusive but short threshold, 
the study did not examine how pause frequency and pause duration relate to specific cognitive activities 
in the writing process hierarchically. Future studies could vary pause thresholds to examine the 
correlation between the pausing behavior and the possible cognitive activities involved. 
 
NOTE: 
1. The basis of the Keytrap program was developed by IBM, Brussels. Dr. H. Pauwels (University of 
Antwerp, UFSIA) updated the program and wrote the necessary application programs. For a detailed 
description of the program, see Van Waes and Schellens (2003).  
 
APPENDIX. Rating Rubric for CET4 Writing 
Points Organization Content Language 
2 No focus; disorganized Ideas random, 
inappropriate or illogical 
Incomplete or incorrect sentences; 
severe errors that affect meaning 
5 Attempts to focus; minimal 
organization 
Ideas mixed; few 
transitions 
Monotonous sentence structures; 
numerous errors that interfere with 
meaning 
8  Single focus; some lapses 
or flaws in organization 
Ideas not well supported 
or elaborated 
Little variety in syntax; some 
evident errors 
11  Single focus; logical 
organization  
Ideas appropriate and 
varied 
Varied sentence structure; few 
errors 
14  Single, distinct focus; 
logical progression of ideas 
Details effective, vivid, 
explicit and pertinent 
Very few, if any, errors 
Note: This rubric assigns each text into one of the five levels above, and minor deviations from the description for each level may 
result in the loss or gain of one point. Thus, a perfect score is 15 and the lowest score is zero.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The research reported in this paper was funded by the Youth Project of Humanities and Social Sciences, 
Cuiqin Xu and Yanren Ding Pauses in Computer-Assisted EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
Ministry of Education, China (No. 14YJC740095). The authors would like to thank the reviewers and 
LLT editors for their insightful suggestions, which help improve the original manuscript. Our thanks also 
go to the students who kindly agreed to join the study. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Cuiqin Xu is an associate professor in the Department of Applied Foreign Language Studies, Nanjing 
University. She holds a PhD in applied linguistics and her research interests are L2 writing process, 
second language acquisition and computer-assisted language learning in EFL classrooms. 
E-mail: cqxu@nju.edu.cn 
Yanren Ding is a professor of applied linguistics in the Department of English, Nanjing University. His 
research interests include EFL writing, EFL classroom studies and second language acquisition. 
E-mail: yrding@nju.edu.cn 
 
REFERENCES 
Ackerman, P. L. (2003). Aptitude complexes and trait complexes. Educational Psychologist, 38, 85–93. 
Alves, R., Castro, S. L., & Olive, T. (2008). Execution and pauses in writing narratives: Processing time, 
cognitive effort and typing skill. International Journal of Psychology, 43, 469–479.  
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory. In G. A. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of 
learning and motivation (pp. 47–89). San Diego, CA: Academic Press. 
Beauvais, C., Olive, T., & Passerault, J. (2011). Why are some texts good and others not? Relationship 
between text quality and management of the writing processes. Journal of Educational Psychology, 103, 
415–428. 
Camtasia 6.0 [Computer software]. TechSmith© Cooperation.  
Chenoweth, N. A., & Hayes, J. R. (2001). Fluency in writing: Generating text in L1 and L2. Written 
Communication, 18, 80–98. 
Chon, Y. V. (2008). The electronic dictionary for writing: A solution or a problem? International Journal 
of Lexicography, 22(1), 23–54. 
Chun, D. M. (2001). L2 reading on the web: Strategies for accessing information in hypermedia, 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 14(5), 367–403. 
Cohen, A. D., & Brooks-Carson, A. (2001). Research on direct versus translated writing: Students’ 
strategies and their results. The Modern Language Journal, 85, 169–188. 
de Beaugrande, R. 1984. Text production: Toward a science of composition. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
DeKeyser, R. (2001). Automaticity and automatization. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second 
language instruction (pp. 125–151). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
de Larios, R. J., Manchón, R. M., Murphy, L., & Marín, J. (2008). The foreign language writer’s strategic 
behavior in the allocation of time to writing processes. Journal of Second Language Writing, 17, 30–47. 
de Larios, J. R., Manchón, R. M., & Murphy, L. (2006). Generating text in native and foreign language 
writing: A temporal analysis of problem-solving formulation processes. The Modern Language Journal, 
90(1), 100–114. 
Cuiqin Xu and Yanren Ding Pauses in Computer-Assisted EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
de Larios, R. J.,  Marín, J. & Murphy, L. (2001). A temporal analysis of formulation processes in L1 and 
L2 writing. Language Learning, 51, 497–538. 
Hall, C. (1990). Managing the complexity of revising across languages. TESOL Quarterly, 24, 43–60. 
Jones, S., & Tetroe, J. (1987). Composing in a second language. In A. Matsuhashi (Ed.), Writing in real 
time (pp. 34–57). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Kellogg, R. T. (1994). The psychology of writing. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Kellogg, R. T. (1996). A model of working memory in writing. In C. M. Levy & S. Ransdell (Eds.), The 
science of writing: Theories, methods, individual differences and applications (pp. 57–72). Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum. 
Knutson, E. M. (2006). Thinking in English, writing in French. The French Review, 80(1), 88–109. 
Kormos, J. (2012). The role of individual differences in L2 writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 
21(4), 390–403. 
Lay, N. D. S. (1982). Composing processes of adult ESL learners: A case study. TESOL Quarterly, 16(3), 
406. 
Leijten, M., & Van Waes, L. (2006). Inputlog: New perspectives on the logging of on-line writing 
processes in a Windows environment. In K. P. H. Sullivan & E. Lindgren (Eds.), Computer keystroke 
logging: Methods and applications (pp. 73–93). Oxford, UK: Elsevier. 
Levy, C.M., & Ransdell, S. (1996). The science of writing. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Lynch, T., & Mclean, J. (2000). Exploring the benefits of task repetition and recycling for classroom 
language learners. Language Teaching Research, 4, 221–250. 
Matsuhashi, A. (1981). Pausing and planning: The tempo of written discourse production. Research in the 
Teaching of English, 15, 113–134. 
Matsuhashi, A. (1987). Writing in real time: Modeling production processes. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
McCutchen, D. (1996). A capacity theory of writing: Working memory in composition. Educational 
Psychology Review, 8, 299–325. 
Prior, P. A. (1998). Writing disciplinarity: A sociohistoric account of literate activity in the academy. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Ransdell, S., & Levy, C. M. (1996). Working memory constraints on writing quality and fluency. In C. 
M. Levy & S. Ransdell (Eds.), The science of writing: Theories, methods, individual differences, and 
applications (pp. 93–105). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Robinson, P. (2005). Aptitude and second language acquisition. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 
25, 45–73. 
Rundell, M. (1999). Dictionary use in production. International Journal of Lexicography, 12(1), 35–53. 
Sasaki, M. (2000). Toward an empirical model of EFL writing processes: An exploratory study. Journal 
of Second Language Writing, 9, 259–291.  
Sasaki, M. (2004). A multiple-data analysis of the 3.5-year development of EFL student writers. 
Language Learning, 54, 525–582. 
Schilperoord, J. (1996). The distribution of pause time in written text production. In G. Rijlaarsdam, H. 
van den Bergh and M. Couzijn (Eds.), Current research in writing: Theories, models and methodology 
(pp. 21–35). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Amsterdam University Press. 
Cuiqin Xu and Yanren Ding Pauses in Computer-Assisted EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
Schumacher, G. M., Klare, G. R., Cronin, F. C., & Moses, J. D. (1984). Cognitive activities of beginning 
and advanced college writers: A pausal analysis. Research in the Teaching of English, 18, 169–187. 
Scott, V. M. (1996). Rethinking foreign language writing. Boston, MA: Heinle. 
Scott, V. M., & New, E. (1994). Computer-aided analysis of foreign language writing processes. CALICO 
Journal, 11, 77–90. 
Silva, T. (1993). Toward an understanding of the distinct nature of L2 writing: The ESL research and its 
implications. TESOL Quarterly, 27, 657–677. 
Spelman Miller, K. (2000). Academic writers on-line: Investigating pausing in the production of text. 
Language Teaching Research, 4, 123–148. 
Spelman Miller, K. (2005). Second language writing research and pedagogy: A role for computer 
logging? Computers and Composition, 22, 297–317. 
Spelman Miller, K., Lindgren, E. & Sullivan, K. P. H. (2008). The psycholinguistic dimension in second 
language writing: Opportunities for research and pedagogy using computer keystroke logging. TESOL 
Quarterly, 42, 433–454. 
Stapleton, P. (2010). Writing in an electronic age: A case study of L2 composing processes. Journal of 
English for Academic Purposes, 9, 295–307. 
Stevenson, M. (2005). Reading and writing in a foreign language: A comparison of conceptual and 
linguistic processes in Dutch and English. Unpublished doctoral thesis. University of Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. 
Stratman, J., & Hamp-Lyons, L. (1994). Reactivity in concurrent think-aloud protocols: Issues for 
research. In P. Smagorinsky (Ed.), Speaking about writing (pp. 89–112). London, UK: Sage. 
Sullivan, K. P. H., & Lindgren, E. (2002). Self-assessment in autonomous computer-aided L2 writing. 
ELT Journal, 56, 258–266. 
Sun, Y. & Chang, Y. (2012). Blogging to learn: becoming EFL academic writers through collaborative 
dialogues. Language Learning & Technology, 16(1), 43–61. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/sunchang.pdf. 
Thorson, H. (2000). Using the computer to compare foreign and native language writing processes: A 
statistical and case study approach. The Modern Language Journal, 84, 155–169. 
Van Waes, L., & Schellens, P. J. (2003). Writing profiles: The effect of the writing mode on pausing and 
revision patterns of experienced writers. Journal of Pragmatics, 35, 829–853. 
Van Weijen, D., van den Bergh, H., Rijlaarsdam, G., & Sanders, T. (2009). L1 use during L2 writing: An 
empirical study of a complex phenomenon. Journal of Second Language Writing, 18, 235–250. 
Wang, W., & Wen, Q. (2002). L1 use in the L2 composing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 11, 
225–246. 
Wengelin, Å. (2002). Text production in adults with reading and writing difficulties. Ph.D. thesis, 
Department of Linguistics, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. 
Wengelin, Å. (2006). Examining pauses in writing: Theory, methods and empirical data. In K. P. H. 
Sullivan & E. Lindgren (Eds.), Computer keystroke logging: Methods and applications (pp. 107–130). 
Oxford, UK: Elsevier. 
Whalen, K., & Ménard, N. (1995). L1 and L2 writers’ strategic and linguistic knowledge: A model of 
multiple-level discourse processing. Language Learning, 44, 381–418. 
Cuiqin Xu and Yanren Ding Pauses in Computer-Assisted EFL Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 96 
Woodall, B. R. (2002). Language-switching: Using the first language while writing in a second. Journal 
of Second Language Writing, 11, 7–28. 
Zamel, V. (1983). The composing processes of advanced ESL students: Six case studies. TESOL 
Quarterly, 17, 165–187. 
