Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/wugaozhang.pdf 
October 2014, Volume 18, Number 3 
pp. 228–254 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 228 
CHINESE EFL TEACHERS' SOCIAL INTERACTION AND SOCIO-
COGNITIVE PRESENCE IN SYNCHRONOUS COMPUTER-MEDIATED 
COMMUNICATION  
Heping Wu, Northwest Normal University 
Junde Gao, Northwest Normal University 
Weimin Zhang, Northwest Normal University  
The present study examines the professional growth of three Chinese English teachers by 
analyzing their interactional patterns and their social and cognitive presence in an online 
community. The data from social network analysis (SNA) and content analysis revealed 
that computer-mediated communication (CMC) created new opportunities for teachers to 
interact personally, socially and professionally with other fellow teachers with whom they 
would otherwise not have contact in their working milieu. At the initial stage of their 
online communication, newcomers to the forum were more likely to rely on vertical 
relationships, preferring to communicate with people with more expertise or power in the 
community. New horizontal, peer-to-peer relationships emerged with their increasing 
involvement in online discussion. Moreover, codes of social presence were frequently 
used by the participants, especially by the peripheral members in the community. 
“Elucidating” was the most frequent category of cognitive presence codes used by all the 
participants while the codes of the other three phases varied with individual teachers. No 
significant change was observed in the development of cognitive presence likely due to the 
effect of the time variable. The study has some practical implications for the professional 
development of language teachers in an online community.  
Key Words: Computer-Mediated Communication, Discourse Analysis, Teacher 
Education, Social Presence, Cognitive Presence, Community of Inquiry  
APA Citation: Wu, H., Gao, J. &Zhang, W. (2014). Chinese EFL teachers' social 
interactionand socio-cognitive presence in synchronous computer-mediated 
communication. Language Learning & Technology, 18(3), 228–254. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/wugaozhang.pdf 
Received: October 1, 2013; Accepted: April 10, 2014; Published: October 1, 2014 
Copyright: © Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang  
With the advance of emerging information and communication technology (ICT) and the growing interest 
in the use of the internet for education, computer-mediated communication (CMC) presents EFL teachers 
with a broad range of new opportunities for professional development. On the one hand, CMC facilitates 
both person-to-person and person-to-group communication by means of computer networks, such as e-
mail, threaded forums, electronic bulletin boards, network videoconferencing, and more recently since 
mid-2000s, web 2.0 social media services like weblogs, microblogs, wikis, podcasts, and so on 
(Alexander, 2006). On the other hand, CMC makes professional development available to educators any 
time, any place, by using a range of digital resources to enhance the pedagogy of teaching and bringing 
together diverse voices from teachers with whom they would otherwise not have contact in their local 
working milieu (Dede, Ketelhut, Whitehouse, Breit, & McCloskey, 2009). 
Given the geographical vastness of China and the severe shortage of competent teacher educators therein, 
CMC-based teacher development initiatives have gained growing prominence in China in recent years, at 
both national and local levels. For instance, in 2010, about 1,029,000 teachers participated in 
technologically supported "Distance Teacher Training Programs”, an integral component of the country's 
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 229 
National Teacher Training Project which has been financially supported by the state since 2010.1 A broad 
range of objectives for teacher development underlie these CMC-based professional development 
programs in China. These include introducing the New National Curricula, building teachers’ pedagogical 
knowledge base, altering teachers' beliefs and instructional practices, sharing experiences and resources 
and creating communities of teacher development, among many others. Compared with face-to-face 
teacher training programs, these online teacher development initiatives can create an evolutionary path 
towards providing real-time, ongoing, work-embedded support for teachers with busy schedules and 
diversified demands.  
The present study aims to examine some Chinese EFL teachers’ professional development in a CMC-
based community by analyzing their interaction patterns and their online discourse in a regular CMC-
based forum. 
BACKGROUND LITERATURE 
Previous Studies on CMC-based Teacher Professional Development 
Computer Mediated Communication (CMC) is defined as communication that takes place between human 
beings via networked computers (Herring, 1996; Warschauer, 1997). Research into CMC focuses largely 
on the social effects of different computer-supported communication technologies. For language teachers, 
CMC has the potential to contribute to nurturing their professional growth in productive and practical 
ways. On the one hand, CMC provides a context whereby teachers can interact personally, socially, and 
professionally (Vrasidas & Glass, 2004). On the other hand, it creates opportunities for teachers to reflect 
on their teaching practice (Hawkes & Romiszowiski, 2001), engage in discourse with teacher educators 
(Meskill, 2009), share expertise (Job-Sluder & Barab, 2004), and promote collaborations with their peers 
(Dooly & Sadler, 2013). More importantly, CMC can foster the formation of communities of practice that 
can promote teachers’ professional development (Riordan & Murry, 2012; Yang, 2009). 
Weblogs and online videos are two forms of CMC platforms that have been amply documented in the 
literature of online teacher development. The former was found to be very valuable in engaging teachers 
in reflective practice or pedagogical knowledge construction in teacher training or teacher preparation 
programs (Hou, Chang, & Sung, 2009; Yang, 2009), while the latter was recognized as playing a crucial 
role in influencing teachers’ professional vision (Sherin & van Es, 2009), developing their analytical 
thinking skills (Sherin & Han, 2004), improving their teaching discourse and establishing links between 
teaching theories and practice (Koc, Peker, & Osmanoglu, 2009). CMC platforms have been found to be 
particularly beneficial to pre-service teachers in that they can provide them with such professional 
supports as modeling online instructional conversations and practice, developing pedagogical content 
knowledge, linking theory and practice, sharing and assessing their internship or practicum experiences, 
improving the quality of mentoring and promoting ongoing professional engagement (Chai, Koh, & Tsai, 
2010; Dooly & Sadler, 2013; Meskill, 2009).  
As can be seen from this brief review of the literature on research of CMC-based teacher development, 
most of these studies were cross-sectional and were based on the examination of pre-service teachers’ 
online activities on asynchronous CMC platforms such as weblogs and video clubs, while the longitudinal 
investigations of the in-service teachers’ online communication and interactions on synchronous CMC 
platforms was limited. This is the area to which the present study attempts to make a contribution. More 
specifically, the purpose of the present study is to examine the professional growth of three Chinese 
teachers of the English language firstly by analyzing their interaction patterns with other participants and 
their social and cognitive presence in a CMC-based professional community, and secondly by analyzing 
the content of their postings in an online forum. The key research questions this study will address are: 
What is the interactional pattern of the Chinese EFL teachers in a synchronous CMC community?  
What characterizes the Chinese EFL teachers’ social and cognitive presence in their online 
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 230 
communication with other participants? 
To what extent do the teachers’ online interactional pattern and social and cognitive strategies 
change over time?  
Studies on Teachers’ Social Interaction in Online Communities 
Participation in interactional activities has been argued to be an intrinsic part of learning wherein 
professional knowledge is co-constructed, negotiated and improved (Wenger, 1997). Since communities 
of practice are able to provide opportunities for teachers to learn from peers, both interactively and 
collaboratively, studies on social interaction in online communities have become an emerging perspective 
on teacher learning. The aim of these studies is to understand the nature of connectedness and 
engagement in online interactional processes––of ties, relations, roles and network formations––by asking 
how teachers develop and maintain a web of social relations (De Laat, 2006). In the field of teacher 
professional development, some studies showed that teacher networks add value to the implementation of 
innovations, teacher development, and improved teaching practices (Dresner & Worley, 2006; Earl & 
Katz, 2007). Both weak ties between new acquaintances, and strong ties in long-lasting friendships and 
community memberships were found to play crucial roles in gaining access to new knowledge and 
maintaining commitment to joint activities in the online communities (Haythornthwaite & De Laat, 2010). 
It was also observed that network prestige and network centrality were both robust predictors of cognitive 
learning outcomes in an online community (Russo & Koesten, 2005). Engaging teachers in an online 
community, therefore, is in essence empowering them to work constructively and creatively with 
professional knowledge building and experience sharing.  
Studies on Social and Cognitive Presence in Online Communities  
It was argued in early communication studies that participants in online communities would be less 
sociable because CMC was considered as a depersonalized medium because it lacks nonverbal cues, a 
perspective called ‘cues-filtered-out’ theory (Culnan & Markus, 1987). However, many later studies 
suggest that relationships in CMC context developed in the same way as face-to-face situations did, 
though interpersonal impressions were formed more slowly with CMC.  
Garrison and other scholars (Garrison, 2007; Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 2000; Garrison, Anderson, & 
Archer, 2001) developed an influential model of a community of inquiry that combines three elements: 
cognitive presence, social presence, and teaching presence. Social presence is a concept that has its base 
in telecommunication literature (Short, William, & Christie, 1976), and is defined as the sense of being 
together with other people in a networked environment. According to Garrison and his colleagues’ 
framework of Community of Inquiry (CoI) (Garrison et al., 2000; Garrison et al., 2001; Rourke, 
Anderson, Garrison, & Archer, 2001), social presence can further be classified through a series of 
indicators that fit into the following categories: affective, interactive, and cohesive. Researchers have 
found that online social presence of participants is a significant predictor of their perceived learning 
satisfaction and learning outcomes in an online community (Asoodar, Atai, Vaezi, & Marandi, 2014; 
Dede et al., 2009; Gunawardena & Zittle, 1997; Tsai, 2012). Different dimensions of social presence 
emerge as important elements in making connections to other peers and establishing a sense of 
community among online learners (Arnold, Ducate, Lomicka, & Lord, 2005; Tu & McIsaac, 2002). 
Social presence, according to these studies, serves as the base for the successful building of communities 
of inquiry and the other dimensions of cognitive and teaching presence. Also noteworthy in the literature 
is that social presence is not a stable attribute of a community of inquiry and it is susceptible to some 
external factors, such as time (Swan & Shea, 2005) and participants’ local cultural beliefs (Tu, 2001).  
Cognitive presence is a notion based on Dewey’s model of inquiry and reflective thinking (Dewey, 1963). 
It is conceptualized as progressive development of a community of inquiry where participants move 
deliberately from understanding the problem or issue through to exploration, integration and application 
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 231 
(Garrison, 2007; Garrison et al., 2000; Garrison et al., 2001). Accordingly, some models involving 
different stages of cognitive presence have been proposed in order to measure its effect in an online 
community, including Garrison et al.’s well-known four-stage model of triggering event, exploration, 
integration and resolution (Garrison et al., 2000; Garrison et al., 2001).  
There have been many reports of successful implementations of CMC with different cognitive benefits. 
For instance, discussion boards and computer conferencing with dense information exchanges often 
reflect in-depth processing, critical thinking and higher-order knowledge acquisition (Bullen, 1997; 
Garrison et al., 2001; Newman, Webb, & Cochrane, 1995; Shea & Bidjerano, 2009). Reading others’ 
comments, ideas and experiences also helps to broaden the participants’ knowledge and deepen their 
understanding (Gunawardena, Lowe, & Anderson, 1997). The opportunity to build on each other’s ideas 
and to learn from each other in a CMC community can result in the co-construction of knowledge (Hull & 
Saxon, 2009; Pena-Shaff & Nicholls, 2004) in the process of collaborative learning and scaffolding. In 
addition, becoming involved in online conversations has been found to help future language teachers to 
reflect, evaluate, solve pedagogical problems and progress in their cognitive understanding of the 
pedagogical topics (Arnold & Ducate, 2006). However, a number of studies of the cognitive presence 
note that participants have great difficulty moving beyond the exploration phase (Garrison, 2007; 
Garrison et al., 2001; Newman et al., 1995).  
CONTEXTOF THE STUDY 
The context of this study is China Education Resources and Services Platform (henceforth referred to as 
CERSP)2. Starting with its launch in 2005, CERSP provides a cyberspace for Chinese teachers in primary 
and middle schools to participate in online training modules and to share professional experiences and 
resources with a network of teachers nationwide. 
There are five major components in CERSP: teachers’ blog, educational forum, distance training 
programs, resource sharing, news and views in education, and other featured sites. The present study 
focuses on the posts published in the English teaching forum3 which is one of the ten sub-forums in its 
educational forum component.  This study draws on 35,829 messages for its analysis, which had been 
posted by over 200 contributors by the end of September, 2012.  
A noticeable feature of this forum is thematic online discussion, which is a regular, synchronous 
discussion on a broad range of topics about English language teaching, such as teaching reading skills, 
textbook use, cooperative learning, and pathways to teacher development, to list just a few.  The 
participants in the discussion voluntarily meet online, at 20:00 on the 8th day of every month, where they 
discuss a central topic decided through online voting. The forum administrator posts reading materials on 
the topic that serves as ‘food for thought’ prior to the discussion. A registered participant can post a new 
message, reply to a message, or send a message with attached files. Some top educational consultants and 
teacher educators in China are invited to communicate with the teachers in the monthly online discussion. 
The online discussions in CERSP purportedly provide a context in which participants can interact 
personally, socially and professionally, by raising practical problems, sharing thoughts and experiences, 
and seeking advice and solutions. The present study endeavors to examine the online communication of 
three English teachers who actively participated in the monthly online discussions between 2006 and 
2011 by analyzing their social interactions with other participants and the posts they published in the 
forum. 
METHODS 
Data Sources 
The primary sources of data for this study were the posts published in the thematic online discussions of 
the English teaching forum of CERSP. Two major sources were particularly relevant for the purposes of 
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 232 
this study and these were the data for social network analysis (SNA) —the data pertaining to who speaks 
to whom in the online discussion, and data for the content analysis—the data concerning who says what in 
the thematic discussion. While we have data samples for SNA analysis for the six years between 2006 and 
2011, the data sampled for content analysis only covers the scope of four years between 2008 and 2011. 
The reason for the difference in period for social network analysis and content analysis is that these two 
approaches require different types of data. In SNA, we only need to measure the frequency of each 
participant’s online interactions with their interlocutors, while the content analysis requires that the cross-
case comparison of different categories of social/cognitive presence be done when all teachers are 
participating in the same online discussion. Because the online conversations in 2006 and 2007 did not 
contain simultaneous presence of all three teachers, consequently, their postings during these two years 
were not sampled and coded for content analysis.  
Additionally, in an online interview with one of the forum administrators and another with two of the case 
teachers via e-mail, or QQ (a popular instant messaging service in China), the case teachers were asked 
about their experiences, motivations, and professional outcome of participating in the computer-mediated 
communication.  
Participants and Case Teachers  
The sampled data set contained 1,352 post entries by 123 participants in the online forum, with each 
contributing 10.99 post messages on average. Table 1 presents the top 10 active contributors to the forum 
and their social roles in the physical world. They contributed 64.50% of the total post entries sampled.  
Table 1. Profiles of the Top 10 Active Participants in the Forum 
Username Social Roles in the Physical World Number of Post Entries 
linhong_bnu Forum administrator 194 
马欣_eblog Forum administrator, University Teacher 150 
Newsense Middle School Teacher 120 
陈越 Middle School Teacher 113 
孟雁君 Middle School Teacher, Researcher and Consultant.  78 
f20010825 Unidentified 57 
陈则航 Forum administrator, University Teacher 57 
Shirleyju Unidentified 52 
刘莹老师 Middle School Teacher and Consultant 51 
france1981 Unidentified 43 
Total  872 
Note: The shadowed participants were selected as the case teachers in this study.  
Three out of the 123 participants were selected as case teachers for further study, Newsense ,陈越 (Chen 
Yue, henceforth referred to as Chen), and 孟雁君 (Meng Yanjun, henceforth referred to as Meng). As 
shown in Table 1, these three teachers were selected because they were both middle school EFL teachers 
and ranked among the top 10 contributors to the online discussion. Table 2 shows the profiles of these 
teachers4.  
 
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 233 
Table 2.Profiles of the 3 Case Teachers 
Teachers Professional careers and CERSP activities 
Chen Female with 17 years of teaching experience now working as an English teacher in a junior 
high school in a remote rural area in Shandong Province. Registered to CERSP in April 
2008, posting 734 messages, 212 logins, last login on September 24, 2012.  
Newsense Male with about 20 years of teaching experience now working as an English teacher in a 
senior high school English teacher in a county of Shandong Province. Granted the title of 
Teacher of Distinction by Shandong Province in 2006. Registered to CERSP in December 
2006, posting 1,011 messages, 1,775 logins, last login on September 30, 2012.  
Meng Female now retired but still playing an active role teaching research, consultancy and 
teacher training. Used to work as an English teacher in a senior high school in a county of 
Beijing city for 20 years and as a researcher and consultant in a teaching research institute 
for 10 years. Granted the title of Teacher of Distinction by Beijing Municipal Government 
in 1991. Registered to CERSP in April, 2006, posting 459 messages, 45 logins, last login 
on September 8, 2012. 
Data Analysis 
The present study investigated the interactional patterns and socio-cognitive presence of the 3 case 
teachers actively participating in online discussions in a virtual community of practice. The study 
involved both social network analysis and content analysis of the participants’ postings in the thematic 
discussions of CERSP. Both of these two approaches prove to be conducive in revealing the complex 
relationship involved in the development of higher order thinking and meaningful learning in online 
environments (Martınez, Dimitriadis, Rubia, Gómez, & De La Fuente, 2003; Shea et al., 2010). Social 
Network Analysis was adopted to explore the patterns of social interactions between participants in online 
discussions, and the content analysis was used to examine how the three case teachers built their 
professional knowledge through social and cognitive presence in the synchronous CMC context.  
Social Network Analysis (SNA).  
Social network analysis (SNA) is an approach to examining, quantifying and visualizing the patterns of 
relationships that arise among interacting social entities, typically among individuals (Scott, 1987; 
Wellman, 2001). It views social relationships in terms of network theory, consisting of nodes 
(representing individual actors within the network) and ties (which represent relationships between the 
individuals, such as friendship, kinship and organizational position). In general, SNA enables researchers 
to understand how individuals are connected within a network. This is often depicted in a social network 
diagram known as sociogram, and the network patterns generated by SNA may thus form the basis of 
many further investigations. With the increasing popularity of online communities in the recent years, 
SNA has been used to shed light on some important social features in CMC contexts. For example, SNA 
has enabled researchers to identify central and peripheral actors, to investigate the influence of group 
cohesion in an online community and to clarify the impact of social structures on knowledge construction 
in an asynchronous learning environment (Aviv, Erlich, Ravid, & Geva, 2003).  
There are two broad approaches to SNA: whole-network/sociocentric network approach and personal 
network/egocentric network approach (Scott, 1987; Wasserman & Faust, 1994). The former approach 
focuses on the patterns of connections in the network as a whole by measuring the structural patterns of 
those interactions and how those patterns explain, for example, the concentration of power or other 
resourceswithin the group. The egocentric approach, on the other hand, focuses on a focal actor or object 
and the relationships in its locality and seeks to anchor social networks around particular points of 
reference. This form of SNA is almost always about individuals rather than about groups. 
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 234 
The two key indicators of SNA are “density” and “centrality.” Density provides a measure of the overall 
‘connections’ between the participants. The more participants connected to one another, the higher the 
density value of the network will be (Scott, 1987). The notion of centrality indicates the extent to which 
an individual interacts with other members in the network (Wasserman & Faust, 1994). Using this 
measure, we can identify who, for instance, is a central participant of a particular social network. This can 
be done for each participant by measuring the number of connections with the other members and 
generating “in-degree” and “out-degree values.” In-degree measures provide information about the 
number of people who respond to a message from a certain participant. Out-degree gives an indication of 
the number of messages a person has sent to other individual members of the network (Scott, 1987; 
Wasserman & Faust, 1994). Since the egocentric approach is more germane to the purpose of the present 
study, it is therefore adopted as our primary analytical SNA approach.  
In this study, UCINET, a comprehensive software package developed by Analytic Technologies for SNA 
was used to analyze and visually represent the interactional patterns of the participants in the online forum 
(Borgatti, Everett, & Freeman, 2002).  
Content Analysis.  
Content analysis is a technique widely adopted to unlock the information captured in transcripts of online 
discussion groups (Garrison, Cleveland-Innes, Koole, & Kappelman, 2006; Rourke et al., 2001). The 
present study adopts eCAF (abbreviation for electronic conversational analysis framework) developed by 
J. Duncan-Howell (2009) as a new methodological tool of content analysis which has its origin in the 
Community of Inquiry (CoI) model proposed by Garrison and colleagues (Garrison, 2007; Garrison et al., 
2000; Garrison et al., 2001). One of the strengths of eCAF is that it incorporates the unique virtual/real 
worlds that individuals participate in and links these two locations to the phases of cognitive presence in 
electronic discussions. The eCAF provides codes relevant to this context at each phase of online 
discussion, as shown in Table 3.  
Table 3.Connecting Locations and Phases of Online Discussions (adapted from Duncan-Howell, 2009) 
Phase of discussion Location of discussion 
Generating phase Real/authentic world entering the virtual world 
Elucidating phase Virtual world 
Integrating phase Virtual world linking with the real/authentic world 
Resolution phase Virtual world re-entering the real/authentic world 
Appendix A provides the coding scheme of eCAF with more detailed descriptions of the subcategories 
and examples for each phase.  
It is also noted that eCAF does not have a social dimension since its primary concern is to bridge the 
unique virtual/real worlds that individuals participate in and to link these two locations to different phases 
of cognitive presence in electronic discussions (Duncan-Howell, 2009). However, most of the existing 
frameworks investigating interactions recognize the crucial role played by social interactions between 
participants in a CMC context (Garrison et al., 2006; Gunawardena et al., 1997; Hara, Bonk, & Angeli, 
1998; Henri, 1992), which, unfortunately, can hardly be incorporated into a phase-wise model that 
focuses more on the cognitive development of the participants over time. Therefore, another important 
adaptation to eCAF was to include a social dimension independent of the four phases. The social cues in 
our adapted version of eCAF include self-introduction, affective responses, expression of feeling (e.g., 
"I'm feeling great… "), greeting (e.g., "Hi, everyone"), closure (e.g., "That's it for now"), jokes, the use of 
emoticons such as: )or: -), as well as compliments to others. 
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 235 
Coding Procedure  
The messages were coded with the aid of winMAX, a software package for coding and analyzing texts in 
social sciences which enables the combination of qualitative and quantitative procedures. The basic unit 
of analysis was the unit of meaning. That is, a category was coded if a consistent “theme” or “idea” was 
identified in the message. One third of the coding was done collaboratively by two researchers to ensure 
coding consistency. They negotiated with each other where disagreements arose in the process of coding. 
The remaining two thirds of the messages were coded by one of the two researchers, following the coding 
scheme of eCAF and the adaptations the researchers had made. They coded two out of the twelve monthly 
thematic discussions each year during the years between 2008 and 2011. These two months were chosen 
based on the following principles. First, the two months should be evenly assigned to the first and second 
half of the year. Second, all three teachers must have participated in the discussion so that their 
participation could be quantified on equal conditions. The online conversations in the years of 2006 and 
2007 did not contain the simultaneous presence of all three teachers and, consequently, their postings 
during these two years were not sampled and coded for content analysis, as has been mentioned earlier.  
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
Results from the Social Network Analysis (SNA) 
As indicated earlier,SNA offers both visual and statistical analyses of human relationships. In the present 
study, SNA was adopted to analyze and visually represent the interactional patterns of the case teachers 
and the other participants in the online forum as a response to the first research question of the study: 
“What is the interactional pattern of EFL teachers in a synchronous CMC community?” We examined the 
participants’ involvement in the network at two different periods, that is, the early period (between 2006 
and 2008) and the entire period (between 2006 and 2011).  
A General Description of the Network at Different Phases of Development 
Presented in Table 4 are some key indices that give a general description of the CERSP network at 
different stages of its development.  
Table 4. Descriptive Indices of CERSP Network at Different Stages of Development  
Network Properties Early period 
2006–2008 
Entire Period 
2006–2011 
Nodes 37 123 
Ties 131 428 
Density .101 .029 
Components 14 63 
Connectedness .613 .342 
Fragmentation .387 .658 
Average Distance 2.165 2.280 
Diameter 5 4 
Breadth .676 .835 
Compactness .324 .165 
It can be seen from the table that more participants were involved in the monthly thematic discussion of 
CERSP as the network evolved, and the number of the nodes and ties increased over three times after the 
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 236 
cut-point of the year 2008. However, compared to the early period between 2006 and 2008, the density of 
the network decreased during the entire period of its development when more participants joined the 
discussions. Other indices such as components, connectedness, fragmentation, etc, showed that the 
network became more fragmented, less connected and less compact, with the distance between 
participants becoming greater at its later stage of development than at the earlier period.  
The tendency demonstrated in Table 4 also manifest in sociograms shown in Figure 1 and Figure 2, 
which are respectively visual presentations of the interactional patterns between individual participants in 
CERSP’s thematic discussion at an earlier stage and its later development.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Sociogram of CERSP in the early period 2006–2008.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
linhong_bnu
france1981
f20010825
amanda
newsense
陈越
jessicawang
公孙老师
马欣_eblog
罗少茜
suloo
bernie
陈则航
易燕
半月
张连仲教授
shirleyju
都市猎人 孟雁君
田贵森教授
sxlflewis
yanhui77528
心烛eblog
刘莹老师
黄华钦
北京竞人 valder-field
小魔镜
程晓堂
joannerong
半月
sxlflewis
zhangwenhua111
georgetan xiaoyi
rainstar1215
lisahong
泡泡娃
王蔷
chenfangterry
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 237 
 
Figure 2. Sociogram of CERSP in the entire period (2006-2011). 
An examination of these two figures directed the researchers to examine the reasons why the network 
became less dense over time even though the number of the participants was increasing. Part of the reason 
might lie in the growing number of “dropouts”, “loafers” and “lurkers” in the network activities that are 
listed on the left side of the sociograms in the figures. These users registered themselves as participants in 
the network but rarely contributed to the online activities. Another important feature obtained from these 
figures was that two of the three case teachers in this study, that is, Chen and Meng, were less actively 
involved in the network than Newsense in the early period and only at a later stage did they become 
central figures in the online professional community.  
Centrality Measures of the Teachers.  
Centrality indicates the extent to which an individual interacts with other members in a social 
network(Wasserman & Faust, 1994). We can measure centrality with a centrality degree, which, by 
definition, means the number of links attached to an individual in a social network. Two important 
measurements of centrality are “in-degree” centrality and “out-degree” centrality. As was mentioned 
earlier, in-degree centrality is a count of the number of ties directed to an individual in the network 
whereas outdegree is the number of ties that the individual directs to others members of the network. 
Table 5 presents the centrality measures of the three case teachers in the early stage and overall in the 
network under study.  
 
 
linhong_bnu
france1981
f20010825
amanda
newsense
陈越
jessicawang
公孙老师
马欣_eblog
罗少茜
suloo
bernie
陈则航
易燕
半月
张连仲教授
shirleyju
都市猎人
孟雁君
田贵森教授
sxlflewis
yanhui77528
心烛eblog
刘莹老师
黄华钦
北京竞人
valder-field
小魔镜
程晓堂
joannerong
半月
sxlflewis
zhangwenhua111
georgetan
xiaoyi
rainstar1215
lisahong
泡泡娃
王蔷
chenfangterry
吴一安
姚仁环
文瑛
dbxjzxzsl
lvshiyin2008
马卫民
dbzhzxhll
zlzxdhp888
xuhuang1
a8792161
dbplzxlhy66
dbplzxbyx
dbplzxpj
hbjmlyx
jessicawang
sunshine123
smilelady
islyisly山水幽音
hjdzlzxwjx199
hbjmlsc
lqy666613
211495
安心80
fxliang008
devina
封金花
芯语
lxyan168
邱丽芳
xybowen
凌凰
cinderella1994
wangjane
lisahong
高空飞翔
心琴
whiteivy
yingyujiaoyan
荼蘼花开
tonlychild
huoruizhi
dhxx
ysh皖南
李岩１
武尊民
施静雅
白银hjj
Nanoudalu
绿叶叠翠
Sheri
张荣华
高承玲
Gongsibaxiao
Honeytxin
天涯人家
15z.黄华
hbjmzlzxdhp888
yidianwang106
yuncheng123
shanxilyjjw
jimyang4107
zhangyunxue
陈力
Ouyanglixue
Plzxlhy
dbplzxhwx1
dengli6002
子陵中学罗紫薇
张跃全
yingerly
邓诚
张虹薇鱼儿
mingcaienglish
qiqi713
蜗牛慢慢爬
山东临沂徐晓丽
clare
777388
t000000025
谢乃莹
’3702850034
bwedu
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 238 
Table 5.Centrality Measures of the Case Teachers 
Teachers Early Period Entire Period 
Degree Outdegree Indegree Degree Outdegree Indegree 
Meng 11.111 1.157 1.389 13.934 1.639 1.198 
Newsense 50 7.870 8.102 26.230 2.480 2.501 
Chen 8.333 1.157 .926 20.492 2.354 2.900 
Mean 13.664 1.539 1.539 3.852 .227 .227 
SD 13.877 1.906 2.737 7.211 .581 .800 
According to the results in Table 5, except for Newsense, who was actively involved in the thematic 
discussion of CERSP from the outset of the monthly online discussion, the centrality measures of the 
other two case teachers, Meng and Chen, were lower than average in the earlier period of the computer-
mediated communication. However, all of them eventually became central figures of the network, owing 
to their increasing involvement in the online discussion. They not only posted more messages than most 
of the other network participants, but their messages were more frequently responded to by others as well, 
as were indicated by indegree and outdegree measures.  
A comparison of the egocentric networks of the three individual teachers in the early stage and the entire 
period of the online communication further reveals the interactional patterns of these teachers. These 
networks are respectively depicted in Figure 3 to Figure 8.  
It can be seen from these egocentric networks that the case teachers, Meng and Chen in particular, were 
peripheral participants with a limited number of interlocutors in the community at the initial stage of their 
online communication. Closer examination of these interlocutors indicated that most of them were 
university professors or the forum administrators with greater academic reputation or social prestige in the 
ELT field in China. For instance, Chen had 15 interlocutors in the early stage of her online discussion, 8 
of them were the invited consultants or the forum administrators. The information flow at this initial stage 
was primarily vertical, flowing between participants with more power and those with less power since the 
teachers preferred to ask questions or share ideas with the central and influential figures at the initial stage 
of their online communication in the community. It seems the users wished to benefit more from 
communicating with the “consultants” in the community before they themselves were ready to offer or 
share ideas with other peer teachers. At this initial stage of online communication, the three teachers 
under examination were inclined to seek immediate solutions to their problems in language teaching from 
more capable members in the community, rather than contribute to or construct knowledge with their 
peers (Haythornthwaite & De Laat, 2010; Russo & Koesten, 2005; Zhu, 1996).  
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 239 
 
Figure 3. Egonet of Chen in the early stage. 
Figure 4. Egonet of Chen in the entire period 
linhong_bnu
france1981
f20010825
amanda
newsense
陈越
公孙老师
马欣_eblog
罗少茜
陈则航
shirleyju
孟雁君 刘莹老师
程晓堂
泡泡娃
chenfangterry
吴一安
islyisly
白银hjj
绿叶叠翠
Sheri
张荣华
高承玲
Gongsibaxiao
jimyang4107
张虹薇鱼儿
linhong_bnu
france1981
f20010825
amanda
newsense
陈越
公孙老师
马欣_eblog
罗少茜
陈则航
shirleyju
孟雁君
刘莹老师
程晓堂
泡泡娃
chenfangterry
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 240 
linhong_bnu
france1981
f20010825
amanda
newsense
陈越
马欣_eblog
罗少茜
陈则航
shirleyju
孟雁君
刘莹老师
程晓堂
泡泡娃
chenfangterry
白银hjj
Sheri
jimyang4107
Figure 5. Egonet of Meng in the early stage. 
Figure 6. Egonet of Meng in the entire period. 
 
linhong_bnu france1981
f20010825
amanda
newsense
陈越
马欣_eblog
陈则航
张连仲教授
shirleyju
孟雁君
刘莹老师
lisahong
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 241 
Figure 7. Egonet of Newsense in the early stage. 
 
Figure 8. Egonet of Newsense in the entire period. 
linhong_bnu
france1981
f20010825
amanda
newsense陈越
马欣_eblog
罗少茜
suloo
陈则航
半月
张连仲教授
shirleyju
都市猎人
孟雁君
田贵森教授
yanhui77528
刘莹老师
小魔镜
程晓堂
joannerong
zhangwenhua111
georgetan
lisahong
泡泡娃
chenfangterry
linhong_bnu
france1981
f20010825
amanda
newsense
陈越
马欣_eblog
陈则航
shirleyju
孟雁君 刘莹老师
islyisly
白银hjj
Sheri
张荣华
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 242 
As they became increasingly involved in the online communication in the later stage, these two teachers 
themselves became key players in the community and had a broader circle of interlocutors in the online 
thematic discussion. Their information flow at this stage was both vertical and horizontal. On the one 
hand, these teachers asked questions and sought suggestions from teachers with greater expertise in the 
community, and on the other hand, they also tended to share experiences and offered suggestions to other 
peer teachers, rather than resorting to more authoritative participants. A similar shift of interactional 
patterns at different stages of online networks was also observed by other researchers (e.g., De Laat, 2006; 
De Laat, Lally, Lipponen, & Simons, 2007).  
Using SNA alone, however, does not provide a full picture ofthese teachers’ participants in the online 
forum. It is also useful to combine these findings with the outcomes of content analysis to interpret to 
what extent the increasing social presence of these three teachers in the network, as determined by SNA, 
contributes to their cognitive presence and professional development.  
Results from Content Analysis  
In this section, the results of the content analysis are presented in two major parts. The first part is mainly 
concerned with the examination of the social presence codes, whereas the second part gives a more 
detailed analysis and discussion of the phase-related codes of cognitive presence, as a response to the 
second research question of this study.  
Table 6 tabulates the distribution of these codes across the categories of social and cognitive presence. A 
total of 836 codes were obtained from eight sampled thematic discussions that the three teachers were 
involved in between 2008 and 2011. 
Table 6. Distribution of the Codes Across Categories 
Teachers 
(Number of 
Codes) 
Year Freq. 
of 
Social 
Codes 
Cognitive Codes 
Phase I 
Generating 
Phase II 
Elucidating 
Phase III 
Integrating 
Phase IV 
Resolution 
Sum  
Freq.  % Freq.  % Freq.  % Freq.  % Freq.  
Newsense 
(410 codes) 
2008 36 32 38.1 27 32.1 22 26.2 3 3.6 84 
2009 33 16 32.0 28 56.0 4 8.0 2 4.0 50 
2010 14 10 18.9 33 62.3 2 3.8 8 15.1 53 
2011 50 25 27.8 53 58.9 5 5.6 7 7.8 90 
Chen 
(274 codes) 
2008 19 16 28.6 28 50.0 6 10.7 6 10.7 56 
2009 32 7 12.1 34 58.6 11 19.0 6 10.3 58 
2010 18 10 22.2 21 46.7 5 11.1 9 20.0 45 
2011 20 10 30.0 13 39.4 2 6.1 8 24.2 26 
Meng 
(152 codes) 
2008 1 2 9.1 9 40.9 4 18.2 7 31.8 22 
2009 10 1 2.7 25 67.6 5 13.5 6 16.2 37 
2010 3 3 13.6 8 36.4 5 22.7 6 27.3 22 
2011 13 5 11.4 25 56.8 5 11.4 9 20.5 44 
Total  249 17 23.0 304 51.8 76 13.0 78 13.3 587 
Results of the Social Presence Codes 
There were 249 messages coded as social cues, accounting for 29.78% of the total codes. This fairly high 
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 243 
percentage of the social codes agrees with the findings of some previous studies. Hara et al. (1998), for 
instance, found that 27% of the total message content in their online course consisted of such social 
expressions as self-introductions, jokes, compliments, greetings, and closures. It was also observed in our 
study that Newsense and Chen used social presence codes more frequently than Meng (32.44% for 
Newsense, 32.5% for Chen, and 17.76% for Meng). The reason Meng used fewer social presence codes 
than the other two teachers might lie in the fact that Meng worked and lived in Beijing and was physically 
close to the kernel members of the community, most of whom were forum administrators or university 
teachers in Beijing. The intimate guanxi 5of Meng with other active members in the physical world may 
mean she refrained herself from extending their special and private personal relationship to a public 
online forum. Other researchers have also observed that social presence tends to decrease with the 
establishment of a sense of community between participants (e.g., Swan & Shea, 2005). The other two 
teachers in our study, on the contrary, employed a great variety of social codes in order to build 
interpersonal relationships with other active participants in the virtual community. However, no visible or 
linear patterns of developmental changes in social presence codes were detected from the coded messages 
between 2008 and 2010.  
It is true that socio-affective strategies have little direct relevance to the cognitive process of knowledge 
construction and meaning negotiation in the CMC context, as was maintained by early communication 
theory (Culnan & Markus, 1987). However, just as Lave and Wenger (1991) argued, the learning process 
should not be viewed as simply the transmission of abstract and decontextualised knowledge from one 
individual to another, and learning is also a social process whereby knowledge is co-constructed. 
According to Vygotsky’s socio-cultural approach to mind, higher mental functions in an individual have 
their origins in social life and human learning is a socially mediated process constructed through dialogic 
interaction (Vygotsky, 1978). In this social learning process, social presence can play the vital role of 
interpersonal lubricator that helps the participants feel more comfortable working together. It serves as a 
mediating variable between cognitive presence and teaching presence (Garrison, Cleveland-Innes, & 
Fung, 2010), or as a positive predictor of learning satisfaction within CMC environments (Gunawardena 
& Zittle, 1997; Tsai, 2012). It can also give each member a sense of belonging or group commitment, and 
it enables them to become “insiders” in the community (Wegerif, 1998). It is likely for this reason that the 
social presence codes were used fairly frequently by all three teachers in the study, in particular by the 
two teachers who were physically further away from the center of the administration and CERSP’s 
consultancy cohort. This interpretation is supported by Chen’s reflection in the subsequent interview 
excerpt:  
When I first joined the forum, I felt like an outsider while ‘they’ were talking cheerfully and 
intimately because they knew each other so well. Guided and encouraged by Mr. Lin, the forum 
administrator, I began to muster up my courage and said hello to them, and gradually they accepted 
me.  
Results of the Cognitive Presence Codes  
The results concerning the codes of cognitive presence will be presented, interpreted and discussed in the 
following three sections, that is, (a) the general trend of the distribution of cognitive codes; (b) the 
interpersonal comparison of the cognitive presence codes; and (c) the development of cognitive presence 
codes over time.  
The General Trend of the Distribution of Cognitive Codes 
According to Table 6, there were 587 cognitive presence codes, accounting for 70.22% of the total codes. 
One immediate observation was that most of these codes clustered in Phase II of the eCAF framework, 
i.e., the elucidating phase, which accounted for 51.79% of the total number of cognitive codes. This 
observation is congruent with a number of similar studies in which the exploration codes (equivalence to 
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 244 
elucidation in eCAF) were found to be much more frequent than the codes of other categories, ranging 
from 41% to 53% (e.g., Garrison et al., 2000; Garrison et al., 2001; Rourke & Kanuka, 2009; Vaughan & 
Garrison, 2006). This result is not surprising because, among the four phases in the eCAF framework, the 
elucidating phase is the only one taking place totally in the virtual world, with little direct relevance to the 
real/authentic world. That is to say, the online community of the CERSP forum is in the first place used as 
a virtual platform for brainstorming ideas, co-constructing knowledge, negotiating meaning, thinking 
critically and sharing experiences, etc. . Another reason might lie in the open and democratic nature of the 
online community where people feel free to share their insights and contribute relevant information.  
The findings in the early studies have consistently revealed that the development of cognitive presence in 
the online community has great difficulty moving beyond the elucidating phase (known as exploration 
stage in CoI model, see Garrison, 2007; Garrison et al., 2001; Newman et al., 1995; Rourke & Kanuka, 
2009; Vaughan & Garrison, 2006), and the distribution of cognitive presence in this study also supports 
this observation, with the codes of Phase III (integration) and Phase IV (resolution) accounting for only 
12.95% and 13.29% of all the cognitive presence codes respectively. Among many alternative 
explanations of this phenomenon, researchers convincingly argue that integration and resolution is more 
cognitively demanding than elucidating/exploration and generating/triggering, and as a result, increased 
time for offline reflection is also required (Meyer, 2003), which is particularly the case in a synchronous 
CMS context like that of the present study.  
The Interpersonal Comparison of the Cognitive Presence Codes  
To further reveal the interpersonal comparison of the codes of cognitive presence categories in a more 
straightforward way, we present the percentage of cognitive presence codes of the three teachers in Figure 
9.  
 
Figure 9. Interpersonal comparison of the cognitive codes for each phase. 
According to Figure 9, the Phase II codes (elucidating) constituted more than 40% of the phase-related 
codes for all the individual teachers under investigation, which has been shown and discussed in the 
preceding section. While the results of the other categories presented a mixed picture, some interesting 
patterns emerged. First, Newsense and Chen, two teachers working in remote areas in Shandong province, 
had more messages coded as Phase I (generating) than Meng, accounting respectively for about a quarter 
of their codes in the cognitive presence category (29.19% for Newsense and 23.29% for Chen). This is an 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
08 09 10 11 08 09 10 11 08 09 10 11
Newsense Chen Meng
Pe
rc
en
ta
ge
 o
f C
og
ni
tiv
e 
Co
de
s 
Year 
Phase I
Phase II
Phase III
Phase IV
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 245 
indication of their attempt to bring to the virtual community the real-world problems they have 
encountered in their authentic language teaching context. They wish to seek solutions by communicating 
with the consultants otherwise inaccessible in their own working milieu.  
Second, Meng, a veteran teacher with more than forty years of English language teaching and researching 
experiences, took the initiative to offer more solutions to the problems raised during the online 
conversations with her Phase IV (resolution) codes amounting to 23.94% of her stage-related codes. The 
other two teachers, Newsense and Chen refrained from giving immediate resolution responses, with 
resolution codes accounting for 7.61% of interactions for Newsense and 16.33% for Chen. This is partly 
because suggesting solutions to problems requires more reflection and the latter two users were not ready 
to provide practical resolutions to real-time problems during the two-hour synchronous online discussions. 
As Chen reflected in her online interview,  
When involved in the forum discussions, I’ve improved myself in the dynamic and spiral cycle of 
“problems, solutions, higher-level problems, higher-level solutions.” Some of our puzzles can be 
resolved in the online discussion whereas no immediate answer can be found to some others. But 
participating in the online discussion has inspired me to get them solved by myself offline, so I will 
try to find some time to seek answers to the problems unsolved online by reading more books or 
seeking resources during the offline time. In this way I find solutions to the problems in my own 
teaching practice, and I can improve myself as well.  
The Development of Cognitive Presence Over Time 
Figure 9 does not seem to reveal a clear and consistent pattern in the development of cognitive presence 
codes for three individual teachers for the length of time between 2008 and 2010. No linear, gradual or 
incremental changes were observed in the individual teachers’ codes of cognitive presence across the 
phases, as is often anticipated from a longitudinal study. There might be several reasons for the absence 
of such a developmental pattern. First, the data obtained from this study was not sufficient to draw a 
generalization about the changes in the teachers’ cognitive presence in the electronic discussion. The 
present study sampled and analyzed only eight online discussions which met the study’s data-collection 
requirement, accounting for one sixth of the total number thematic discussions.  
Second, the occurrence of the cognitive presence codes is highly contextualized and susceptible to the 
influence of many external and extraneous variables that may confound the possible effect of time in our 
study, such as the three teachers’ workload at school, family duties, availability of computers and internet 
access, institutional expectations, teachers’ prior experiences and knowledge, participants' motivation and 
willpower, and sometimes, even other people’s skeptical attitudes towards their “inconceivable but 
unfading enthusiasm in online discussions about English language teaching with a lot of unknown people 
in the evening time”, to quote one of the case teachers’ words in the subsequent online interview. The 
existence of so many unpredictable, dissonant and uncontrollable variables would lead researchers to 
interpret any quantifiable patterns with caution, even when they ever occurred in a longitudinal 
observation of an individual’s online communications.  
Third, and most importantly, the development of a teacher’s cognitive processes, including the attributes 
of their online cognitive presence is a slow, complex, indeterminate and non-linear process. The dynamic 
and complex nature of the development of teachers’ cognitive processes has not been noticed until the 
past decade (Feryok, 2010; Tudor, 2003). As Swan and Shea (2005) rightly recognized, “Online 
discussion does not evolve linearly through time, … but rather seems to grow like crystals from multiple 
conceptual seeds in many dimensions at once. ” 
Profiles of the Teachers’ Social Presence and Cognitive Presence 
Figure 10 summarizes the percentages of the teachers’ social and cognitive codes with the variable of 
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 246 
time removed for the reasons stated above.  
 
Figure 10. The individual teachers profiles of the social and cognitive presence.  
Figure 10 indicates that the distribution of the eCAF codes varies across individual teachers. While all 
three teachers had a considerably high percentage of Phase II (elucidating) codes, Meng exhibited 
different patterns from the other two teachers concerning the other four categories of codes. First, she had 
fewer codes of social presence than Newsense and Chen, owing to her close and special personal 
relationship with the most active figures in the forum, as has been described earlier.  
Second, as a veteran teacher with over 30 years of teaching and consulting experience, her Phase I codes 
were also fewer than the other two teachers, which suggested that she brought fewer problems into the 
online community than the other two younger teachers with less teaching experience. Nonetheless, her 
codes on the other two higher-order categories of cognitive presence, that is, Phase III (integrating) and 
Phase IV (resolution), were markedly higher in percentage than those of the other two teachers, 
accounting for 40.39% of her cognitive presence codes and 36.18% of all her coded messages. This is 
noteworthy since it differs from other research findings claiming that participants have great difficulty 
moving beyond the second phase of elucidating/exploration (Garrison, 2007; Garrison et al., 2001; Meyer, 
2003; Newman et al., 1995).  
The existing literature has offered several explanations for the lack of higher order thinking or deep 
learning in the online community of inquiry, such as participants’ metacognitive awareness, the lack of a 
well-pronounced goal, the desired function of the online network. The validity of the CoI model itself is 
even called into question (see Garrison, 2007 for a review). The unique case of Meng in the study 
provides an alternative perspective to look at the issue.  
The data from this study’s social network analysis and content analysis does not contain straightforward 
evidence about Meng’s frequent use of higher-level cognitive presence codes in the online 
communication. However, an analysis of her responses in the online interview and some of her own posts 
in the online forum may shed light on the subject. First, Meng was very “medium-sensitive”. That is, she 
had a clear understanding of different functions between online and offline teacher learning, as she 
reported in the following excerpt of the online interview,  
0%
15%
30%
45%
Phase I Generating
Phase II Elucidating
Phase III IntegratingPhase IV Resolution
Social Presence
Newsense Chen Meng
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 247 
Many-to-many networked communication (in online discussion) is a powerful and delightful tool to 
communicate about a great variety of dynamic, personalized, and practical problems encountered by 
teachers, many of which cannot be solved by one-to-many offline teacher training programs, the 
latter of which can only handle the common and static problem in teaching. The real-time problems 
being negotiated in the colliding communication online may disappear in a flash, but getting to grips 
with these problems can help us to solve our puzzles or eliminate difficulties in teaching. 
Communicating, sharing, and counseling online will help teachers to convert ‘what-knowledge’ to 
‘how-knowledge’.  
In Meng’s opinion, there is a clear distinction between offline and online professional discussions. The 
former scenario is characterized with “one-to-many communication” where an invited consultant lectures 
to a hall of audience on “static teaching knowledge”, while the communication in the latter case is more 
problem-oriented, where the participants can share ideas about, and seek solutions to problems they have 
encountered in real-time teaching situations.  The recognition of this difference explains Meng’s 
increasing use of solution codes in the CMC community.  
Another feature of her online communication was that her discourse was “product-oriented”. She focused 
more on getting her prior knowledge and experiences articulated, explicated, shared, and published, 
which, according to Meng, should be translated into practical strategies or teaching actions. Meng made 
this explicit in her posts on the theme of “More on teacher development and growth” in the forum 
discussion of on July 8, 2009: 
I personally think a good teacher should do three things, and all of them are indispensable for 
teacher development: (1) one must orientate oneself in the direction of future development; (2) one 
must reflect very frequently on his/her teaching and derive his/her own micro-theories from the 
reflection; and (3) a teacher need also convert his/her reflections into tangible outcomes. That is, 
she/he needs to publish his/her ideas in papers or books. Unfortunately, many teachers fail to take 
this last step. 
It is this awareness of the benefits of ‘the tangible product’ in the professional development that drives 
her to integrate theories with teaching practice and seek solutions to problems in teaching, hence 
accounting for a marked increase in higher-level thinking codes in her online discourse. However, it 
remains open to further investigation whether she has developed this awareness through communicating 
online, or through prior knowledge and experiences developed in her professional career.  
CONCLUSION 
CMC creates new opportunities for teachers to interact personally, socially and professionally with other 
fellow teachers otherwise inaccessible in their own working milieu. Our longitudinal case study 
investigates the social interaction between participants and the development of their socio-cognitive 
presence in an online community. This study yields the following findings:  
First, at the initial stage of online communication, the newcomers were more likely to develop vertical 
relations, preferring to interact with people with more expertise or power in the virtual community. New 
horizontal, peer-to-peer relationships were established with their increasing involvement in the online 
community of inquiry.  
Second, strategies of social presence were used by the participants fairly frequently, especially by the 
peripheral members who had a strong desire to communicate with the key figures of the community. Like 
the findings of earlier studies, elucidating turned out to be the category of cognitive presence codes most 
frequently used by all the participants while the codes of the other three phases vary with individual 
teachers. Also like earlier findings, two out of the three case teachers ceased to move beyond the 
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 248 
exploration/elucidating phase in the development of their cognitive presence. However, one case teacher 
with self-reported medium-sensitivity and product-orientation in online communication was involved in 
higher-order cognitive processes fairly often.  
Third, time proved to be a significant variable giving rise to the changes in the interactional patterns 
among individual teachers in this study. However, it did not contribute to marked and incremental 
development of socio-cognitive presence within the time scope of this study.  
Fourth, this study contains a case with a low level of social presence but a high level of cognitive 
presence. This finding, nonetheless, needs to be accepted with caution, owing to the unique interpersonal 
relationship between the case teacher and other active members in the online community. The result, 
however, was congruent with the claims of some previous studies wherein socio-emotional 
communication is not positively correlated with CMC effectiveness (Walther, 1996).  
Finally, early studies suggest that some forms of asynchronous CMC, such as video club or weblogs were 
very valuable in engaging teachers in reflective practice or pedagogical knowledge construction in teacher 
training or teacher preparation programs. Our study has proved that synchronous online discussions also 
increases the social interaction between teachers with shared vision of professional development, and 
their social presence in the online communication also gives rise to the increase of their cognitive 
presence, which in turn has significant implications on their professional careers. Computer-mediated 
communication, such as the thematic discussions on CERSP, turns out to be professionally rewarding for 
secondary school teachers in China, in particular for those teachers in the less developed areas of the 
country where local professional support is not readily accessible.  
The present study also suggests that heterogeneity of community members is crucial for the sustainable 
and healthy growth of an online professional development community in which participants can establish 
both vertical and horizontal relationships by sharing ideas, feelings and experiences with people with 
diverse voices but shared vision of professional pursuits. It would be inconceivable that the thematic 
discussion in the online community of CERSP would have evolved for seven successive years without the 
voluntary and active involvement of a cohort of participants with different roles to play in the physical 
world, that is, secondary school English teachers, university teachers, educational consultants, forum 
administrators, language teaching researchers, etc.  
This study is subject to a few limitations. First, the data obtained for this study are not sufficient for the 
researchers to draw solid generalizations, for instance, the effect of time upon the development of a socio-
cognitive presence in an online community. Besides, the length of time for SNA and content analysis was 
not consistent, owing to the different requirement of data collection for these two approaches. Second, the 
absence of a sound categorization of the social presence codes precludes the possibility of further 
exploring the relationship between different subcategories of social presence and cognitive presence. 
Third, the lack of testing for inter-rater reliability is also likely to have an impact on the rigor of message 
coding.  
In this case study we have identified some key factors crucial for the online professional development of 
teachers in China. The authors feel that future research on a larger scale will broaden our vision of teacher 
development in an online community. Besides, focusing on the development of a threaded topic, rather 
than on individual participants will also reveal the relationship between teacher learning and socialization 
in the professional development community. 
 
 
 
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 249 
Appendix A. Coding Scheme of eCAF (adapted from Duncan-Howell, 2009) 
Phase Subcategory Examples from CERSP 
Phase 1 
Generating 
G1: Question/problem 
presented 
I have a question here: why can holidays be included 
in the list of the seven wonders of the modern world? 
G2: An issue is proposed What I want to ask is whether we should put emphasis 
on the content, or new ideas in the content? 
G3: New question-extending 
discussion on the same 
subject/topic 
but what we need to explore might be "why to teach 
with textbooks" and especially "how to teach with 
textbooks". And if not the textbooks only, what else 
will we have to teach. 
G4: New question-moving 
discussion in new 
direction 
Even if the textbook IS the bible, we also need to 
challenge this bible... and can any teachers provide 
some teaching cases for us to discuss？ 
Phase 2 
Elucidating 
E1: Asking for clarification or 
further explanation of 
question/problem 
In addition, encouraging students' divergent thinking 
is a manifestation of teaching principle of "student 
centeredness". 
E2: Brainstorming ideas To import new knowledge, some kinds of exercises 
can be presented. Teachers can get Ss to do exercises 
in activity, or drill of word conversion in advance, or 
use given words to write a dialogue. 
E3: Suggesting solution When teachers are designing lesson, they should 
organise and arrange teaching procedure according to 
the teaching activities based on task. 
E4: Offering personal opinion I think that the key to developing critical 
thinking in the teaching is to give students something 
available to think about.  
E5: Sharing experiences When teaching every grammar item, I would tell 
students the usage of it, 
then design some of the scenarios to allow students 
to use it 
E6: Misunderstanding/ 
disagreement 
Ms. Chen, should we learn how to teach the 
English language from Chinese teacher? I didn’t mean 
that. 
E7: Mediating contribution I think, however, we need to…from a different 
perspective ... 
E8: Using metaphor However, we should treat textbooks as the vegetables 
that we bought at the local market, we need to select, 
match, process and cook them. 
Phase 3 
Integrating  
I1: Building on ideas I agree with Ms. Meng…we also need to summarize, 
analysis, practice 
 I2. Applying discussion Teachers is supposed to 
organizers, participants and evaluators in teaching 
activities. I must try it in my teaching practice. 
  
Phase 4 
Resolution  
R1: Solution to question Students can combine what they learned from articles 
and daily life to solve some specific problems  
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 250 
independently through cooperation and exploration. 
 R2: Issue-consensus reached Right, we teachers need to challenge the textbooks, 
and meanwhile encourage our students to question 
what is printed in the textbooks. 
 
 R3: Issue-divergence Yes, teaching aims of a lesson contains targets of 
knowledge and ability emotion and attitude ... we 
cannot achieve so many goals in every single lesson. 
  
NOTES 
1. This figure was obtained from the official site of the Ministry of Education of China: 
http://www.moe.edu.cn/publicfiles/business/htmlfiles/moe/s4645/201105/120285.html.  
2. The internet portal to CERSP is http://www.cersp.com.  
3. This forum can be visited via this link: http://bbs.cersp.com/index.asp?boardid=16 
4. The profiles of these teachers were based on the personal accounts these teachers posted to CERSP, 
and the statistical data on their CERSP activities were updated until October 3, 2012. 
5. Guanxi is the Chinese word describing the basic dynamic in personalized networks of influence, and it 
is a key idea in understanding the interpersonal relationship of Chinese society (Gold, Guthrie, & Wank, 
2002). 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This article is based on a project funded by the China Social Science Fund (09BYY075).The authors wish 
to thank the anonymous reviewers of Language Learning and Technology for their insightful comments 
and suggestions, and to acknowledge Mr. Lin Hong, the administrator of the English teaching forum of 
CERSP and the three case teachers who provided valuable information for the study. The authors also 
thank Ms. Mónica Vidal and Mr. David Michael Clements for helping to review the language of the 
article.  
 
REFERENCES 
Alexander, B. (2006). Web 2.0: A new wave of innovation for teaching and learning? EDUCAUSEReview, 
41(2), 32–44. Retrieved fromhttp://www.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/erm0621.pdf.  
Arnold, N., & Ducate, L. (2006). Future foreign language teachers' social and cognitive collaboration in 
an online environment. Language Learning & Technology, 10(1), 42. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/pdf/vol10num1.pdf 
Arnold, N., Ducate, L., Lomicka, L., & Lord, G. (2005). Using computer-mediated communication to 
establish social and supportive environments in teacher education. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 537–565.  
Asoodar, M., Atai, M. R., Vaezi, S., & Marandi, S. S. (2014). Examining effectiveness of communities of 
practice in online English for academic purposes (EAP) assessment in virtual classes. Computers & 
Education, 70, 291–300.  
Aviv, R., Erlich, Z., Ravid, G., & Geva, A. (2003). Network analysis of knowledge construction in 
asynchronous learning networks. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 7(3), 1–23.  
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 251 
Borgatti, S. P., Everett, E. M. G., & Freeman, L. C. (2002). UCINET 6 for Windows: Software for social 
network analysis. Harvard, MA: Analytic Technologies. 
Bullen, M. (1997). A Case Study of Participation and Critical Thinking in a University-level Course 
Delivered by Computer Conferencing. Unpublished Dissertation, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada. Retrieved from http://www2.cstudies.ubc.ca/~bullen/Diss/thesis.doc 
Chai, C. S., Koh, J. H. L., & Tsai, C.-C. (2010). Facilitating preservice teachers' development of 
technological, pedagogical, and content knowledge (TPACK). Educational Technology & Society, 13(4), 
63–73.  
Culnan, M. J., & Markus, M. L. (1987). Information technologies. In F. M. Jablin, L. Putnam, K. H. 
Roberts & L. W. Porter (Eds.), Handbook of organisational communication: An interdisciplinary 
perspective. Newbury Park, CA: SAGE. 
De Laat, M. (2006). Networked learning.Apeldoorn, The Netherlands: Politie Academie, 
De Laat, M., Lally, V., Lipponen, L., & Simons, R.-J. (2007). Investigating patterns of interaction in 
networked learning and computer-supported collaborative learning: A role for Social Network Analysis. 
International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2(1), 87–103.  
Dede, C., Ketelhut, D. J., Whitehouse, P., Breit, L., & McCloskey, E. M. (2009). A research agenda for 
online teacher professional development. Journal of Teacher Education, 60(1), 8–19.  
Dewey, J. (1963). Experience and education. New York, NY: MacMillan Press. 
Dooly, M., & Sadler, R. (2013). Filling in the gaps: Linking theory and practice through telecollaboration 
in teacher education. ReCALL, 25(1), 4–29.  
Dresner, M., & Worley, E. (2006). Teacher research experiences, partnerships with scientists, and teacher 
networks sustaining factors from professional development. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 17(1), 
1–14.  
Duncan-Howell, J. (2009). eCAF: A new tool for the conversational analysis of electronic communication. 
British Journal of Educational Technology, 40(2), 1014–1027.  
Earl, L., & Katz, S. (2007). Leadership in networked learning communities: Defining the terrain. School 
Leadership and Management, 27(3), 239–258.  
Feryok, A. (2010). Language teacher cognitions: Complex dynamic systems? System, 38(2), 272–279.  
Garrison, D. R. (2007). Online community of inquiry review: Social, cognitive, and teaching presence 
issues. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 11(1), 61–72.  
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2000). Critical inquiry in a text-based environment: 
Computer conferencing in higher education. The Internet and Higher Education, 2(2–3), 87–105.  
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2001). Critical thinking, cognitive presence, and computer 
conferencing in distance education. American Journal of Distance Education, 15(1), 7–23.  
Garrison, D. R., Cleveland-Innes, M., & Fung, T. S. (2010). Exploring causal relationships among 
teaching, cognitive and social presence: Student perceptions of the community of inquiry framework. The 
Internet and Higher Education, 13(1), 31–36.  
Garrison, D. R., Cleveland-Innes, M., Koole, M., & Kappelman, J. (2006). Revisiting methodological 
issues in transcript analysis: Negotiated coding and reliability. Internet and Higher Education, 9(1), 1–8.  
Gold, T., Guthrie, D., & Wank, D. (2002). Social Connections in China: Institutions, Culture, and the 
Changing Nature of Guanxi. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 252 
Gunawardena, C. N., Lowe, C. A., & Anderson, T. (1997). Analysis of a global online debate and the 
development of an interactional analysis model for examining social construction of knowledge in 
computer conferencing. Journal of Educational Computer Research, 17(4), 397–431.  
Gunawardena, C. N., & Zittle, F. J. (1997). Social presence as a predictor of satisfaction within a 
computer-mediated conferencing environment. American Journal of Distance Education, 11(3), 8–26.  
Hara, N., Bonk, C. J., & Angeli, C. (1998). Content analysis of online discussion in an applied 
educational psychology. CRLT Technical Report No. 2–98.Bloomington, IN: The Center for Research on 
Learning and Technology, Indiana University. 
Hawkes, M., & Romiszowiski, A. (2001). Examining the reflective outcomes of asynchronous computer-
mediated communication on in-service teacher development. Journal of Technology and Teacher 
Education, 9 (2), 283–306.  
Haythornthwaite, C., & De Laat, M. (2010). Social networks and learning networks: Using social 
network perspectives to understand social learning. Paper presented at the 7th International Conference 
on Networked Learning, Aalborg, Denmark. Retrieved from 
http://celstec.org.uk/system/files/file/conference_proceedings/NLC2010_Proceedings/abstracts/PDFs/Hay
thornwaite.pdf.  
Henri, F. (1992). Computer conferencing and content analysis. In A. Kaye (Ed.), Collaborative Learning 
through Computer Conferencing: The Najaden Papers (pp. 117–136). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag. 
Herring, S. C. (1996). Computer-mediated Communication: Linguistic, Social, and Cross-cultural 
Perspectives. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Hou, H.-T., Chang, K.-E., & Sung, Y.-T. (2009). Using blogs as a professional development tool for 
teachers: Analysis of interaction behavioral patterns. Interactive Learning Environments, 17(4), 325–340.  
Hull, D. M., & Saxon, T. F. (2009). Negotiation of meaning and co-construction of knowledge: An 
experimental analysis of asynchronous online instruction. Computers and Education, 52, 624–639.  
Job-Sluder, K., & Barab, S. A. (2004). Shared"we" and shared "they" indicators of group identity in 
online teacher professional development. In S. A. Barab, R. Kling & J. H. Gary (Eds.), Designing for 
irtual communities in the service of learning (pp. 377–403). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Koc, Y., Peker, D., & Osmanoglu, A. (2009). Supporting teacher professional development through 
online video case study discussions: An assemblage of pre-service and in-service teachers and the case 
teacher. Teaching and Teacher Education, 25(8), 1158–1168.  
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Martínez, A., Dimitriadis, Y., Rubia, B., Gómez, E., & De La Fuente, P. (2003). Combining qualitative 
evaluation and social network analysis for the study of classroom social interactions. Computers & 
Education, 41(4), 353–368.  
Meskill, C. (2009). CMC in language teacher education: Learning with and through instructional 
conversations. International Journal of Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 3(1), 51–63.  
Meyer, K. A. (2003). Face-to-face versus threaded discussions: The role of time and higher-order thinking. 
Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 7(3), 55–65.  
Newman, D. R., Webb, B., & Cochrane, C. (1995). A content analysis method to measure critical 
thinking in face-to-face and computer supported group learning. Interpersonal Computer and Technology, 
3(2), 56–77.  
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 253 
Pena-Shaff, J. B., & Nicholls, C. (2004). Analyzing student interactions and meaning construction in 
computer bulletin board discussions. Computers & Education, 42(3), 243–265.  
Riordan, E., & Murry, L. (2012). Sharing and collaborating between an online community of novice 
teachers: CMC in language teacher education. Journal of e-Learning and Knowledge Society, 8(3), 95–
107.  
Rourke, L., Anderson, T., Garrison, D. R., & Archer, W. (2001). Methodological issues in the content 
analysis of computer conference transcript. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 
12(1), 8–22.  
Rourke, L., & Kanuka, H. (2009). Learning in communities of inquiry: A review of the literature. The 
Journal of Distance Education/Revue de l'Éducation à Distance, 23(1), 19–48.  
Russo, T. C., & Koesten, J. (2005). Prestige, centrality, and learning: A Social network analysis of an 
online class. Communication Education, 54(3), 254–261.  
Scott, J. (1987). Social network analysis: A handbook. London, UK: Sage. 
Shea, P., & Bidjerano, T. (2009). Community of inquiry as a theoretical framework to foster "epistemic 
engagement" and "cognitive presence" in online education. Computers & Education, 52(3), 543–553.  
Shea, P., Hayes, S., Vickers, J., Gozza-Cohen, M., Uzuner, S., Mehta, R., Valchova, A., & Rangan, P. 
(2010). A re-examination of the community of inquiry framework: Social network and content analysis. 
The Internet and Higher Education, 13(1), 10–21.  
Sherin, M. G., & Han, S. Y. (2004). Teacher learning in the context of a video club. Teaching and 
Teacher Education, 20(2), 163–183. Sherin, M. G., & van Es, E. A. (2009). Effects of video club 
participation on teachers' professional vision. Journal of Teacher Education, 60(1), 20–37.  
Short, J., William, E., & Christie, B. (1976). The social psychology of telecommunication. London, UK: 
John Wiley & Sons. 
Swan, K., & Shea, P. J. (2005). The development of virtual learning communities. In S.R. Hiltz & R. 
Goldman (Eds.), Asynchronous learning networks: The research frontier. New York, NY: Hampton. 
Tsai, I.-C. (2012). Understanding social nature of an online community of practice for learning to teach. 
Educational Technology & Society, 15 (2), 271–285.  
Tu, C.-H. (2001). How Chinese perceive social presence: An examination of interaction in online learning 
environment. Educational Media International, 38(1), 45–60.  
Tu, C.-H., & McIsaac, M. (2002). The relationship of social presence and interaction in online classes. 
The American Journal of Distance Education, 16(3), 131–150.  
Tudor, I. (2003). Learning to live with complexity: Towards an ecological perspective on language 
teaching. System, 31(1), 1–12.  
Vaughan, N., & Garrison, D. R. (2006). How blended learning can support a faculty development 
community of inquiry. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 10(4), 139–152.  
Vrasidas, C., & Glass, G. V. (Eds.). (2004). Online professional development for teachers. New York, 
NY: Information Age. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Walther, J. B. (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Impersonal, interpersonal, and hyperpersonal 
interaction. Communication Research, 23(1), 3–43.  
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer-mediated collaborative learning: theory and practice. The Modern 
Heping Wu, Junde Gao, & Weimin Zhang Chinese EFL Teachers’ Socio-cognitive Presence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 254 
Language Journal, 81(4), 470–481.  
Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social network analysis: Methods and applications. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Wegerif, R. (1998). The social dimension of asynchronous learning. Journal of Asynchronous Learning 
Networks, 2(1), 34–49.  
Wellman, B. (2001). Computer networks as social networks. Science, 293, 2031–2034.  
Yang, S.-H. (2009). Using blogs to enhance critical reflection and community of practice. Educational 
Technology & Society, 12(2), 11–21.  
Zhu, E. (1996). Meaning negotiation, knowledge construction, and mentoring in a distance learning 
course. Paper presented at the 1996 national convention of the association for educational 
communications and technology, Indianapolis, IN. Retrieved from 
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED397772.pdf#page=830. 
