Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/lin.pdf 
October 2014, Volume 18, Number 3 
pp. 120–147 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 120 
ESTABLISHING AN EMPIRICAL LINK BETWEEN COMPUTER-
MEDIATED COMMUNICATION (CMC) AND SLA:  
A META-ANALYSIS OF THE RESEARCH  
Huifen Lin, National Tsing Hua University 
Drawing on interactionist and socio-cultural theories, tools provided in computer-mediated 
communication (CMC) environments have long been considered able to create an 
environment that shares many communicative features with face-to-face communication. 
Over the past two decades, researchers have employed a variety of strategies to examine 
the asserted advantages and possible limitations of learning a second language in such a 
computer mediated environment. Despite its seeming appeal to language educators, the 
literature on the effectiveness of CMC in SLA is unable to conclusively support its 
benefits. This meta-analysis aims to systematically synthesize findings from (quasi-) 
experimental studies conducted between 2000-2012 to examine whether there was a link 
between the use of CMC and second language acquisition (SLA). Results from 59 primary 
studies show a positive and medium effect from CMC interventions. Additionally, 
communication taking place either asynchronously or synchronously does not seem to 
have a differential effect on SLA. Furthermore, learners’ proficiency level, interlocutor 
type, research context and task type were found to be variables that would significantly 
moderate the effectiveness of interaction in such an environment. The above results, 
however, were interpreted as tentative due to the small n-size of some categories of 
variables under comparison.  
Keywords: Meta-Analysis, Computer-Mediated Communication, Effect Size. 
APA Citation: Lin, H. (2014). Establishing an empirical link between computer-mediated 
communication and SLA: A meta-analysis. Language Learning & Technology, 18(3), 
120–147. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/lin.pdf 
Received: February 17, 2013; Accepted: November 7, 2013; Published: October 1, 2014 
Copyright: © Huifen Lin 
INTRODUCTION 
The past two decades have witnessed a shift away from the conventional use of multimedia or stand-alone 
programs to facilitate second/foreign language learning to the “communicative and interactive” aspects of 
language learning that technologies can offer or reinforce (Hoven, 2006, p.237). CMC applications, when 
appropriately designed for pedagogical goals, instructional context, content, and learners, can closely 
approximate authentic communications “equivalent to real-life learner-to-leaner or teacher-to-learner 
communication” (Hoven, 2006, p.241; Sims, 2000) although features of turn-taking and overlaps 
frequently observed in face-to-face (F2F) communication might not occur in CMC mode due to its 
technical constraints.  Since CMC had traditionally been depicted as one-dimensional, passive and neutral 
in nature, previous research was not able to distinguish between different technologies under the 
overarching umbrella of CMC technology. CMC effectiveness must be evaluated in terms of its impact on 
language learning not as a uniform technology but based on the unique characteristics or features 
embodied in the different sub-tool and technology utilized in the interaction process (Smith, Alvarez-
Torres & Zhao, 2003). Four qualities were proposed by Smith et al., to describe and distinguish different 
CMC sub-technologies: temporality, degree of anonymity, modality, and spatiality. Temporality describes 
the mode of time in which communication can take place: either simultaneous (synchronous) or delayed 
(asynchronous) depending on whether or not there is a substantial time gap between the responses or 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 121 
messages received from/sent to the interlocutors. Anonymity refers to the degree to which the 
interlocutors are known to each other in a CMC environment. Some tools such as e-mail are more capable 
of concealing a user’s identity (ensuring anonymity) than others such as video conferencing. Modality 
refers to the way interaction is supported. Some technology tools, such as chats, support both voice and 
written communication while others, such as the bulletin boards, allow only textual communication. 
Spatiality refers to the spatial distance felt by the interactants when engaging in online communication 
and is of consequence because it is believed to have an impact on the nature of interaction.   
As explorations on CMC continue to accumulate, researchers have sought to anchor CMC studies within 
an array of existing SLA theoretical frameworks. Unique features of computer-mediated communication, 
such as text-based and computer-mediated interaction, were justified to be beneficial for SLA when 
examined from the framework of sociocultural learning theory and SLA interactionist theory 
(Warschauer, 1997). Sociocultural theory stresses that “the human mind is mediated” (Lantolf, 2000, p.1) 
and humans rely on tools to change the world and to regulate relationships. Among these tools, language 
is the most important. Using language as the mediation tool, people work jointly to co-construct a context 
and develop their mental abilities (Lantolf, 2000). L2 acquisition is a social phenomenon (Ellis, 1999). 
Language learners, through communicative and cognitive activities, not only learn new linguistic forms 
but also take on new roles, such as those of authors, narrators, and interpreters (Lantolf, 2000; Linell, 
1998). The interactionist theory of SLA, which addresses incidental acquisition, emphasizes L2 learning 
through the process of interacting. Basic components in the SLA interaction process include input, 
apperception, semantic and syntactic comprehension, intake, integration into the learner’s linguistic 
system and output (Chapelle, 1998). CMC, in a text-based form, renders human interaction easily 
transmitted, stored, archived, reevaluated and edited, all of which encourage reflection and interaction 
(Harasim, 1990; Warschauer, 1997).  
The amount of research on CMC has been unprecedented especially with technologies moving toward 
Web 2.0 or even 3.0, making social networking and collaborative interaction via the target language 
easier and more flexible. Empirical studies focused on learning products or the learning process have been 
conducted using a combination of quantitative, qualitative, or mixed methods, which involve learners 
across different educational levels, ages, and L1 backgrounds. Researchers have either focused on the 
analysis of speech input and output in the negotiation process resulting from different modes of CMC or 
employed instruments to measure certain SLA effects after such interventions. A certain amount of 
research has also tried to resolve the still debatable issue of whether CMC or face to face interaction is 
more beneficial for SLA and at what levels of outcome. Topics that have received attention include (a) the 
differential effect of face-to-face, synchronous CMC and asynchronous CMC (Blake, Wilson, Pearson, 
Cetto, & Pardo-Ballester, 2008; Fitze, 2006; Heins, Duensing, Stickler, & Batstone, 2007), (b) 
comparative discourse analysis of output produced by language learners in different CMC environments 
(Böhlke, 2000; Liaw & Master, 2010; Patterson, 2000), (c) the effects of different CMC tools on: 
pronunciation (Alastuey, 2010; Lord, 2008); oral proficiency (Abram, 2003; Hirotani, 2009; Payne & 
Ross, 2005; Payne & Whitney, 2002; Wang, 2010); pragmatic competence (Liu, 2007; Sykes, 2005;); 
writing (Jou, 2008; Liang, 2010; Shang, 2007); grammar (Sauro, 2009); vocabulary (Fuente, 2003; Lee 
2009; Sasaki & Takeuchi, 2010), and reading (Izquierdo & Reyes, 2009; Jou, 2008; Kung, 2004; Li, 
2009). A large number of studies have also investigated students’ perceptions of CMC (Chao & Lo, 2011; 
Mahfouz, 2010; Ray & Hocutt, 2006).  
In general, various studies have revealed: (a) the likelihood that a relationship between working memory 
(Payne & Ross, 2005; Payne & Whitney, 2002; Wang, 2010) and oral proficiency and chat-room 
discussion can be utilized to develop L2 oral proficiency (Payne & Whitney, 2002); (b) overall, e-mail 
exchanges improve students’ writing performance (Shang, 2007); (c) students demonstrate a greater 
lexical range and used more complex and varied discourse in CMC than in the face-to-face mode (Fitze, 
2006; Sykes, 2005); (d) interactional and intercultural competencies are important dimensions of online 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 122 
electronic discussion for language learning (Kung, 2004; Liaw & Master, 2010), and (e) students perceive 
the applications or experiences of CMC activities for facilitating different levels of language learning as 
positive and helpful (Izquierdo & Reyes, 2009; Lee, 2009; Mahfouz, 2010 ). 
Computer-mediated communication, with its various modes and tools, has been extensively used in all 
areas of SLA; however, research on its effectiveness has been inconclusive. For example, following 
Healy-Beauvois (1992) and Kern (1995), Payne and Whitney’s study (2002) further supported their 
finding that L2 oral proficiency can be developed through synchronous computer-mediated 
communication (SCMC) (e.g., synchronous chatroom) interaction in the target language, while two later 
studies conducted by Fuente (2003) and Hirotani (2009) did not support such a finding. Although it has 
been suggested that findings from primary studies need to be replicated in different contexts with 
different participants and treatments (Payne & Whitney, 2002) to further pin down the effects of CMC, 
we argued that a comprehensive and systematic meta-analysis would be more efficient and effective in 
telling us the overall effect of CMC interventions, directing our future research efforts in this field and 
providing evidence-based pedagogical suggestions. A more detailed introduction of how meta-analysis 
works in research synthesis is provided in the next section.  
WHAT IS META-ANALYSIS? 
Meta-analysis is a “formalized statistical method” for averaging the effects found across a set of scientific 
studies or observations (Oswald & Plonsky, 2010, p. 85). The primary purpose of meta-analysis is to 
integrate findings by analyzing a large collection of results from primary studies (Glass, 1976). The 
difference between a meta-analysis and traditional narrative literature review is that the latter is usually 
done on studies with different topics for the purpose of reinterpretation or hypothesis-generating, while 
the former is a hypothesis-testing method (Baumeister & Leary, 1997). “Meta-analysis” has been 
variously employed, including study effect meta-analysis, homogeneity test-based meta-analysis and 
psychometric meta-analysis, depending on the purpose of the review (Liao & Hao, 2008). However, by 
applying systematic statistical methods to measure the treatment effects observed in quantitative studies, 
meta-analysis has received recognition as a favorable scientific research synthesis compared to traditional 
reviews, such as the narrative literature review described above, vote counting, or the P values method 
(Hunter & Schmidt, 2004; Li, 2010; Liao & Hao, 2008).  
Meta-analysis has become a “preferred” way of synthesizing research findings in many scientific 
disciplines (Aytug, Rothstein, Zhou, & Kern, 2012, p.103; Cooper, 2009). Previous meta-analysis of 
CMC studies took many forms, such as the employment of a narrative review to explore the role of 
SCMC for SLA (Sauro, 2011); the investigation of the overall effectiveness of computer assisted 
language learning (CALL) (Felix, 2005, 2008); a discussion of characteristics of CMC with reference to 
socio-cultural and interactionist theories (Hata 2003); a critical review of CMC from various theoretical 
perspectives (Nguyen, 2008), scrutinizing the effect of text-based synchronous computer mediated 
communication on SLA (Lin, Huang, & Liou, 2013) and employing both narrative review and meta-
analysis approaches to explore developments in technology and language learning, (Zhao, 2003).   
The few previous meta-analyses or research reviews failed to produce a quantitative measurement of the 
overall effect of CMC in SLA, leaving the cause and effect relationship between CMC interventions and 
language learning outcomes to be clarified, established, and most importantly updated. Adopting 
Cooper’s (1982) five-stage model of the integrative review, this meta-analysis seeks to (a) present an 
overview of empirical studies of CMC in SLA conducted between 2000 and 2012, (b) investigate the 
overall effectiveness of the wide range of CMC interventions/tasks adopted in SLA classrooms, and (c) 
identify variables that might moderate the effect of CMC on language learning. I focus the analysis on the 
following research questions: 
1. Compared to face-to-face communication or no (i.e., passive study without interactive) 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 123 
communication, how effective is CMC in facilitating second language learning/acquisition? 
2. Is the effectiveness of CMC related to whether the communication is taking place asynchronously 
or synchronously? 
3. Do learners with more advanced language proficiency and in higher educational contexts benefit 
more from CMC than others? 
4. Do the following methodology features impact the effects of CMC differently: (a) task type, (b) 
interlocutor type, (c) CMC modality, (d) research setting? 
Definition of Terms 
Operational definitions of major constructs were developed drawn on conceptual definitions in the 
literature to establish and delimit their scope for this meta-analysis. 
Second Language Acquisition (SLA) 
In this meta-analysis, SLA is operationalized as the acquisition of tools language learners need to rely on 
in order to successfully carry out communication with the target language users. The tools are composed 
of but not limited to speaking, reading, writing, listening, and the respective components that make up the 
tool, such as grammar, pronunciation, vocabulary, etc. Such capacities were acquired through the use of a 
particular feature of technology in a learning situation from which a discernible change in the learning 
process, the learning climate, or the learning achievement was found and measured (Felix, 2005) 
immediately after the change. Following this operational definition, this meta-analysis synthesized the 
immediate/short-term but not delayed effectiveness of CMC on different language outcomes right after 
the CMC interventions were removed or became unavailable.  
Computer-mediated Communication (CMC) 
Computer-mediated Communication refers to multimodal, often Internet-mediated communication 
(Thorne, 2006), which was made possible by utilizing “ … a wider variety of online tools which include 
social networking sites, virtual realities, and gaming…” (Goertler, 2009, p.75). In this meta-analysis, 
CMC is loosely defined as any real-time or delayed communicative transaction that occurs through the 
use of tools taking advantage of networked technology capabilities. 
METHODS 
This meta-analysis was conducted to investigate the overall effect of CMC on SLA. Specifically, the 
independent variable examined is communication mode (face to face vs. asynchronous/ synchronous 
CMC). The potential moderator variables were identified both from the methodology and learner features, 
and included: task type, CMC modality, research setting, interlocutor type, learners’ educational level and 
L2 proficiency level. The dependent variable is the effect sizes calculated from the eligible studies based 
on the random-effect model with justification provided. In the following, the steps taken in conducting the 
current meta-analysis are described. 
Literature Search 
Key words were first identified from primary studies and then used alone or in different combinations to 
search for relevant studies. The major key word used to guide the search was computer-mediated 
communication, in combination with techniques/platforms commonly utilized to engage in such 
communication including email, chat, discussion forum, Web 2.0, etc. ESL, EFL or language learning 
were used interchangeably to limit search outcomes to research contexts of language learning/teaching 
only. The “file-drawer” problems were minimized by inclusion of both published and unpublished studies 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 124 
while considering the fact that studies reporting statistical significance were more likely to be published 
than those with no significant difference (Hunter & Schmidt, 2004; Li, 2010; Lipsey & Wilson, 2001; 
Rosenthal, 1979). The unpublished studies included theses, dissertations and conference presentations that 
were not published in proceedings, and manuscripts that may have never been subjected to any kind of 
peer review. The major databases searched included Education Abstracts Full Text (Wilson), Education 
resources Information Center (ERIC), ProQuest Psychology Journals, Springer Online Journal Archives, 
JSTOR - Arts & Sciences III Collection, EBSCOhost, Linguistics and Language Behavior Abstracts 
(LLBA), and the Social Science Citation Index. Manual searches of peer-reviewed journals were also 
conducted to ensure a maximum coverage of eligible studies. The first priority search included CALL- 
specific and education technology-related journals (Smith & Lafford, 2009). These journals were 
manually searched issue by issue and included Language Learning & Technology, Computer-assisted 
Language Learning, ReCALL, System, CALICO, and the JALT CALL Journal. The second priority of 
search included journals that were overall related to SLA, language learning, teaching, and practices. 
These journals included, but were not limited to: Language Learning, the Modern Language Journal, 
TESOL Quarterly, Canadian Modern Language Review, Second Language Writing, Foreign Language 
Annals, Second Language Research, and Studies in Second Language Acquisition. The third priority of 
searching included journals that published research utilizing educational technology overall but not 
necessarily in language learning contexts, including the Journal of Computer-assisted Learning (JCAL), 
the British Journal of Educational Technology, Educational Technology Research & Development 
(ETR&D), Computers & Education. References provided from the primary studies were also manually 
checked to expand the range of potentially eligible studies.  
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
In order for the empirical studies to be reviewed in this meta-analysis, each study had to meet the 
following criteria: 
• Be published between 2000 and 2012. 
• Investigated some form of CMC (e.g., email, chat, video/audio conferencing, discussion forums, 
CMS, Moodle, etc.) either exclusively or in conjunction with other instructional 
strategies/intervention as long as the effect of CMC could be teased out by making comparisons 
between treatment groups for which the only difference between them was the CMC intervention.  
• Address the effect of CMC by examining the amount of language used during the process or by 
administering a posttest, both conditions requiring quantitative data.  
• Employed an experimental or quasi-experimental design. 
• Recruited participants who were L2 or foreign language learners. 
• Report adequate quantitative information for effect sizes to be calculated. 
• For studies reporting several sources, only one report was included in the meta-analysis. 
After initial review of potential primary studies, the following exclusion criteria were drawn to filter out 
unqualified studies. This designation would exclude studies whose primary focus were: 
• Students’ attitudes towards or beliefs regarding CMC (Luo, 2005) 
• Pedagogical implications/recommendations for using CMC (Blake, 2007; Goertler, 2009). 
• Functionalities of CMC (Kenning, 2010), and 
• Theoretical position papers (Hampel, 2003) 
• The study described the process of CMC from a qualitative perspective (Peterson, 2009).  
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 125 
• The study employed questionnaires/interviews to explore students’ perceived effectiveness of the 
use of CMC (Samsonov, 2001). 
• The participants in the study were not identified in any way as L2 learners. For example, studies 
investigating the use of CMC as a tool for teacher preparation (Johnson, 2006). 
• Qualitative/quantitative syntheses/reviews (Belz, 2007). 
The rationale for selecting potential moderating variables along with their descriptions and codings are 
discussed in the following section. 
Variables  
CMC Mode 
In online settings, language learners can engage in communication either asynchronously or 
synchronously. The latter involves interlocutors in a real-time situation in which they “converse” either 
by typing messages or by speaking into microphones. Due to its real-time nature, synchronous CMC, 
such as via chat rooms and Yahoo messenger, is considered to resemble face-to-face interaction to some 
degree.  On the other hand, asynchronous CMC, such as web-based bulletin boards and email, simulate a 
delayed-time interaction in which extended planning, decoding and encoding time are allowed (Abrams, 
2003). Since the communication modes, with their unique technological affordance, might affect the 
nature of interaction, it is worth investigating and comparing their respective effectiveness for SLA. 
CMC Modality  
CMC modality was coded as either text or voice, which may significantly affect the quality and nature of 
interaction. Voice-based CMC allows students to engage in verbal and para-verbal communications in 
which repair and negotiation are more likely to occur than in the text-based modality (Jenks, 2009) in 
which participants use personal computers to send typed messages with a potential delay of seconds 
before appearing on their partner’s computer screen. Text-based modality may better fit certain 
communicational styles, and provide opportunities for more language production (Jepson, 2005). 
Task Type 
CMC technologies enable L2 learners to engage in networked, internet-based activities that facilitate 
interaction between learners and other speakers. Learners can now receive information and also engage in 
learning tasks and activities in various modes, such as visual, audio, and verbal/textual (Hampel, 2006). 
Although there exist similarities in modes of communication between face-to-face classroom-based 
interaction and CMC, the very different affordances of the latter create potential as well as limitations in 
terms of appropriate task designs (Hampel & Baber, 2003).  Task designs in accordance with the 
affordances or limitations of CMC are likely to have a differential effect on the quantity and quality of 
interaction. It is therefore interesting to investigate task type as a potential factor in moderating the effects 
of CMC on SLA. The task typology established by Pica, Kanagy, and Falodun, (1993) was used to 
classify studies since it was probably the most frequently used typology for examining interaction in the 
task-based learning environment (Smith, 2003). A task is defined as an activity that students carry out 
actively to reach a prescribed goal either alone or with other peers. Task type was coded as opinion 
exchange, information gap, jigsaw, decision-making or problem solving in full awareness of the fact that 
each specified task type might take many different forms.  
Interlocutor Type 
A subset of CMC studies (Chiu & Savignon, 2006; Iwasaki & Oliver, 2003; Sauro, 2009) has examined 
the occurrence of self-repair or feedback types in different CMC environments, which provide learners 
with different tools to initiate their utterances, self-repair, or construct modified responses to their 
interlocutors (Heift, 2010; Sauro, 2011). Learner uptake, a long-relied-on predictor of successful SLA, is 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 126 
used to describe the reactions or responses to feedback provided by interlocutors (Heift, 2010; Lightbown, 
2000; Loewen, 2004; Lyster, 2007). Different interlocutors might employ different learner strategies or 
feedback types, thus affecting the amount or nature of uptake, which indirectly or directly affects learning 
outcomes (Yamada & Akahori; 2009). It is therefore interesting to examine if there is a differential effect 
of interlocutor type on SLA in CMC environments. Interlocutor type is coded one of three possibilities: 
peers, native speakers of the target language, and instructor/tutor/researcher or others.  
Research Setting 
Research setting refers to the environment in which SLA is taking place, and is broadly divided into 
learning the target language either as a second language (SL) or as a foreign language (FL). In the former 
setting, students have the benefits of using and practicing the target language in daily life, both inside and 
outside the classroom; however, in the latter setting, language learning is mostly limited to within the 
classroom, and there is little chance to use the language in an authentic environment. The degree of 
exposure to the target language is different in SL and FL settings both in the nature and amount of SLA, 
and practitioners tend to design learning activities differently for the two different settings. It is worth 
investigating if the research setting has an influential effect on how CMC activities are not only designed 
but also used to reinforce language acquisition.  
Learner Education Level 
Cognitive development has long been recognized as a significant factor in determining learning outcomes 
(Geva & Ryan, 1993; Robinson, 1997). The ability to rely on one’s cognition to receive and process new 
information and integrate it with prior knowledge to construct and reflect on new knowledge plays a 
significant role in all kinds of learning, SLA being no exception. Learner education level generally 
reflects the degree of cognitive development. It is worth probing if learners’ educational level has an 
impact on SLA in CMC environments. Participants’ education level was classified into college and above, 
middle and secondary school, and primary school and below. No inferences were made regarding studies 
that did not provide such information. Participants’ educational level was coded as reported or labeled by 
the researcher in the study. 
Learners’ L2 Proficiency Level 
L2 learners’ target language proficiency level has been used either as an independent variable or as a 
covariate in primary SLA studies, proving its importance in SLA. Research has been conducted to close 
or minimize the gap between high and low proficiency students in SLA by exploring different 
instructional interventions. Would CMC characteristics, used to supplement or simulate real face-to-face 
classrooms, scaffold students with limited target language proficiency? This meta-analysis also seeks to 
answer this question. Learners’ initial target language proficiency level was coded as one of the following 
four levels: elementary, intermediate, advanced, or mixed. The code was determined based on the 
participants’ background information as provided in the primary studies. The original labels used by the 
researchers to classify participants into different levels were retained and no inferences were made based 
on this feature. It has to be noted that some primary researchers administered proficiency tests to 
participants while others did not. The latter’s judgment may indicate only an impression of a student’s 
level. It is relevant to note that in the former cases a wide variety of proficiency tests may have been 
given so the classified proficiency levels may not be comparable across the various studies. 
Coding and Inter-coder Reliability 
A team made up of four research assistants and the meta-analyst collaborated to code the retrieved 
studies. Each coded independently 1/5 of all eligible studies and then served as a backup so that each 
study was actually coded by at least two of the five. They computed inter-coder reliability by calculating 
the agreement rate for each category and variable. Codes receiving less than 95% agreement went through 
an additional coding by all concerned, and any disagreements were resolved through discussion. For 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 127 
codes with extremely high inferences due to limited information available in the study (e.g., task type), a 
code was given based on the best estimation, but this is noted and discussed in the limitation section. The 
final agreement rate was 96%. Table 1 presents the final coding scheme with descriptions for each coded 
feature. Rationales for selecting specific variables for further moderator analysis are provided following 
Table 1. Coding Scheme. 
Features  Descriptors 
PUBLICATION  
 Publication year Year of publication 
 Publication type Journal article/ Dissertation/ Thesis/Conference paper/ Report/Other 
LEARNERS  
 L2 proficiency Learners’ initial target language proficiency level  
Advanced / Intermediate / Elementary 
 Educational status Primary school or below/Middle school (or secondary school)/ College or above 
METHODOLOGY  
 Research setting FL/SL 
 CMC platform E-mail/Chat/Discussion forum/Instant/CMS Messenger/Blog/E-
portfolio/Wiki/Other (specify) 
 Task type Information gap/Jigsaw/Problem-solving/Decision-making/ 
Opinion-exchange/Mixed 
 Interlocutor type Peers/ native speakers of TL/ Instructor, tutor, researcher/Others 
 CMC modality Voice/Text/Both 
 CMC mode Synchronous/Asynchronous/Both 
 Sample size Number of participants 
Effect Size Calculation 
The effectiveness of CMC on language skill acquisition was expressed by calculating effect sizes for each 
study of different learning outcomes. The effect sizes represented as standardized mean difference were 
calculated by dividing the mean difference in a study by its pooled standard deviation, that is,  Hedge’s g. 
The potential outliers were checked for their influence on the overall mean effect. The effect sizes were 
also weighted and corrected for small sample sizes (Johnson & Eagly, 2000; Penny & Coe, 2004). If a 
study did not provide descriptive analysis data but did provide F values, effect sizes were calculated using 
the procedure suggested by Glass, MacGaw, and Smith (1981). 
RESULTS 
The Research Synthesis 
In total, 59 studies published between 2000 and 2012 were included in this meta-analysis. Data collection 
was completed by March 2012. The 59 studies included 3,562 participants in Lee’s study (2009) 
involving the smallest sample size (N=12), with Blake, Wilson, Pearson, Cetto, and Pardo-Ballester 
(2008) being the largest (n=334). Among the 59 studies, 5 were conference papers, 12 were dissertations, 
11 were theses, and 31 were journal articles. Approximately one fifth of the studies (K=13) generated 
negative effect sizes. Among the remaining 46 studies, the effect sizes range between 0.01 and 2.17. 
Based on Cohen’s interpretation of size of effect (i.e., ES<.02 is regarded as small, between .02 and .05 is 
medium and >.08 is large), 44% of the included studies (K=25) generated large, one fifth generated 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 128 
medium (K=12), and 12% generated small effect sizes (N=9). Appendix A displays the effect sizes each 
study contributed, the standard error, and the 95% confidence interval [CI] of each effect size, its 
associated upper and lower limit and the p value. The number of studies included in this meta-analysis by 
year is displayed in Figure 1.  As indicated, there has been a growth in the number of studies on CMC 
since 2000, with the majority of included studies appearing between 2004 and 2010.  
 
 
Figure 1. Distribution of included studies by year 
Among the 31 journal articles, more than half (K=20) were published in five major journals (see Figure 
2): Computer-assisted-language-learning (CALL), Modern Language Journal (MLJ), Language Learning 
& Technology (LLT), Foreign Language Annals (FLA) and CALICO Journal. 
 
Figure 2. Distribution of articles in journals 
Summary of Learner and Methodological Characteristics  
Table 2 summarizes the learner characteristics of the included studies. As shown, the majority of the 
studies did not report the learners’ initial target language proficiency; however, for those which did, a 
slightly higher ratio can be found for elementary-level participants followed by the intermediate level. 
Not many CMC studies recruited participants whose target language proficiency was advanced. More 
than two thirds of the studies recruited college students as participants while only three involved primary 
school students.  
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 129 
Table 2. Learner Characteristics of Included Studies 
L2 Proficiency* K Education Level K 
Advanced 4 College & above 45 
Intermediate 7 High (Secondary) school 10 
Elementary 8 Primary 3 
Mixed 7 Mixed 1 
N/A 33   
Note. *The initial target language proficiency level as defined in each primary study 
Table 3 summarizes the methodology characteristics of the included studies. As shown, 28 studies 
employed a synchronous mode of communication. The predominant tool of communication was text 
rather than voice-based. With respect to the tasks carried out making use of CMC tools, more than 50% of 
the studies employed performance-based tasks, while only slightly more than one-third adopted 
communicative tasks.  Detailed coding of the learner and methodological features of the primary studies 
can be found in Appendix B. 
Table 3. Methodology Characteristics of the Included Studies 
Mode K Modality K Task Type K Setting K Interlocutors K 
Asynchronous 23 Text 40 Decision-Ma 1 FL 43 Peers 47 
Synchronous 28 Voice 16 Information Gb 5 SL 11 Teachers 5 
Both 8 Both 3 Jigsaw 2 Mixed 3 Native Sd  4 
    Opinion Ec 44 N/A 2 Mixed 2 
    Mixed 2   N/A 1 
    N/A 5     
Notes. adecision-making; bInformation gap; copinion exchange; dnative speakers 
As shown in Table 4, computer-mediated communication, in general, has a small to medium effect on 
language learning (Hedge’s g=0.461). Studies that employed an asynchronous mode of communication 
produced the largest effect (g =0.610) followed by both modes (g=0.460). Synchronous CMC produced 
the smallest effect (g= 0.313). The lower and upper limits at the 95% confidence interval do not include 
zero meaning as such an effect does not happen by chance. The Q-test, however, revealed that the 
difference between the three levels of CMC is non-significant. 
Table 4. Effects of Computer-mediated Communication by Independent Variable 
Independent 
variable 
K Hedge’s g Standard Error 95% Confidence Interval 
Lower               Upper  
Overall Effecta 59 0.441 0.074 0.296 0.587 
Mode   Q(2)=2.312, p=.315      
Asynchronous 23 0.610 0.118 0.378 0.842 
Synchronous 28 0.313 0.157 0.006 0.621 
Both 8 0.460 0.218 0.032 0.888 
Note. aThe overall effect (Hedge’s g) is computed based on the principle of “one study, one effect size” (Li, 2010). 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 130 
Moderator Variable Analysis 
Six moderator variables were further analyzed to explore their possible impact on the overall 
effectiveness of CMC. To achieve this aim, a series of Q-tests were performed, and the obtained Q 
statistics and associated p value (set at the .05 level) were used to examine if a certain variable is a 
significant moderator.  The results, shown in Table 5, indicated that research setting, learners’ language 
proficiency level, and interlocutor type were significant moderators.  
Table 5. Moderator Analysis Results 
Moderators Ka Hedge’s g SE 95% CI  Qb 
    Lower Upper  
CMC modality 
Text 40 0.438 0.104 0.233 0.642 0.130 
 Voice 16 0.491 0.173 0.151 0.830 
Both 3 0.605 0.614 -0.599 1.809 
Research setting 
FL 43 0.610 0.100 0.414 0.805 13.049***  
 SL 11 -0.038 0.149 -0.330 0.254 
Task Type 
Opinion Exchange 45 0.616 0.116 0.388 0.844 8.483* 
 Information gap 5 -0.158 0.374 -0.890 0.574 
Jigsaw 1 -0.322 0.775 -1.841 1.197 
Decision making 1 1.943 0.766 0.442 3.444  
Educational level 
College & above 45 0.432 0.101 0.233 0.631 0.529 
High (Secondary) 
school 
10 0.615 0.241 0.143 1.086 
Primary 3 0.426 0.138 0.156 0.697 
L2 proficiency 
Advanced 4 0.403 0.112 0.184 0.622 9.048* 
Intermediate 7 0.393 0.125 0.148 0.638 
Elementary 8 0.782 0.097 0.593 0.971 
Interlocutor type 
Peers 
Teachers 
Native speakers 
 
47 
5 
4 
 
0.495 
0.031 
0.487 
 
0.105 
0.154 
0.119 
 
0.290 
-0.270 
0.255 
 
0.700 
0.333 
0.720 
 
7.095* 
Notes: a This moderator analysis included only studies from which the data for the certain variable was available.b* indicates 
significance at the .05 level; ** at the .01 level; *** at the .001 level. 
Follow-up pairwise comparisons were conducted for the significant moderators identified above. Table 6 
provides the results of the pair-wise comparisons, and a brief summary of the results follows.  
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 131 
Table 6. Follow-up Pairwise Comparisons of Significant Moderators 
Pairwise comparisons Q statisticsa Results 
Research Setting    
FL vs. SL 13.049*** FL>SL 
L2 Proficiency   
Advanced vs. Elementary 6.596* Elementary > Advanced 
Advanced vs. Intermediate 0.003  
Intermediate vs. Elementary 6.062* Elementary > Intermediate 
Interlocutor Type   
Peer vs. Native speakers 0.02  
Peers vs. Teacher 6.200* Peers > Teacher 
Native speakers vs. Teachers 5.507* Native speakers > Teacher 
Task Type   
Opinion exchange vs. 3.913* Opinion exchange> 
Information gap  Information gap 
Opinion exchange vs. Jigsaw 1.407  
Opinion vs. decision-making 2.863  
Decision vs. Information gap 15.213*** Decision-making>Information gap 
Decision vs. Jigsaw 1.112  
Information gap vs. Jigsaw 0.140  
Notes:*indicates significant at the .05 level; ** at the .01 level; *** at the .001 level. 
Research Setting  
Research setting is found to be a significant moderator of CMC effectiveness. The mean effect size 
calculated for studies conducted in foreign language settings is significantly greater than that of studies 
conducted in second language settings, (Q(1)=13.049, p=.000).  
L2 Proficiency 
A significant difference was detected among the three different levels of L2 proficiency (Q(2)=9.048, 
p=.011). Studies with elementary level students generated a significantly larger effect size than those with 
advanced (Q(1)=6.596, p=.010), and with intermediate level students (Q(1)=6.062, p=.014).  
Interlocutor Type 
Regarding the interlocutor type, it was found to be a significant moderator (Q(2)=7.095; p=.029). 
Pairwise comparisons showed that having peers as interlocutors generated a larger effect size than having 
teachers (Q(1)=6.200, p=.013). Having native speakers as interlocutors also generated a larger effect size 
than having teachers (Q(1)=5.507, p=.019). No significant difference was found between peers and native 
speakers as interlocutors.  
Task Type 
Task type was found to be a significant factor that moderated the effectiveness of CMC, (Q(3)=8.483, 
p=.037). A pairwise comparison indicated that opinion exchange, the most overwhelming task adopted in 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 132 
most CMC studies, produced the largest effect size and is more effective than the information gap. 
Furthermore, decision-making is also significantly more effective than the information gap task. 
However, there was no significant difference between decision-making and opinion exchange.    
DISCUSSION 
This meta-analysis aimed to systematically examine empirical studies that investigated the use of CMC 
tools in SLA contexts and calculate an overall effect size to quantitatively encapsulate the effect of such 
tools on SLA. The results showed a medium but positive effect of CMC on SLA over face-to-face or no 
communication. Following are plausible explanations for the findings.  
First, two variables associated with the methodology features did not turn out to be significant 
moderators, as was expected. These variables are CMC mode and CMC modality. In empirical studies, 
researchers tend to manipulate the independent variables to examine their relative effects on the learning 
outcomes. Most of the methodological features identified in this meta-analysis were the independent 
variables examined in the primary studies. For example, CMC mode, either asynchronous or 
synchronous, was compared in Abrams’s (2003) and Hirotani’s (2009) studies. Cross-tabulation analysis 
of the effect sizes incorporating outcome skills found that, almost exclusively, writing tasks were carried 
out either asynchronously or synchronously, while speaking tasks were almost exclusively conducted 
synchronously, with few exceptions. For example, Sun (2012) used voice-blogs (asynchronous CMC) to 
provide extra practice for speaking. The largest negative effect sizes were generated by studies employing 
the synchronous mode (Coniam & Wong, 2004; Fuente, 2003; Loewen & Erlam, 2006; Pyun, 2003; 
Zheng, 2010), while effect sizes generated by asynchronous studies were quite evenly distributed in terms 
of magnitude. A further observation indicated conflicting results. Studies employing synchronous 
communication for speaking generated both the largest positive, i.e., Xiao (2007), Chen (2008), Satar & 
Ozdener (2008), and the largest negative effect sizes, i.e., Loewen and Erlam (2006), Pyun (2003), and 
Zheng (2010). While this study found no conclusive preferences for either mode of communication in 
SLA, and the nature of each mode lends itself to a preferred language skill development, it has to be noted 
that the effectiveness of each mode needs to be examined by taking into consideration other essential 
factors such as task design and the language skill that is targeted.  
With respect to CMC modality, the results showed no significant difference in effect sizes generated 
between text-based (0.417) and voice-based CMC studies (0.346). Among these studies, voice-based 
CMC was almost exclusively used to develop speaking skills, with few exceptions (e.g., Kost, 2004; Sun, 
2010), while text-based CMC was more spread out across all four skills, though the majority was used to 
develop writing skills (N=27). Close examination of the data showed that the largest negative effect sizes 
were associated with text-based CMC (e.g., Fuente, 2003; Loewen & Erlam, 2006; Pyun, 2003; Zheng, 
2010), while the largest positive effect sizes were associated with voice-based CMC (e.g., Chen, 2008; 
Xiao, 2007). Cross-tabulation revealed a thought-provoking finding: both negative and positive effect 
sizes were associated with the measurement of speaking. This suggests that when text-based CMC is 
employed to develop oral skills, the results can be expected to be negative; on the other hand, when voice-
based CMC was employed, the results were positive. Previous studies have examined the communicative 
features that are unique to each mode of communication (Jepson, 2005; Sauro, 2004). The technological 
affordances of voice-based CMC seem to be able to engage students more in self-repair and self-
correction than do those of text-based CMC. Communication in the former, being slower than in the face-
to-face mode, gives students opportunities to monitor their interactions. They are able to correct their 
pronunciation problems so as to produce comprehensible output while employing various communication 
strategies in rapid turn-taking (Jenks, 2009), which is likely to put them more at ease and improve their 
oral proficiency. In text-based CMC, however, students may be given the choice to retype their utterance 
only when there is a communication breakdown.  
Nonetheless, the discussion might also be taken up from the perspective of working memory. Previous 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 133 
studies have examined the hypothesis that L2 oral proficiency can be indirectly developed via text-based 
synchronous chat-room interaction. In text-based chat interaction, the rate of conversation is slower and 
learners are given opportunities to refresh their memory by re-reading messages. Both processes 
significantly reduce working memory load, which has an impact on L2 performance and acquisition 
(Payne & Whitney, 2002). It should be noted, however, that most primary studies relied on printed chat 
log files as the sole data to interpret chat interactions–files which might not be able to capture all the 
repairs that go on. This data collection method may have rendered the results severely flawed and not 
comparable (Smith, 2008). Additionally, the discussion above is limited to synchronous interaction since 
only three studies employed asynchronous communication, and all three studies were voice-based.  
With respect to task type, this meta-analysis found that opinion-exchange was the most favored task 
(k=45) researchers chose to engage students in meaningful interactions in the CMC environment, with 
information-gap tasks ranking second (k=5). A very small number of studies adopted jigsaw (k=1) or 
decision-making (k=1) in such an environment. Students’ learning outcome was found to be significantly 
better when engaging in opinion exchange than in information gap activities. Furthermore, tasks such as 
jigsaw and information-gap could actually produce negative effects on language learning. This result is 
counter-intuitive, belying previous research results. According to the interactant relationships and 
requirements in communicating information to achieve task goals as proposed by Pica et al. (1993), both 
jigsaw and information gap required interactants to be information suppliers and/or holders, thus 
exchanging or sharing information is a must for achieving a convergent goal for a task with only one 
outcome option. These two tasks are able to maximize opportunities for comprehensible input, promote 
feedback on production, and enhance modification of the output. Such experiences are required for 
language learning to take place. On the other hand, for opinion exchange and decision-making tasks, the 
individual students would have access to information needed to complete a task so he/she could work 
independently to solve a problem or make a decision without interaction with others. When there is more 
than one possible outcome and when learners do not need to complete a task with a convergent goal, 
opinion-exchange and decision-making are least facilitative for SLA compared to the other tasks (Smith, 
2003). Further cross-tabulation analysis revealed that decision-making, information gap, and jigsaw tasks 
were all carried out synchronously mostly for speaking purposes; on the other hand, opinion exchanges 
were performed both synchronously and asynchronously, covering a wider range of language skills. 
Considering language outcome and task type, it was found that large effect sizes (i.e., ES>=1) were 
exclusively associated with opinion-exchange used to facilitate writing skill. When opinion-exchange was 
performed in speaking practice, it actually produced a negative effect. For studies that used the 
information gap, positive effects were associated with speaking, while the negative effect sizes were 
associated with writing skill. In this meta-analysis, opinion exchange was found to be almost exclusively 
positive for the development of reading and writing while it may be either positive or negative for 
speaking depending on the task design. It has to be noted, however, that the above findings have to be 
interpreted with great caution given that there was only one single study that employed either decision-
making or problem-solving while a good number adopted opinion-exchange. The big gap in the number 
of studies among categories renders the question of which task type is most effective for SLA in CMC 
environment open for further research. Furthermore, in this meta-analysis, acquisition was defined as 
short-term gains measured by varying types of tests. It’s also possible that the primary researcher did not 
employ the most appropriate post-test to the nature of the task, which would then show negative results in 
the outcome. 
Interlocutor type turned out to be a significant moderating variable. Having peers as interlocutors 
generated a larger effect size compared with native speakers followed by teachers, which generated the 
smallest effect. Although the difference in the size of effects was minimal, the results are contrary to our 
expectation that, with native speakers as interlocutors providing authentic input, the amount of 
negotiation between ESL students and native speakers would most likely be greater than that between 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 134 
peers due to the larger language proficiency gap, which would provide more chances for negotiation and 
the possible transfer of the negotiated input into intake. As one would expect, when the teacher is the sole 
interlocutor, opportunities for interaction are split among learners and thus the effect of such 
communication on language acquisition may be expected to be less observable. The plausible 
explanations above, though, would have to be considered against the fact that in this meta-analysis, the 
number of studies employing peers as interlocutors (K=47) was overwhelmingly larger than those with 
native speakers (K=4) and teachers (N=5). Thus, the native-speaker and teacher-as-interlocutor samples 
are under-representative and thereby render the discussion of the effect of this variable tentative. 
With regard to research setting, a tentative finding revealed a much larger effect for studies in which the 
target language was a foreign language than for studies in which it was a second language. A more 
striking observation is that studies conducted in SL contexts actually generated a negative effect on SLA, 
while those in FL contexts generated a moderate positive effect. One plausible explanation may be that 
learners in FL contexts are more enthusiastic about making use of the opportunities offered for the 
simulated communication afforded in the CMC environment than those in SL contexts, in which such 
opportunities are also available to them beyond the classroom. That CMC actually had a negative effect 
on SLA in second language contexts deserves special attention. Cross-tabulation indicated that the 
majority of studies (7/11; 64%) conducted in SL contexts employed short treatments of less than 10 
weeks, while the majority of studies conducted in FL contexts employed medium-length treatments 
(26/40; 65%) lasting for a period of 11-24 weeks. The difference in length of treatment is another 
speculation as to why studies conducted in SL contexts produced a much smaller (or even negative) effect 
than those in FL contexts. The fact that the wider social context might interact with the duration of the 
study/treatment render the finding that context plays a role in CMC effectiveness tentative.  
Furthermore, to investigate if learners’ target language proficiency has an impact on the effect of CMC, 
effect sizes were calculated for three levels of proficiency: elementary, intermediate and advanced. The 
results show that elementary-level students benefit more from CMC than both intermediate- and 
advanced-level students. The level of proficiency was determined by the primary researchers, who 
employed various types of measurements or who simply made such judgments based on their 
understanding of the students, and thus this variable is by no means to be taken as valid. However, since 
the moderator analysis showed differences significantly favoring elementary-level proficiency learners, 
the meta-analyst decided to report this finding, but without subjecting it to further interpretation. That 
said, it still merits attention, as one reviewer pointed out, that beginning level learners may progress at a 
much faster rate than either intermediate or advanced learners; it is therefore too soon to conclude that 
CMC indeed has a larger impact on beginners, unless CMC is compared with non-CMC for beginning 
level students. 
Our answer to the question of overall effectiveness of CMC compared to F2F is consistent with the main 
findings reported by Lin et al. (2013), who included only SCMC studies in their meta-analysis. 
Synthesizing 10 eligible studies, Lin et al. found a small but positive overall effect (d= .33) of SCMC on 
SLA. Similarly, the tentative answers gleaned for research questions 3 and 4 in this meta-analysis are 
comparable to findings reported in Lin et al. In both meta-analyses, contextual variables such as L2 
learners’ language proficiency and learning conditions were identified to be significant factors that would 
influence the effect of CMC on SLA. Among them, lower proficiency students were more likely than 
advanced learners to benefit from CMC interaction and CMC employed in a foreign language context 
seems to be more advantageous than in a second language environment for learning to take place.  
CONCLUSION AND PEDAGOGICAL IMPLICATIONS 
This meta-analysis revealed several tentative findings with respect to the effectiveness of CMC on various 
aspects of second language acquisitions. Computer-mediated communication has been used extensively 
both in and out of the classroom to deliver and supplement instruction. In recent years, there has been a 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 135 
rapidly increasing number of empirical studies investigating the use of CMC tools in second language 
education. In response to the proliferation of research studies on this topic, this meta-analysis was 
undertaken to investigate whether interactions conducted in computer-mediated environments would 
induce equal or even superior communication performance compared to those carried out in face-to-face 
contexts, and thus would be more effective in facilitating second language acquisition. Overall, the 
evidence is encouraging; computer-mediated environments can serve as a site for communicating in a 
second/foreign language when the traditional classroom-based face-to-face alternative is unavailable or as 
an alternative to it.  
This meta-analysis also identified four significant contextual factors that may impact the effectiveness of 
CMC in SLA, including research setting, learner proficiency level, interlocutor type and task type. 
Specifically, effective pedagogical features in CMC environments, as derived from the current meta-
analysis, would suggest communication tasks that involve classmates/peers, rather than native speakers or 
teachers, as interlocutors. Additionally, language acquisition may be facilitated through learners’ 
engagement in either asynchronous or synchronous interaction. Another finding is that CMC can possibly 
close, or at least reduce, the gap between low and high proficiency learners. While, overall, language 
learners may benefit more from CMC environments compared to the face-to-face mode, it is the low 
proficiency learners in particular who performed better than the high proficiency learners in this 
environment, suggesting that the unique features affordable in online environments do have the potential 
to remedy some learners’ shortcomings, such as their low language proficiency.  
Furthermore, although a variety of task types can be performed by taking advantage of technology 
affordances, opinion-exchange is a more flexible task that can be performed either online or offline to 
facilitate the four language skills, particularly reading and writing. In contrast, the information gap may 
be more appropriate for the development of speaking, as opposed to writing. Communication taking place 
in a virtual environment is mediated through computers and/or other technology and the features or 
affordances of a medium seem to determine the “discourse patterns and communicative behaviors” of 
interactants (Zhao, Alvarez-Torres, Smith, & Tan, 2004, p. 30). Tasks designed for a traditional F2F 
environment might need to be modified in order to accommodate technological features. 
Although the CMC mode and modality did not turn out to be variables that differentiated CMC 
effectiveness, the related findings are equally valuable as they suggest that language practitioners have 
more flexibility in determining real-time vs. delay and voice vs. text communication. The above results, 
however, are tentative due to the small n-size in some categories of variables under comparison (e.g. 
interlocutor type), which calls for further research to establish and confirm such a causal relationship. 
Furthermore, the results in which a greater effect for CMC was found were limited by the measures of 
learning that were used in the studies included in this meta-analysis. 
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH SUGGESTIONS 
The conclusions that can be drawn from this meta-analysis are tentative due to its several limitations; 
nevertheless, several future research directions emerged. Firstly, we strongly suggest that researchers 
provide as much detailed information as possible with respect to important variables and outcome 
measures. Information such as experimental procedures, communication task features, and how learning 
is measured is important not only for the purpose of synthesizing research but also for future research 
replications. In this meta-analysis, the number of studies that could be consistently and, more importantly, 
precisely classified into specific categories was small and, most of the time, relied on the meta-analyst’s 
best guesses due to insufficient information given in the primary studies. Secondly, we would encourage 
more studies in second language contexts and with more participants from secondary and primary school 
levels. The majority of studies included in this meta-analysis were conducted in foreign language contexts 
with participants in higher education. The glaring difference in the number of studies on each level makes 
one level over-represented and the other under-represented and thus precludes firm conclusions. Thirdly, 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 136 
the effects of CMC, compared to face-to-face, need to be evaluated as to how it is used, the skills it 
intends to facilitate, and specifically the tasks that accompany its use (Rodriguez, Nussbaum, & 
Dombrovskaia, 2012). The studies included in this meta-analysis are highly diverse with respect to 
learners’ background, research design, instructional context, targeted linguistic features, outcome 
measures, and level of measurements, etc. Although the results found a greater effect for CMC on the 
measures of learning that were used in the studies included in this meta-analysis, the vast variability 
greatly limits the generalizability of the findings. We need to understand how learners co-construct 
meanings in online (and offline) environments, in what ways this impacts their language learning and 
acquisition, both during the process and following (Warschauer, 1997).  
 
Appendix A. Effect Sizes for Each Included Study 
Primary Studies  Hedges's g S.E. 95%CI  p-value 
Author(s) Year   Lower Upper  
Abrams 2003 0.153 0.247 -0.331 0.637 0.536 
AbuSeileek 2007 0.878 0.183 0.519 1.237 0.000 
Ahn 2006 0.117 0.345 -0.559 0.793 0.735 
Alastuey 2010 0.525 0.22 0.094 0.956 0.017 
Alastuey 2011 -0.098 0.285 -0.657 0.461 0.293 
Arslan & Sahin-Kizil 2010 1.595 0.322 0.964 2.226 0.000 
Blake et al.  2008 -0.322 0.314 -0.937 0.293 0.305 
Blake 2009 0.369 0.403 -0.421 1.159 0.360 
Camacho 2008 1.533 0.203 1.135 1.931 0.000 
Chang 2007 -0.255 0.280 -0.804 0.294 0.362 
Chang 2008 0.109 0.195 -0.273 0.491 0.000 
Chang et al.  2008 1.311 0.215 0.890 1.732 0.000 
Chen 2008 1.943 0.290 1.375 2.511 0.000 
Chiang 2007 0.472 0.143 0.192 0.752 0.001 
Chung 2004 0.374 0.223 -0.063 0.811 0.094 
Coniam & Wong 2004 -0.417 0.388 -1.177 0.343 0.282 
Fellner & Apple 2006 1.737 0.361 1.029 2.445 0.000 
Fitze 2006 -0.167 0.269 -0.694 0.360 0.535 
Fuente 2003 -0.859 0.449 -1.739 0.021 0.056 
González-Bueno & Pérez  2000 0.812 0.370 0.087 1.537 0.028 
Huang & Chang 2009 1.311 0.215 0.890 1.732 0.000 
Huang et al.  2008 0.697 0.355 0.001 1.393 0.050 
Huang et al.  2010 0.661 0.365 -0.054 1.376 0.070 
Hung 2007 0.788 0.298 0.204 1.372 0.008 
Jian 2005 0.927 0.280 0.378 1.476 0.001 
Jou 2008 0.489 0.200 0.097 0.881 0.014 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 137 
Kost 2004 0.050 0.260 -0.460 0.560 0.477 
Lee 2009 -0.213 0.631 -1.450 1.024 0.736 
Lee & Liou 2009 1.399 0.597 0.229 2.569 0.019 
Li 2008 0.505 0.259 -0.003 1.013 0.051 
Li 2009 0.122 0.298 -0.462 0.706 0.682 
Liang 2006 0.517 0.268 -0.008 1.042 0.267 
Lin 2009 0.712 0.392 -0.056 1.480 0.069 
Liu 2007 0.959 0.231 0.506 1.412 0.000 
Loewen & Erlam 2006 -0.527 0.450 -1.409 0.355 0.242 
Lord 2008 0.936 0.364 0.223 1.649 0.010 
Lu & Liou 2004 0.225 0.186 -0.140 0.590 0.226 
Payne & Whitney 2002 0.668 0.369 -0.055 1.391 0.070 
Peng & Hsu  2006 0.779 0.280 0.230 1.328 0.005 
Pérez 2000 0.466 0.201 0.072 0.860 0.020 
Pyun 2003 -1.382 0.423 -2.211 -0.553 0.001 
Sanders 2005 0.014 0.118 -0.217 0.245 0.082 
Satar & Ozdener 2008 1.703 0.299 1.117 2.289 0 
Sequeira 2009 0.853 0.276 0.312 1.394 0.002 
Shang 2007 -0.248 0.222 -0.683 0.187 0.264 
Simsek 2010 0.468 0.240 -0.002 0.938 0.051 
Song & Usaha 2009 1.233 0.471 0.310 2.156 0.009 
Sun 2010 0.417 0.299 -0.169 1.003 0.163 
Sun 2012 -0.284 0.125 -0.529 -0.039 0.023 
Thurston et al. 2009 0.402 0.314 -0.213 1.017 0.522 
Tsai  2007 0.125 0.279 -0.422 0.672 0.654 
Volle 2005 0.193 0.318 -0.430 0.816 0.544 
Wang 2010 0.460 0.279 -0.087 1.007 0.099 
Xiao 2007 2.167 0.554 1.081 3.253 0 
Yang 2006 0.015 0.243 -0.461 0.491 0.951 
Yang 2011 0.008 0.091 -0.170 0.186 0.930 
Yanguas 2012 -0.592 0.353 -1.284 0.100 0.094 
Zheng 2010 -1.749 0.366 -2.466 -1.032 0 
Zhou 2009 1.427 0.277 0.884 1.970 0 
 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 138 
Appendix B. Learner and Methodology Characteristics of the Included Studies 
Authors Year Taska Setting IORb MEc MOd EDUe L2f 
Abrams 2003 OE FL P B B CG IN 
AbuSeileek  2007 M FL P V B CGe  N/A 
Ahn 2006 N/A SL P V S CG  N/A 
Alastuey 2010 OE N/A P V S CG  M 
Alastuey 2011 IG FL P V S CG  M 
Arslan & Sahin-Kizil  2010 OE FL P T A CG IN 
Blake et al.  2008 JI SL P T S CG  N/A 
Blake 2009 IG SL P T S M IN 
Camacho 2008 OE FL P T S CG  M 
Chang 2007 OE FL T V S HS N/A 
Chang 2008 OE FL P T S CG ELE 
Chang & Hsu  2008 N/A FL P T S CG N/A 
Chen 2008 DM FL P V B HS ELE 
Chiang 2007 OE FL P T B CG ADV 
Chung 2004 OE FL P T A HS N/A 
Coniam & Wong  2004 OE FL M T S HS N/A 
Fellner & Apple 2006 OE FL P T A CG  ELE 
Fitze 2006 OE SL P T S CG  ADV 
Fuente 2003 IG SL P T S CG  ELE 
González-Bueno & Pérez 2000 OE SL T T A CG IN 
Huang & Chang 2009 OE FL P T S CG  N/A 
Huang & Hung 2008 OE FL P T S CG  N/A 
Huang & Hung 2010 OE FL P V A CG N/A 
Hung 2007 OE FL NS T A CG ELE 
Jian 2005 OE FL P T A CG  N/A 
Jou 2008 OE FL NS T A PS N/A 
Kost 2004 OE FL P V S CG  M 
Lee 2009 IG SL P B S CG IN 
Lee & Liou  2009 OE FL P T S CG  N/A 
Li 2008 OE FL P V S CG  N/A 
Li 2009 OE FL P T A HS N/A 
Liang 2006 OE FL P T B CG  N/A 
Lin 2009 OE SL P T A CG  N/A 
Liu 2007 OE FL P T A CG  N/A 
Loewen & Erlam  2006 IG M T T S CG  M 
Lord 2008 OE NA P V A CG  N/A 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 139 
Lu & Liou  2004 OE FL P T A HS N/A 
Payne & Whitney 2002 OE M P T S CG  N/A 
Peng & Hsu 2006 OE FL P T A CG  N/A 
Pérez 2000 OE FL NS T A CG  ELE 
Pyun 2003 OE M P T S CG  N/A 
Sanders  2005 OE SL P T B CG IN 
Satar & Ozdener 2008 M FL P B S HS M 
Sequeira 2009 OE FL P T S HS ELE 
Shang  2010 OE FL P T A CG  N/A 
Simsek 2010 N/A FL N/A T A PS N/A 
Song & Usaha 2009 OE FL P T A CG  ADV 
Sun  2010 OE FL P V A CG  N/A 
Sun 2012 OE FL P V A CG  N/A 
Thurston et al.  2009 OE SL NS T A PS N/A 
Tsai 2007 N/A FL T T A HS M 
Volle 2005 OE FL P V B CG  ELE 
Wang  2010 OE FL P V S CG  ADV 
Xiao 2007 OE FL M V S CG IN 
Yang 2006 OE FL P T S CG  N/A 
Yang 2011 OE FL T T B CG  N/A 
Yanguas 2012 JI SL P V S CG N/A 
Zheng 2010 OE FL P T S CG N/A 
Zhou 2009 N/A FL P T A HS N/A 
Notes: N/A: Data is not available from the study; M: Mixed;  aTask type (OE- Opinion-exchange; IG- Information-gap; JI-Jigsaw; 
DM- Decision-making; bInterlocutor(P-Peers; T-Teacher; NS-Native speaker);  cModality (T-text; B-text and voice; V-voice); d 
Mode (S-synchronous; B-Synchronous and asynchronous; A-Asynchronous); e Education (CG-College and above; HS-High 
school; PS-Primary school);  f L2 Proficiency (ELE-Elementary; IN-Intermediate; ADV-Advanced
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 140 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The author is grateful for her dissertation advisor, Professor Emeritus Francis M. Dwyer, who introduced 
her to the field of meta-analysis while she pursued her Ph.D. at the Pennsylvania State University. She 
would also like to express her immense gratitude to the anonymous reviewers who offered many 
suggestions and comments on how to improve this paper. This research was supported by the National 
Science Council of Taiwan, grant number NSC99-2410-H-007-082-MY2. 
 
REFERENCES 
* indicates primary studies included in this meta-analysis 
*Abrams, Z. I. (2003). The effect of synchronous and asynchronous CMC on oral performance in 
German, Modern Language Journal, 87(2), 157–167. 
*AbuSeileek, A. F. (2007). Cooperative vs. individual learning of oral skills in a CALL environment, 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 20(5), 493–514. 
*Ahn, H. (2006). The impact of individual learner characteristics and synchronous computer-mediated 
communication on language production in learners of English. (Unpublished PhD dissertation), 
University of Arizona. 
*Alastuey, M. C. B. (2010). Synchronous-voice computer-mediated communication: Effects on 
pronunciation. CALICO Journal, 28(1), 1–20. 
*Alastuey, M. C. B. (2011). Perceived benefits and drawbacks of synchronous voice-based computer-
mediated communication in the foreign language classroom, Computer Assisted Language Learning, 
24(5), 419–432. 
*Arslan, R. Ş., & Şahin-Kızıl, A. (2010): How can the use of blog software facilitate the writing process 
of English language learners? Computer Assisted Language Learning, 23(3), 183–197. 
Aytug, Z. G., Rothstein, H. R., Zhou, W., & Kern, M. C. (2012). Revealed or concealed? Transparency of 
procedures, decisions, and judgment calls in meta-analyses, Organizational Research Methods, 15(1) 
103–133. 
Baumeister, R. F. & Leary, M. R. (1997). Writing narrative literature reviews, Review of General 
Psychology, 1 (3), 311–320. 
Belz, J. A. (2007). The role of computer mediation in the instruction and development of L2 pragmatic 
competence. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 27, 45–75.  
Blake, R. J. (2007). New trends in using technology in the language curriculum. Annual Review of 
Applied Linguistics, 27, 76–97. 
*Blake, C. (2009). Potential of text-based internet chats for improving oral fluency in a second language, 
The Modern Language Journal, 93(2), 227–240. 
*Blake, R., Wilson, N., Pearson, N., Cetto, M., Pardo-Ballester, C. (2008). Measuring oral proficiency in 
distance, face-to-face and blended classrooms, Language Learning & Technology, 12(3), 114–127. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/blakeetal.pdf 
Böhlke, O. E. (2000). A comparative discourse analysis of output produced by learners of German in a 
chatroom and a face-to-face discussion group and its potential implications for foreign language 
instruction s. (Unpublished PhD dissertation), Michigan State University. 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 141 
*Camacho, R. (2008). Developing writing fluency through synchronous computer-mediated 
communication. (Unpublished MA dissertation), Brigham Young University. 
*Chang, Y.-Y. (2007). The potential of synchronous text-based computer-mediated communication for 
second language acquisition, Issues in Information Systems, 8(2), 355–361. 
*Chang, Y.-Y. (2008). A study of synchronous text-based computer-mediated communication and 
language learning outcomes. (Unpublished PhD dissertation),, Tamkang University, Taipei, Taiwan. 
*Chang, Y. C., & Hsu, H.-H. S. (2008). The factors of synchronous computer-mediated communication 
on EFL writing, In Proceedings of The Second Tamkang International Conference on Second Language 
Writing (pp. 26–36). Taipei, Taiwan: Tamkang University, Taipei, Taiwan. 
Chao, Y.-C., & Lo, H-C. (2011). Students' perceptions of Wiki-based collaborative writing for learners of 
English as a foreign language, Interactive Learning Environments, 19(4), 395–411. 
Chapelle, C. (1998). Multimedia CALL: Lessons to be learned from research on instructed SLA. 
Language Learning & Technology, 2(1), 21–39. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num1/article1/ 
*Chen, F. (2008). The effects of voiced-based synchronous and asynchronous CMC on EFL learners’ 
oral proficiency. (Unpublished MA dissertation), National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan. 
*Chiang, M. H. (2007). A novel idea: English as foreign language reading via virtual literature circles, 
English Teaching & Learning, 31(4), 1–37 
Chiu, C.-Y., & Savignon, S. J. (2006). Writing to mean: Computer-mediated feedback in online tutoring 
of multidraft compositions, CALICO Journal, 24(1), 97–114. 
*Chung, M.-C (2004). Effects of three theme-based projects on English learning for a CMC group and a 
non-CMC group in junior high school in Taiwan. (Unpublished MA dissertation), National Kaohsiung 
Normal University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. 
*Coniam, D., & Wong, R. (2004). Internet relay chat as a tool in the autonomous development of ESL 
learners’ English language ability: An exploratory study, System, 32, 321–335. 
Cooper, H. M. (1982). Scientific guidelines for conducting integrative research reviews, Review of 
Educational Research, 52 (2), 291–302. 
Cooper, H. M. (2009). Research synthesis and meta-analysis: A step-by-step approach (4th ed.). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Ellis, R. (1999). Theoretical perspectives on interaction and language learning. In R. Ellis, (Ed.), Learning 
a second language through interaction (pp. 3–31). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Felix, U. (2005). What do meta-analyses tell us about CALL effectiveness? ReCALL, 17(2), 269–288.  
Felix, U. (2008). The unreasonable effectiveness of CALL: What have we learned in two decades of 
research. ReCALL, 20(2), 141–161.  
*Fellner, T., & Apple, M. (2006). Developing writing fluency and lexical complexity with blogs. JALT 
CALL Journal, 2(1), 15–26. 
*Fitze, M. (2006). Discourse and participation in ESL face-to-face and written electronic conferences, 
Language Learning & Technology, 10(1), 67–86. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/fitze/default.html 
*Fuente, M. J. (2003), Is SLA interactionist theory relevant to CALL? A study on the effects of 
computer-mediated interaction in L2 vocabulary acquisition, Computer Assisted Language Learning, 
16(1), 47–81. 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 142 
Geva, E., &Ryan, E. B. (1993). Linguistic and cognitive correlates of academic skills in first and second 
languages. Language Learning, 43, 5–42 
Glass, G. V. (1976). Primary, secondary, and meta-analysis of research. Presidential address to the 
Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, April 21, 1976. 
Glass, G. V., McGaw, B., & Smith, M. L. (1981). Meta-analysis in social research. London, UK: Sage. 
Goertler, S. (2009). Using computer-mediated communication (CMC) in language teaching. UP, 42(1), 
74–84.  
*Gonzalez-Bueno, M., & Perez, L. C. (2000). Electronic mail in foreign language writing: A study of 
grammatical and lexical accuracy, and quantity of language, Foreign Language Annals, 33(2), 189–198. 
Hampel, R. (2003). Theoretical perspectives and new practices in audio-graphic conferencing for 
language learning, ReCALL, 15(1), 21–36.  
Hampel, R. (2006). Rethinking task design for the digital age: A framework for language teaching and 
learning in a synchronous online environment. ReCALL, 18(1), 105–121.  
Hampel, R., & Baber, E. (2003) Using internet-based audio-graphic and video conferencing for language 
teaching and learning. In U. Felix, (Ed.), Language learning online: Towards best practice (pp. 171–191). 
Lisse, Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger,  
Harasim, L. (1990). Online education: An environment for collaboration and intellectual amplification. In 
L. Harasim (Ed.), Online education: Perspectives on a new environment (pp. 39–64). New York, NY: 
Praeger. 
Hata, M. (2003). Literature review: Using computer-mediated communication in second language 
classrooms, Osaka keidai Ronshu, 54(3), 115–125. 
Healy-Beauvois, M. (1992). Computer assisted classroom discussion in the foreign language classroom: 
Conversation in slow motion. Foreign Language Annals, 25(5), 455–464. 
Heift, T. (2010). Prompting in CALL: A longitudinal study of learner uptake. The Modern Language 
Journal, 98(2), 198–216.  
Heins, B., Duensing, A., Stickler, U., & Batstone, C. (2007). Spoken interaction in online and face-to-face 
language tutorials. Computer-assisted Language Learning, 20(3), 279–295. 
Hirotani, M. (2009). Synchronous versus asynchronous CMC and transfer to Japanese oral performance, 
CALICO Journal, 26(2), 413–438.  
Hoven, D. (2006). Communicating and interacting: An exploration of the changing roles of media in 
CALL/CMC. CALICO Journal, 23(2), 233–256. 
*Huang, H. T. D., & Hung, S. T. A. (2008). Chatting to write: Synchronous computer-mediated 
communication in an EFL writing classroom. In C. J. Bonk, M. M. Lee & T. Reynolds (Eds.), 
Proceedings of World Conference on E-Learning in Corporate, Government, Healthcare, and Higher 
Education (pp. 1638–1645). Chesapeake, VA: AACE. 
*Huang, S. Y. & Chang, Y. (2009). A Mediation Effect of Computer-mediated Communication on EFL 
Writing.  Paper presented in the 2009 World Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia and 
Telecommunications. 
*Huang, H.-T. D., & Hung, S.-T. A. (2010). Effects of electronic portfolios on EFL oral performance, 
Asian EFL Journal 12(2), 192–212. 
*Hung, P.-Y. (2007). The effects of exchanging emails with American key pals on Taiwanese college 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 143 
students’ writing in English. (Unpublished PhD dissertation),Kent State University. 
Hunter, J., & Schmidt, F. (2004). Methods of meta-analysis. London, UK: SAGE. 
Iwasaki, J., & Oliver, R. (2003). Chat-line interaction and negative feedback. Australian Review of 
Applied Linguistics, 17, 60–73. 
Izquierdo, B. L. de., & Reyes, L. E. (2009). Effectiveness of blogging to practice reading at a freshman 
FFL program, The Reading Matrix, 9(2), 100–117. 
Jenks, C. J. (2009). When is it appropriate to talk? Managing overlapping talk in multi-participant voice-
based chat rooms, Computer Assisted Language Learning, 22(1), 19–30. 
Jepson, K. (2005). Conversations – and negotiated interaction – in text and voice chatrooms, Language 
Learning & Technology, 9(3), 79–98. Retrieved from 
http://www.llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/jepson/default.html 
*Jian, Q. W. (2005). Effects of online peer response on EFL college writing. (Unpublished MA 
dissertation), National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchiu,Taiwan. 
Johnson, G. M. (2006).Synchronous and asynchronous text-based CMC in educational contexts: A review 
of recent research. TechTrends, 50(4), 46–53. 
Johnson, B. T., & Eagly, A. H. (2000). Quantitative synthesis of social psychological research. In H. T. 
reis & C. M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in social and personality psychology (pp. 496–
528). London, UK: Cambridge University Press.  
*Jou, Y.-A. E. (2008). The effect of email keypal project on the enhancement of reading and writing 
performance of elementary school-aged EFL students in Taiwan. (Unpublished PhD dissertation), Alliant 
International University.  
Kenning, M.-M. (2010). Differences that make the difference: A study of functionalities in synchronous 
CMC. ReCALL, 22(1), 3–19.  
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quality and 
characteristics of language production. Modern Language Journal, 79(4), 457–476. 
*Kost, C. R. (2004). An investigation of the effects of synchronous computer-mediated communication 
(CMC) on interlanguage development in beginning learners of German: Accuracy, proficiency and 
communication strategies. (Unpublished PhD dissertation), University of Arizona. 
Kung, S.-C. (2004). Synchronous electronic discussions in an EFL reading class, ELT Journal, 58(2), 
164–173. 
Lantolf, J. P. (2000). Introducing sociocultural theory. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory & 
second language learning (pp. 1–26). Hong Kong: Oxford University Press.  
*Lee, J. Y. (2009). The effect of computer-mediated communication (CMC) interaction on L2 vocabulary 
acquisition: A comparison study of CMC interaction and face-to-face interaction. (Unpublished PhD 
dissertation),Iowa State University. 
*Lee, S. L., & Liou, H. C. (2009). A case study of Wiki‐base pair versus individual writing in an EFL 
College Context, In the Proceedings of 27th International Conference on English Teaching and Learning 
in the R.O.C. (pp. 28–44). Kaohsiung, Taiwan: Crane. 
*Li, L. J. (2008). The impact of different levels of instructional strategy on synchronous CMC in 
improving college students’ oral English proficiency and learning motivation. . (Unpublished MA 
dissertation), National Cheng Kung University, Tainan,Taiwan. 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 144 
Li, S. (2010). The effectiveness of corrective feedback in SLA: A meta-analysis, Language Learning 
60(2), 309–365. 
Li, J. (2009). The evolution of vocabulary learning strategies in a computer-mediated reading 
environment. CALICO Journal, 27(1), 118–146. 
*Li, W.-L. (2009). The effects of integrating blogging into peer feedback revision on English writing 
performance and attitude of vocational high school students in Taiwan.  (Unpublished MA dissertation), 
National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei,Taiwan. 
*Liang, M.-Y. (2006). Interaction in EFL online classes: How web facilitated instruction. (Unpublished 
PhD dissertation), Indiana University. 
Liang, M.-Y. (2010). Using synchronous online peer response groups in EFL writing: Revision-related 
discourse, Language Learning & Technology, 14(1), 45-64. Retrived from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num1/liang.pdf 
Liao, Y.-K., & Hao, Y.-W. (2008). Large-scale studies and quantitative methods, In J. Voogt & G. 
Knezek (Eds.) International handbook of information technology in primary and secondary education, 
(pp.1019–1035). Springer Science + Business Media. 
Liaw, M.-L., & Master, S. B.-L. (2010). Understanding telecollaboration through an analysis of 
intercultural discourse, Computer-Assisted Language learning, 23(1), 21–40. 
Lightbown, P. M. (2000). Classroom SLA research and second language teaching. Applied Linguistics, 
21, 431–462. 
*Lin, S. M. (2009). How computer-mediated communication affects ELL students’ writing processes and 
writing performance. (Unpublished PhD dissertation),Oklahoma University 
Lin, W.-C., Huang, H.-T., & Liou, H.-C. (2013). The effects of text-based SCMC on SLA: A meta-
analysis. Language Learning & Technology, 12(3), 123–142. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/linetal.pdf 
Linell, P. (1998). Approaching dialogue: Talk,interaction, and contexts in dialogical perspectives. 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins.  
Lipsey, M. W., & Wilson, D. B. (2001). Practical meta-analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
*Liu, C.-N. (2007). Pragmatics in foreign language instruction: The pedagogical intervention and 
technology on the development of EFL learners’ realization of “Request”.(Unpublished PhD dissertation), 
Texas A & M University. 
Loewen, S. (2004). Uptake in incidental focus on form in meaning-focused ESL lessons. Language 
Learning, 54, 153–188. 
*Loewen, S., & Erlam, R. (2006). Corrective feedback in the chatroom: An experimental study, 
Computer Assisted Language Learning,19(1), 1–14. 
*Lord, G. (2008). Podcasting communities and second language pronunciation, Foreign Language 
Annals, 41(2), 374–389. 
*Lu, K. Y., & Liou, H. C. (2004). Effects of E-mail exchanges on EFL senior high school students’ 
English writing, English Teaching & Learning, 28(4), 95–119. 
Luo, L.Y. (2005). A systemic functional perspective on native and non-native English speaking students 
online discussion in a mixed mode graduate seminar. (Unpublished PhD dissertation), University of 
British Columbia, U.K.  
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 145 
Lyster, R. (2007). Learning and teaching languages through content: A counterbalanced approach. 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Mahfouz, S. M. (2010). A study of Jordanian university students’ perceptions of using email exchanges 
with native English keypals for improving their writing competency, CALICO Journal, 27(2), 393–408. 
Nguyen, L. V. (2008). Computer mediated communication and foreign language education: Pedagogical 
features. International Journal of Instructional Technology and Distance Learning, 5(12), 23-44.  
Oswald, F. L., & Plonsky, L. (2010). Meta-analysis in second language research: Choices and challenges, 
Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 30, 85–110.  
Patterson, P. (2000). Computer-assisted language learning: An analysis of discourse produced in 
computer-assisted and oral class discussions by Spanish learners. (Unpublished PhD dissertation),,The 
University of Texas at Austin.   
Payne, J. S., & Ross, B. M. (2005). Synchronous CMC, working memory, and L2 oral proficiency 
development, Language Learning & Technology, 9(3), 35–54. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/payne/default.html 
*Payne, J. S., & Whitney, P. J. (2002). Developing L2 oral proficiency through synchronous CMC: 
Output, working memory and Interlanguage development, CALICO Journal, 20(1), 7–32.  
*Peng, C. Y., & Hsu, P. Y. (2006). Implementing online journal practice into EFL writing class, 
Chaoyang Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences, 4(2), 1–20.  
Penny, A. R., & Coe, R. (2004). Effectiveness of consultation on student ratings feedback: A meta-
analysis. Review of Educational Research, 74(2), 215–253. 
*Perez, L. C. (2000). Electronic mail: An extension of my Spanish class boundaries? Cincinnati Romance 
Review, 19, 138–145.  
Peterson, M. (2009). Learner interaction in synchronous CMC: A sociocultural perspective. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 22(4), 303–321. 
Pica, T., Kanagy, R., & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second language 
research and instruction. In G. Crookes & S. Gass (Eds.) Tasks and second language learning (pp. 9–34). 
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
*Pyun, O. C. (2003). Effects of networked language learning: A comparison between synchronous online 
discussions and face-to-face discussions. . (Unpublished MA dissertation),The Ohio State University. 
Ray, B. B., & Hocutt, M. M. (2006). Teacher-created, teacher-centered weblogs: Perceptions and 
practices. Journal of Computing in Teacher Education, 23 (1), 11–18. 
Robinson, P. (1997). Individual differences and the fundamental similarity of implicit and explicit adult 
second language learning, Language Learning, 47(1), 45–99. 
Rodríguez, P., Nussbaum, M., & Dombrovskaia, L. (2012). Evolutionary development: A model for the 
design, implementation, and evaluation of ICT for education program. Journal of Computer-Assisted 
Learning, 28, 81–98.  
Rosenthal, R. (1979). The file drawer problem and tolerance for null results. Psychological Bulletin, 86, 
638–641.  
Samsonov, P. (2001). Effectiveness of teaching a part of a foreign language course through CMC as 
perceived by the students. (Unpublished PhD dissertation),Texas A & M University. 
*Sanders, R. E. (2005). Redesigning introductory Spanish: Increased enrollment, online management, 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 146 
cost reduction and effects on student learning, Foreign Language Annals, 38(4), 523–532. 
Sasaki, A., & Takeuchi, O. (2010). EFL students’ vocabulary learning in NS-NNS email interactions: Do 
they learn new words by imitation? ReCALL, 22(1), 70–82. 
*Satar, H. M., & Ozdener, N. (2008). The effects of synchronous CMC on speaking proficiency and 
anxiety, The Modern Language Journal, 92, 595–613. 
Sauro, S. (2004). Cyberdiscursive tug-a-war: Learner repositioning in a multimodal CMC environment. 
Working Papers in Educational Linguistics, 19(2), 55–72. 
Sauro, S. (2009). Computer-mediated corrective feedback and the development of L2 grammar. Language 
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 96–120. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/sauro.pdf 
Sauro, S. (2011). SCMC for SLA: A research synthesis. CALICO Journal, 28(2), 369–391.  
*Sequeira, C. A. (2009). Synchronous computer-mediated communication and second language 
proficiency. (Unpublished PhD dissertation), University of Oregon. 
*Shang, H. F. (2007). An exploratory study of e-mail application on FL writing performance, Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 20(1), 79–96. 
Sims, R. (2000). An interactive conundrum: Constructs of interactivity and learning theory. Australian 
Journal of Educational Technology, 16(1), 45–57. 
*Simsek, Ö. (2010). The effect of weblog (blog) students’ writing performance, Procedia Social and 
Behavioral Sciences 2, 953–958. 
Smith, B. (2003). The use of communication strategies in computer-mediated communication, System, 31, 
29–53. 
Smith, B. (2008). Methodological hurdles in capturing CMC data: The case of the missing self-repair. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(1), 85–103. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/smith/default.html 
Smith, B., Alvarez-Torres, B. M. J., & Zhao, Y. (2003). Features of CMC technologies and their impact 
on language learners’ online interaction, Computers in Human Behavior, 19, 703–729. 
Smith, B. & Lafford, B. (2009). The evaluation of CALL scholarly activity. The Modern Language 
Journal, 93, 868–883. 
*Song, W., & Usaha, S. (2009). How EFL university students’ use electronic peer response into revisions, 
Suranaree Journal of Science & Technology, 16(3), 263–275. 
*Sun, Y.-C. (2010). Extensive writing in foreign language classrooms: A blogging approach, Innovations 
in Education and Teaching International, 47(3), 327–339. 
*Sun, Y.-C. (2012). Examining the effectiveness of extensive speaking practice via voice blogs in a 
foreign language learning context, CALICO Journal, 29(3), 494–506. 
Sykes, J. M. (2005). Synchronous CMC and pragmatic development: Effects of oral and written chat, 
CALICO Journal, 22(3), 399–431. 
Thorne, S. L. (2006). Computer-mediated Communication. In N. Van Deusen-Scholl and N. H. 
Hornberger (Eds), Encyclopedia of language and education, 2nd Edition, Volume 4: Second and foreign 
language education, pp. 325–336. 
*Thurston, A., Duran, D., Cunningham, E., Blanch, S., & Topping, K. (2009). International on-line 
reciprocal peer tutoring to promote modern language development in primary schools, Computers & 
Education, 53, 462–472. 
Huifen Lin Link between CMC and SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 147 
*Tsai, Z. Y. (2007). Effects of a teacher-centered blog on English reading comprehension. (Unpublished 
MA dissertation)National Kaohsiung Normal University, Kaohsiung,Taiwan 
*Volle, L. M. (2005). Analyzing oral skills in voice e-mail and online interviews, Language Learning & 
Technology, 9(3), 146–163. Retrieved fromhttp://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/pdf/volle.pdf 
*Wang, C. Y. (2010). A study comparing the effects of synchronous CMC and FTF interaction on L2 oral 
proficiency development for students with various working memory capacities. . (Unpublished MA 
dissertation), National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchiu,Taiwan. 
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer-mediated collaborative learning: Theory and practice. The Modern 
Language Journal, 81(4), 470-481. 
*Xiao, M. (2007). An empirical study of using Internet-based desktop videoconferencing in an EFL 
setting. (Unpublished PhD dissertation),Ohio University.  
Yamada, M., & Akahori, K. (2009). Awareness and performance through self- and partner’s image in 
videoconferencing. CALICO Journal, 27, 1–25. 
*Yang, M. L. (2006). Exploring Taiwanese EFL Students’ Responses to Synchronous CMC: Effects on 
language use, learning and transfer, and perceptions. (Unpublished PhD dissertation), University of 
Texas at Austin. 
*Yang, Y. F. (2011). Engaging students in an online situated language learning environment, Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 24(2), 181–198. 
*Yanguas, I. (2012). Task-based oral computer-mediated communication and L2 vocabulary acquisition, 
CALICO Journal, 29(3), 507–531. 
Zhao, Y. (2003). Recent developments in technology and language Learning: A literature review and 
meta-analysis, CALICO Journal, 21(1), 7–27. 
Zhao, Y., Alvarez-Torres, M. J., Smith, B., & Tan, H. S. (2004). The non-neutrality of technology: A 
theoretical analysis and empirical study of computer mediated communication technologies, Journal of 
Educational Computing Research, 30(1 & 2), 23–55.  
*Zheng, S. N. (2010). The transferability from synchronous computer-mediated communication to oral 
discussion.  (Unpublished MA dissertation), National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchiu,Taiwan. 
*Zhou, H. J. (2009). Effects of weblog-based writing instruction on English writing performance of 
vocational high school students. (Unpublished MA dissertation), National Kaohsiung Normal University, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. 
