Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/emerging.pdf 
October 2014, Volume 18, Number 3 
pp. 5–15 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 5 
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES 
GLOBAL REACH AND LOCAL PRACTICE:  THE PROMISE OF MOOCS 
Robert Godwin-Jones, Virginia Commonwealth University 
Keywords: Distance Learning, Online Teaching & Learning, Web-Based Instruction. 
APA Citation: Godwin-Jones, R. (2014). Global reach and local practice: The promise of 
MOOCS. Language Learning & Technology, 18(3), 5–15. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/emerging.pdf 
Copyright: © Robert Godwin-Jones 
Introduction 
If you want to attract attention to a new online course, the foolproof strategy today is to label it a MOOC, 
a massive open online course. The hype surrounding MOOCs has resulted in substantial interest—from 
the general public to university presidents—in online learning, as long as it's categorized as a MOOC. In 
reality, many “MOOCs” are neither open nor massive, but often simply regular online courses that have 
been re-branded. Courses labeled as MOOCs are being offered in virtually all disciplines. Second-
language instruction, however, has not so far been a major player in the MOOC space. In this column, I 
will examine why that may be. That will entail discussing MOOC pedagogical models and how language 
learning fits into teaching and learning approaches typically used in such courses. Several existing and 
planned MOOC language courses will be discussed. I will also be looking at language and culture issues 
and how MOOC providers are dealing with internationalization and localization. Finally, the column will 
profile possible future developments. 
MOOC Pedagogy 
The pedagogical approach used most widely today, popularized by the major US MOOC providers 
Udacity, Coursera, and EdX, is commonly referred to as the xMOOC model (from EdX). It uses 
essentially a "flipped classroom” approach in which lecture videos of the instructor are provided as online 
digital clips, shown through embedded HTML5 video, Flash files, or streaming through YouTube or 
another external service. The videos are typically short—5 to 10 minutes in length—and are interspersed 
with comprehension questions, most often in multiple-choice format. Readings are also assigned, mostly 
provided as PDF documents, linked webpages, or e-books (in EPUB format). Sometimes the readings or 
other course content are annotated by the instructor, and occasionally are supplied through a wiki. 
Discussion forums enable peer-to-peer discussion of course content and there is rarely any direct 
communication between individual students and the instructor. Quizzes or exams are provided after 
completion of each content unit and are usually in formats that can be machine graded. Most MOOCs are 
free, but many require payment for those taking exams or requesting certified course completion. Bali 
(2014) provides a detailed analysis of the pedagogy used in four different xMOOC examples.  The 
MOOC Research Institute, has done an analysis of the kind of learning that takes place in the typical 
MOOC. Eisenberg and Fischer (2014) provide a particularly useful discussion of MOOC pedagogy 
focusing on its characteristics seen from the perspective of research in learning sciences and 
contemporary theories of learning. 
Commentators (such as Paul Stacey) have asserted that this model represents a step backwards in online 
pedagogy, contrasting the lecture-based, instructivist approach used in most MOOCs today to the more 
open-ended, constructivist model used in earlier MOOCs. These are often labeled cMOOCs, as they are 
built around constructivist theories of learning. They date back to 2007 and include courses such as Social 
Media and Open Education or Personal Learning Environment, Networks and Knowledge. This style of 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology  6 
MOOC invites users to create personal learning networks: discovering, collecting, annotating, and sharing 
web-based resources of personal interest. Social media are used extensively, with users expected to 
participate actively in creating "digital artifacts" while using a variety of web services and tools. In 
contrast to the xMOOC model, cMOOCs tend to require participants to set up on their own personalized 
learning environments, which might include creating a blog or using a bookmarking service such as 
Diigo. A study of cMOOCs provides a list of the kinds of Web tools and services often used in such 
courses. In comparison with xMoocs, this model necessitates a higher level of learner autonomy and 
digital literacy. There has been some criticism of this approach in that it requires users to be Internet 
savvy, and discourages those not prepared to be active contributors to building a shared knowledge base 
from taking the course (Milligan, Littlejohn & Margaryan, 2014; Saadatmand & Kumpulainen, 2014). 
Others have pointed out that cMOOCs often deal with topics such as digital literacy or e-learning, and 
that they are less successful for basic introductory-level classes or in fields where structured, hierarchical 
teaching and learning is the norm. 
While the early cMOOCs went unnoticed outside of a relatively small group of digital technorati, the 
xMOOCs have created an immense media buzz. This began in 2011 when Stanford engineering 
professors offered three of the school’s most popular computer science courses as MOOCs. The course 
that garnered the most attention was Introduction to Artificial Intelligence, taught by Sebastian Thrun and 
Peter Norvig. The course attracted over 160,000 students from nearly 200 different countries. Being free, 
the course (and other MOOCs) attracted many casual students curious about the topic, but who did not 
actually complete the course. Dropout rates for most MOOCs tend to be very high: this is sometimes 
taken to be symptomatic of failure, but in fact it is not an unexpected phenomenon with any freely 
available, online learning resource. As others have remarked, the experience of taking a MOOC is for 
many participants more akin to attending a conference than to taking a regular university course—
participants naturally tend to drift in and out. Sebastian Thrun was so taken with his first MOOC that he 
left Stanford and founded Udacity as a commercial MOOC platform. This was soon followed by 
Coursera, founded by Stanford computer science professors. EdX, out of MIT, is the third major US 
MOOC platform. 
As MOOCs have attracted such attention in Western media, traditional providers of online learning 
platforms have unsurprisingly jumped on the MOOC bandwagon. Vendors of virtual learning 
environments or learning management systems (LMS) have encouraged the use of their platforms for 
delivering MOOCs or have created cloud-based platforms with that market in mind. That includes 
Blackboard’s CourseSites, the Instructure Canvas Network, and Desire2Learn’s Open Courses. The open 
source Moodle platform is also being used for the delivery of MOOCs. The typical LMS offers a wider 
array of tools and features than MOOCs, allowing more flexibility and variation in structuring an online 
course. Given the estimate that two thirds of MOOC users are outside North America, it's no surprise that 
new MOOC platforms are emerging in a variety of countries. In contrast to North American MOOC 
platforms, these have not all originated in computer science departments. The FutureLearn platform from 
the UK, for example, was developed as a collaborative project between the Open University and the BBC. 
It was designed as an alternative to the pedagogical model of US xMOOCs, as it places more emphasis on 
social constructivist learning. In contrast to the typical MOOC structure, content in FutureLearn is 
connected directly (i.e. on the same webpage) with user discussion of that content. The system also 
encourages learners to "follow" (as in Twitter) other learners in an effort to build community. It stresses 
the importance of storytelling as both a learning strategy and as a means of making personal connections. 
Another model is OpenUpEd, a collaborative EU MOOC platform which has made sure that users 
perceive the distinction that its design reflects "European values such as equity, quality, and diversity" 
(Bayne & Ross, p. 9). Also from Europe are Eliademy (Finland), iVersity (Germany), and UniMOOC 
(Spain). It's not just Europe that is getting into the MOOC business. From Australia comes Open2study 
and from Japan Schoo and JMOOC; China has Ewant  and XuetangX (in partnership with EdX), and 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology  7 
from Brazil comes Veduca. 
MOOCs for Language Learning 
The role of the instructor in a MOOC can vary considerably. In the constructivist model, the instructor’s 
role is that of facilitator, suggesting avenues to explore as well as coordinating course activities. That's 
quite different from MOOCs built around video lectures, in which the professor is front and center and, as 
the content expert, is responsible for designing the learning path, providing course materials, and devising 
assessments. This role has pedagogical consequences, but it also serves to raise the profile of the MOOC 
instructors, potentially making them into the educational equivalent of rock stars. This is an unlikely role 
for language teachers, unless the MOOC were to deal with a popular topic within language or culture. For 
basic language instruction a course built around an instructor giving lectures is not likely to be successful. 
In fact, the nature of language learning as skill development has led some to not only rule out language 
learning MOOCs, but to suggest, as Andrew Delbano has done, that due to MOOCs and other 
technological developments, language teachers will soon be sharing the fate of the dodo bird: 
Today, as star professors increasingly work for themselves, more faculty members at less 
prestigious institutions face low wages, meager benefits, and—since many lack tenure—minimal 
job security. But if the new technology threatens some professors with obscurity, others face 
obsolescence. Language instructors may someday be replaced by multilingual versions of Siri on 
your iPhone (Delbano, 2013). 
Delbano is likely not alone in his view of language learning as a simple, mechanical process that could be 
efficiently accomplished through interactions with an intelligent machine; no actual courses are needed. 
There’s no question that artificial intelligence (AI) can be a helpful tool in language learning. Intelligent 
language tutors can provide valuable assistance to students in particular areas of language learning, such 
as structured grammar learning or vocabulary development. While programmed conversation partners can 
also be useful, the complex cognitive and affective dimensions of language acquisition require social 
interactions. A recent study on students exclusively using the Rosetta Stone language learning software 
for beginning Spanish shows that, while the Rosetta Stone students scored well in vocabulary acquisition, 
they performed less well in actually being able to carry on a conversation in Spanish. They were weak in 
strategic competence, the ability to ask for help in the target language, or to find other ways to formulate 
what they wanted to express. Although not part of the study, I wouldn't be surprised if they were also 
inferior to the control group in pragmatic competence, the ability to not only make the right semantic 
choice, but to take into account context and language register. Real-world communicative ability is 
developed through real world communication, by way of conversational exchanges with other speakers in 
which language use is dynamically adjusted to the situation. This can happen by connecting with others 
over a network, but it’s less likely if one’s unique partner is virtual. 
Rosetta Stone is of course not the only option for intelligent language systems. There are a good number 
of intelligent language tutors, which provide adaptive learning built around a learner profile generated 
dynamically by interactions with the system. Such tools can be integrated into a language learning MOOC 
and provide a valuable resource for learners, but for genuine language acquisition, they need to be 
integrated into an environment which also supplies rich social interactions. Artificial intelligence is used 
extensively in mainstream MOOCs, so as to be able to provide feedback to a very large number of 
students (the average enrollment in mainline MOOCs in Spring, 2014 was 43,000 students). This is not 
surprising, given the fact that AI professors are the founders of both Udacity and Coursera. AI tools can 
be fruitfully deployed in learning content for which there is a specific range of acceptable responses, such 
as performing a calculation or completing a programming assignment. Depending on the assignment or 
assessment, nothing more complex than pattern matching may be needed. This approach is well known to 
CALL practitioners (computer aided language learning), as there have been a great number of software 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology  8 
tools developed over the years to analyze user input with pattern matching and regular expressions, often 
referred to as Tutorial CALL.  
More substantial written assignments may require automatic or semi-automatic evaluation using AI. 
Indeed, today AI is playing a role in assessment of free-form assignments such as essays. Alternatively, 
for assignments that are not machine analyzed, MOOCs typically use a combination of self and peer 
assessments. This is found most often in the evaluation of participation in discussion forums or other 
collaborative course activities. This assumes that the number of users precludes the possibility of the 
instructor or teaching assistants being able to evaluate student work. Participants are often split (either 
formally or informally) into groups, and evaluations are performed within those groups. In other cases, 
ranking systems are used to differentiate the quality of user contributions or assignment completions. 
Model responses are sometimes supplied. There is some evidence that a “reputation system”, such as that 
used in sites like StackOverflow can be beneficial in MOOCs (Coetzee, Fox, Hearst, & Hartmann, 2014). 
A peer assessment system for online language learning is likely to require a more formal mechanism than 
is used in the typical MOOC. That would include clear guidelines and rubrics for evaluating student work 
and assessments, as well as substantial user training and oversight. As is generally the case for other 
MOOCs, "super users" could be identified to provide assistance and guidance to other students. This 
might take the form of volunteer (or paid) native speakers.  
To my mind, the optimal approach to structuring a language learning MOOC is to provide an adaptive 
learning system within an extensive social and personalizable learning environment, in effect combining 
an xMOOC style format with a cMOOC. The mix between machine learning and social learning will 
depend on proficiency levels and on the skills being learned or assessed, with the social dimension 
gaining in importance as proficiency develops. Among the relatively few language MOOCs offered 
today, several have in fact implemented this model to some degree. The SpanishMOOC, for example, 
uses the Instreamia adaptive learning system, to personalize feedback and content sequencing. Instreamia 
features an advanced spaced repetition system to optimize review and retention of new vocabulary and 
structures. The course incorporates an extensive set of social networking options (using Google Groups 
and Google Hangouts), to provide opportunities for real language exchange. Several other intelligent 
learning systems have been adapted to language use. The Open Learning Initiative (OLI) from Carnegie 
Mellon University offers self-study materials in several different languages. Beginning French (French 
Online) has been available for several years; Arabic for Global Exchange and American English Speech 
are also offered, with Elementary Spanish under development. The language offerings from OLI make 
use of Cognitive Tutors, which require AI programming, and also incorporate simpler, example-tracking 
tutors, which do not require programming, and can be created directly by content experts. There has been 
considerable work in recent years in developing more effective learner models for use in adaptive 
learning systems. Of particular interest are “open learner profiles”, which are built principally from 
learner interactions with the system, but which are also open to input from other sources (Bull & Kay, 
2007).  
There are currently a small, but growing, number of language learning MOOCs being offered on a variety 
of platforms, although most offerings deal with culture or literature rather than with basic language 
instruction. EdX offers College Writing 2x: Principles of Written English and Spoken English for Doing 
Business in Asia; Canvas Network has a course on Spanish pronunciation, and Open2Study a basic 
Chinese course. OpenUpEd provides courses in Gaelic and Business Russian. Alison, a MOOC provider 
from Ireland, offers Arabic, English, French, German, Irish, and Swedish. The Spanish MOOC platform 
Myríada X is teaching (in Spanish) Professional English and German for Spanish Speakers. Udemy hosts 
courses in Writing Korean, Elementary Serbian and other languages. Cousera offers Beginning Mandarin 
as well as a bilingual English-Spanish course in Global Business. Self-paced courses, rather than formal 
MOOCs, are offered by the Foreign Studies Institute in a variety of languages, including Bulgarian, 
Yoruba, and Czech. Open Culture lists courses, podcasts, and web site resources in 48 languages. Pablo 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology  9 
Ángel Vega has put together a list of MOOCs (in Spanish) of potential interest to professional translators.  
The Virtual Linguistics Campus from Philipps University (Marburg, Germany) offers a variety of 
MOOCs dealing with different areas within linguistics.  
One of the more interesting language MOOCs I am aware of, planned for 2015, is Spoken 
Communication: English/Spanish in Tandem to be offered by a consortium of Spanish universities. It is 
designed to improve students' spoken ability in English and Spanish as foreign languages using online 
technologies. As it is structured around tandem partners, there is a built-in availability of native speakers 
to help learners and to provide assistance in assignment marking and in evaluating assessments. The 
course also stresses development of digital literacy skills, with rich use of online language learning tools. 
It will use locally developed tools for working on oral communication, a challenging area for any online 
language course. The SpeakApps platform, out of the Open University of Catalonia, as well as 
LANGblog and video conferencing will all be used to provide an extensive environment for language 
practice and exchange. The tools provided can all be integrated into a Moodle course, a popular platform 
for online language instruction. 
A possible model for leveraging participation in a MOOC for language learning is represented by a pilot 
project at the Technical University of Munich. Students there are able to earn up to 2 ECTS credits 
(European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System) by participating in a MOOC conducted in English.  
Students need to find a MOOC on their own they find of interest, then submit a request to the language 
center to participate in Guided English Self-Study. Here according to the info sheet is what then happens:  
If your proposed course is accepted, you will set up a plan with an English instructor to do 60 
hours of language-related work to supplement your online course work. This might include 
summaries of lectures, drafts of homework assignments, exercises tailored to your needs, and use 
of online learning resources. You will receive regular written feedback on the texts you submit 
and meet with your instructor several times over the semester to monitor your progress and get 
individual feedback (Guided English Self-Study, 2013) 
A MOOC not specifically designed for language learning but which may hold interest for those in the 
field due to its innovative approach and focus on storytelling is DS106 Digital Storytelling, offered as an 
independent MOOC from the University of Mary Washington. The course is richly collaborative, with 
users invited to create course assignments (put into the Assignment Bank), which are then used in 
subsequent versions of the course. The course web site is available to function as a resource for parallel 
courses at other universities. Despite its constructivist nature, DS106 does not discourage “lurkers”, 
announcing on its info page that users can “join in whenever you like and leave whenever you need”. The 
course is built around a WordPress blog, in itself a structure that invites connections. In fact, WordPress 
and other blogging platforms are being used for other MOOCs as well. There is actually an LMS/MOOC 
platform built around WordPress—LearnDash—which adds typical LMS features to WordPress, such as 
the ability to create self-correcting quizzes. 
Internationalizing MOOCs 
Sebastian Thrun famously remarked that with the rise of MOOCs internationally, in 50 years there would 
only be 10 universities worldwide. In fact, he envisioned his own company, Udacity, as among those 10 
institutions. In this vision it's likely that North America and Europe would be heavily, if not exclusively, 
represented in that elite group. This is certainly a paternalistic, if not downright neocolonial, perspective 
on higher education. It assumes that education can be served out from universal knowledge centers, 
without regard to local pedagogical and cultural considerations. It also assumes that all people learn the 
same way and that local educational opportunities at the university level are not needed. On the other 
hand, there is an admirable idealism and optimism about this vision, namely that it should be possible for 
anyone on the planet to receive a first world education over the Internet. This is a view embraced by other 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology  10 
MOOC entrepreneurs such as Coursera’s Daphne Koller. Indeed, this is one of the original promises of 
MOOCs: to provide free courses offered by leading experts in their respective fields anywhere on the 
planet. There is no doubt that MOOCs have found a receptive audience in many countries in which higher 
education is not as universally available as it is in North America. After the US, the country with the next 
highest number of MOOC participants is India. Numerous personal anecdotes have been reported in the 
US media about underprivileged learners using a MOOC experience to gain opportunities not available 
locally. The best-known case may be Khadijah Niazi, a Pakistani girl who started taking MOOCs at age 
10. At age12, after successfully completing courses in AI and physics, she was invited to speak at Davos 
about online learning. 
While there are likely to be a limited number of exceptional individuals in a variety of countries who will 
take advantage of MOOCs, there are a number of practical roadblocks in the way of students worldwide 
participating in a MOOC experience. The first is infrastructure. Michael Trucano from the World Bank 
has written informatively about this and other aspects of MOOC use in developing countries. It's not a 
given that reliable electricity will be universally available, let alone Internet access. Particularly 
problematic are high-definition streaming videos, which are not typically available in more than the 
default MP4 or Flash formats. As many of the videos feature talking heads, providing an audio only 
version would not represent much of a loss of content.  That would also enable the audio file to be 
downloadable when Internet access was available, so that off-line playback would be possible. This could 
be done with other course materials as well, which could be packaged as e-texts in EPUB format, so as to 
be available off-line as well as on mobile devices. Udacity has recently enabled content download for 
some of its courses. Despite the much greater penetration of Internet capable cellphones, MOOC 
providers have not focused much effort on making courses fully available to the many users for whom a 
phone is the only viable networked option. There has been some general recognition of the problem of 
Internet access. Coursera, for example, has created a series of "learning hubs", partnering with local 
schools, libraries, and universities to supply access to courses. The company also has a partnership with 
the US State Department to provide access through some US embassies. 
A second issue is language. The vast majority of MOOCs are taught in English. Despite its role as a 
lingua franca, non-native English speakers may need language support in being able to participate 
effectively in an online English environment. MOOC providers have begun to address this issue, 
supplying video subtitles or transcripts by volunteer translators, such as Coursera’s “Global Translator 
Community”. Other materials may also be available in multiple languages. This can help in working with 
the videos and readings, but does not address working with English in discussion forums or other 
collaborative course activities. One approach some MOOC users have taken is to organize local groups, 
which can offer in-person networking and assistance. As commercial MOOC providers, especially 
Coursera, strive to expand globally, course offerings are being increasingly localized. Coursera has 
partnered with a Chinese Internet provider to supply full Mandarin versions of selected courses through a 
dedicated Chinese portal, Coursera Zone (site in Mandarin). Coursera is also partnering with the World 
Bank to produce courses for developing countries. US Embassy employees and Fulbright Fellows have 
been sponsored by the US government to host "MOOC camps" in a variety of countries including China, 
Bolivia, and India. As Anya Kamenetz points out, providing this kind of educational opportunity can be a 
boon to individuals in a position to pursue it, but it doesn’t help local educational systems:  
It’s easy to imagine a future in which the educational equivalent of reruns of Baywatch—a 
limited menu of glossy American fare—comes to dominate the cultural landscape in developing 
countries around the world, making it more difficult for cash-starved universities in those 
countries to pursue scholarship relevant to local contexts. This potential undermining of local 
education becomes especially problematic when the U.S. government takes an official role in 
promoting the use of MOOCs as a form of public diplomacy. The trick going forward is to figure 
out how MOOCs can enhance, instead of just compete with, existing national education systems 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology  11 
(Kamenetz, 2013). 
The danger here is the wholesale importation of the beliefs and pedagogies of a particular US model of 
higher education, represented by institutions like Stanford, Harvard, and MIT and depending heavily on 
teaching techniques in the fields of engineering and computer science. The Generation Rwanda project 
through the Kepler Institute (funded by a hidden corporate foundation), very positively profiled in both 
Scientific American and the Chronicle of Higher Education, has been a controversial example of this 
approach. It uses a competency-based system, but that system (College for America) was developed based 
on US contexts. One of the co-founders of Kepler has defended the adopted approach in an article in 
Slate. 
There are projects in Africa that are using a more collaborative model. Global Exploration of Water, for 
example, was developed with content input from experts in a variety of countries. Students in the venues 
represented (Nigeria, Pakistan, Bulgaria, Lebanon, USA) go into the field to report on local water use 
issues and report back, using the technology available locally, ranging from video to text reporting. The 
course content is shared using an open Web site, making it easy to access on multiple devices. Ubongo is 
a nonprofit organization in Tanzania trying a different approach. It is introducing content through 
television, with follow-up learning materials available on tablets and screen projectors in Tanzanian 
schools. Also, content is localized, as given in an example from elementary school instruction by Nisha 
Ligon, Ubongo’s managing director:  
Localization is key because American examples don't always translate. ‘There was this black and 
white textbook with kids eating doughnuts, and apparently the children were all asking: why are 
they eating tires?’ Ligon said. ‘Why would you eat this round black thing?’ Doughnuts aren’t big 
in Tanzania. It remains to be seen if bananas go over better (Sperber, 2014). 
The Commonwealth of Learning (Canada) provides a good analysis of issues arising from introducing 
MOOCs to Africa. There has not been much commentary on such cross-cultural issues with MOOCs, 
despite the fact that interactions among participants from different cultures in discussion forums or other 
online collaborations is liable to result in occasional (or frequent) misunderstandings or conflict. The few 
studies that have been done, such as a recent paper on Cultural Translations in MOOCs, seem unaware of 
the substantial research of the last decade dealing with telecollaboration in language learning and 
intercultural communication. The experiences of early collaborative projects such as Cultura or the 
analysis of projects such as those by Thorne and Kramsch (2002) or Dorothy Chun (2011) could be 
invaluable in anticipating and preparing for intercultural and linguistic issues. 
Local efforts can help in a third difficulty: a lack of familiarity among students with online learning and 
with the teaching and learning methods used in a MOOC (Liyanagunawardena, Williams & Adams, 
2013). At the Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, a service connected to a mobile app called 
MyLearningMentor has been created specifically to help students adjust to MOOC style learning 
(Gutiérrez-Rojas, Alario-Hoyos, Pérez-Sanagustín, Leony, & Delgado-Kloos, 2014). It  
aims to scaffold self-learning in MOOCs and improve learners’ performance by providing 
personalized planning, tips and hints for time management, study habits and teamwork, and a 
meeting point for people who need help to keep pace with the MOOC and need to know who can 
offer them support (mentors). (p. 44) 
Such an approach enables local customization of support needs. The Open University (UK) has created a 
MOOC which has a similar goal, but specifically geared to language professionals and second language 
learners. The Open Translation Tools and Practices MOOC deals with topics such as the use of online 
dictionaries, translation tools such as Google Translate, and subtitling tools such as Amara. Building this 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology  12 
kind of literacy in information retrieval and language learning tools can be of significant help to students 
in isolated environments. 
Outlook 
MOOCs seem likely to be more than a passing fad, but they also are likely to evolve in a variety of ways 
in the future. How that will happen no one knows for sure, but below are seven possible directions. 
More Options for Credentialing from Completion of MOOCs 
Most MOOC platforms now offer some form of certification for course completion, which usually comes 
with a fee attached. Also of increasing interest is awarding  "badges" for course completion, such as 
Mozilla’s Open Badges system. Through the Iraq University Linkages Program and its Community 
Solutions Program, IREX is launching a digital badge program. Badges and other forms of learning 
certification are likely to be a growing component of e-portfolios, as students seek to document learning 
of all kinds, both formal and informal. We are already seeing a movement towards professional 
development in MOOC offerings and certifications, which is likely to accelerate. As MOOC-based 
training gains traction, it’s likely we will see more mechanisms for verifying student identity and 
preventing fraud, cheating, and plagiarism. Grouping courses together, such as Coursera is doing now 
with their Coursera Specializations Program, is likely to be a growth area, as professionals seek to gain 
certification by completing a sequence of courses. The company Academic Partnerships has created a 
new program called Mooc2Degree, which aims to integrate MOOC courses into a student’s academic 
degree. We are also seeing MOOC platforms dedicated to specialized areas of study, such as the Marginal 
Revolution University, for studies in economics. Also likely are more MOOCs from alternative providers, 
such as museums, professional organizations, or interest groups. There is also a growing interest in 
MOOCs for corporate training. 
Growth in Learning Analytics Applied to MOOCs 
There is tremendous interest in taking advantage of the extensive data tracking by the major MOOC 
platforms to analyze learning patterns and identify key areas likely to need additional learner support. 
Online learning is a relatively new phenomenon, so that more research is needed to learn more about what 
works and what doesn’t. Of particular importance are differentiated studies identifying discipline-based 
techniques: what works in computer science is not likely to be successful in art history. One typical aspect 
of MOOCs that would be useful to analyze is the effectiveness of peer ranking of contributions to 
discussion forums or other course assignments. Useful as well would be studies examining what mix of 
MOOC components optimizes learning outcomes. This would require some experimentation with 
different pedagogical models and the use of control groups to draw meaningful comparisons. For the most 
part, MOOC platforms have instituted their own proprietary analytics systems, which are available only 
within that platform.  However, we are seeing substantial interest in open analytics architectures 
(Siemens, 2011).  Examples of such systems are edX Insights and Tin Can. They provide options for 
integration beyond the MOOC platform by providing a common data repository and a set of APIs 
(application programming interface) to access that data (Mitros, Agarwal & Paruchuri, 2014). 
More Involvement in Planning and Teaching by Information Specialists, Especially Librarians 
Students enroll in MOOCs because they are curious about a topic. Helping students find additional 
resources should be part of all MOOCs. That might seem obvious, but many MOOCs are structured and 
delivered as one-time events, with little regard to how the knowledge from the course might be extended 
or integrated with other resources related to the course topic. Librarians can be of substantial help in this 
process, as demonstrated in a MOOC recently taught at my university (UNIV 200: Inquiry and the Craft 
of Argument), in which librarians played a substantial role. Librarians are beginning to evaluate their 
changing role in an educational environment where MOOCs are likely to remain a major player (Wilson 
& Gruzd, 2014). As is the case in the development of educational games, collaboration is key to a 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology  13 
successful MOOC. Helping users learn to learn and to find reliable information is of great assistance in 
developing learner autonomy. 
More Openness in MOOC Content 
With the exception of EdX, the major MOOC platforms are proprietary and closed. Even more locked 
down is the course content from MOOCs. Content is typically available only during the length of the 
course, and the terms of use preclude out-of-course use, reuse, or distribution. Some individual MOOCs 
are moving away from such restrictions and making content available as open educational resources 
(OER). This is the case, for example, with the SpeakApps tool and data from the Open University of 
Catalonia, which is part of the European Lifelong Learning Program. As Liyanagunawardena, Williams, 
and Adams (2014) comment, the incorporation of OER into MOOCs would be a boon to local 
development of educational resources:  
For higher education policymakers, administrators and educators in the developing world, while 
(used judiciously) OERs might offer them a basis for more cheaply developing their own fit-for-
purpose (socially, culturally, and targeted to the needs and abilities of their learners) higher 
education systems, MOOCs may offer their learners a take-it-or-leave-it...colonial educational 
experience dependent on technologies only available to the already-privileged in those countries. 
(p. 5)  
The OER University has been founded to facilitate the use of OER in MOOC’s; the project represents 
over 20 universities from a variety of countries. The African Virtual University (15 universities from 10 
African countries) has developed OER in math and science and is likely to be moving from an emphasis 
on developing textbooks to an emphasis on shared online learning. Developing a language learning 
MOOC could be jump-started by using open learning resources from the Foreign Service Institute, the 
Center for Open Educational Resources and Language Learning (COERLL) at the University of Texas, or 
other OER repositories. 
Greater Modularity in MOOC Structure 
EdX is the only major MOOC platform that enables and encourages full integration of third-party tools 
and content into a MOOC. Learning content and assessments from the LearningOnline Network (LON-
CAPA) repository, for example, can be incorporated into an EdX course. Because it supports the Learning 
Tools Interoperability standard (LTI), integrated content from outside services and tools can be 
authenticated and integrated into the assessment system. Scores for quizzes or tests offered by an LTI tool 
provider such as a publisher or content repository can automatically be sent to the online grade book. This 
enables rich content—commercial or open source—to be fully integrated into the course, with the 
possibility of incorporating more sophisticated assessment types than are typically used in a MOOC. Also 
possible through a modular structure is the integration of digital games—a course component that has the 
potential for maintaining student interest and motivation (see the recent special issue of LLT on gaming 
and language learning). The e-adventure gaming platform, which has been used to create language 
learning games, has been successfully integrated into the EdX platform (Freire, del Blanco & Fernández-
Manjón, 2014). The OpenMOOC platform (from Seville, Spain) has been designed to be open and 
modular. 
Increased Adaptation of MOOCs to Mobile Environments 
A recent study showed that the vast majority of MOOC users are not the educationally underserved, but 
those already holding university degrees (Christensen, Steinmetz, Alcorn, Bennett, Woods, & Emanuel, 
2013). An article in the Guardian has similar findings. There are mobile apps available for the major 
platforms but they do not support all course activities. Additionally, they typically require smart phones 
running recent versions of iOS or Android. If the content were made available in HTML5 or EPUB 3, 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology  14 
wider access would be possible. In platforms being developed specifically for wide distribution and use in 
developing countries, web apps, rather than proprietary apps, would allow for possible browser-based 
access outside the major mobile vendors. Developing new courses using the techniques of progressive 
enhancement would provide basic access to all users and an enhanced experience for those with better 
hardware and access to a fast network. IREX’s Community Solutions Program, which offers professional 
development across the globe principally through mobile learning, could be a model in this effort. The 
Qualt platform (UK) was designed specifically for mobile course delivery; not surprisingly, it is targeting 
its offerings to India. 
More Language MOOCs in Targeted Areas: English as a Foreign Language, Less Commonly Taught 
Languages, and Languages for Special Purposes 
The British Council will be offering an English MOOC through FutureLearn. This is likely to be a high-
profile project, given that it promises to prepare participants to pass the IELTS exam (International 
English Language Testing System). The reputation of the British Council, along with the free cost, should 
make this an enticing alternative to the commercial prep courses available online. The University of 
Oregon has partnered with Cousera to offer short MOOCS on teaching English as a foreign language. 
While the British Council's MOOC addresses a worldwide interest in learning English, courses in less 
commonly taught languages address a scarcity of opportunity for instruction. The courses are not likely to 
be "massive" in enrollment, but instead in geographic reach. MOOCs may offer a compelling opportunity 
for more wide-spread study of indigenous languages. A third area within language learning in which we 
are seeing significant activity is in languages for special purposes. MOOCs offer a convenient vehicle for 
reaching professionals or trainees who need specialized language skills. They are also already being used 
for students wanting to focus on a particular needed skill such as reading or writing. 
 
REFERENCES 
Bali, M. (2014). MOOC pedagogy: Gleaning good practice from existing MOOCs. MERLOT Journal of 
Online Learning and Teaching, 10(1), 44–55. Retrieved from http://jolt.merlot.org/vol10no1/bali_0314.pdf 
Bayne, S & Ross, J. (2014). The pedagogy of the Massive Open Online Course (MOOC): The UK view. 
London: The Higher Education Academy. Retrieved from http://www-
new1.heacademy.ac.uk/assets/documents/elt/HEA_Edinburgh_MOOC_WEB_240314.pdf 
Bull, S. & Kay, J. (2007). Student models that invite the learner in: The SMILI open learner modelling 
framework. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education. 17(2), 89–120. 
Christensen, G., Steinmetz, A., Alcorn, B., Bennett, A. Woods, D. & Emanuel, E. (2013). The MOOC 
phenomenon: Who takes massive open online courses and why? Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania 
Provost Office. Retrieved from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2350964 
Chun, D. (2011). Developing intercultural communicative competence through online exchanges. CALICO 
Journal 28(2), 392–419. 
Coetzee, D., Fox, A., Hearst, M., & Hartmann, B. (2014). Should your MOOC forum use a reputation system? 
In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing (pp. 
1176–1187). New York, NY: ACM. Retrieved from http://delivery.acm.org/10.1145/2540000/2531657/p1176-
coetzee.pdf?ip=128.172.52.254&id=2531657&acc=OA&key=B33240AC40EC9E30.533CCA13AFAFA5FC.
4D4702B0C3E38B35.40D343A01C51265B&CFID=395344684&CFTOKEN=75641412&__acm__=1406897
545_e29b766eba833b3ed7003ccc 
Delbano, A. (2013). MOOCs of Hazard. The New Republic. Retrieved from 
http://www.newrepublic.com/article/112731/moocs-will-online-education-ruin-university-experience 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology  15 
Eisenberg, M. & Fischer, G. (2014). MOOCs: A perspective from the learning sciences. In J. L. Polman, 
Polman, J., Kyza, E., O'Neill, D., Tabak, I., Penuel, W., … D'Amico, L. (Eds.), Learning and becoming in 
practice. 11th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (ICLS) 2014 (pp. 190–197), Boulder, CO: 
International Society of the Learning Sciences. Retrieved from 
http://l3d.cs.colorado.edu/%7Egerhard/papers/2014/ICLS-MOOCS.pdf 
Freire, M., del Blanco, A, Fernández-Manjón, B. (2014). Serious games as edX MOOC activities. Global 
Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON), 2014 IEEE (pp. 867–871), 3–5 April 2014. Retrieved from 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6826198 
Guided English Self-Study (2013). Sprachzentrum, Technische Universität München. Retrieved from 
http://www.sprachenzentrum.tum.de/fileadmin/w00bjd/www/PDF/WiSe13-14/GESS_poster.pdf 
Gutiérrez-Rojas, I., Alario-Hoyos, C., Pérez-Sanagustín, M., Leony, D., Delgado-Kloos, C. (2014). 
Scaffolding self-learning in MOOCs. In Cress, U. & Kloos, C. (Eds.), Proceedings of the European MOOC 
Stakeholder Summit 2014 (pp. 43–49). Lausanne, Switzerland: PAU Education. Retrieved from 
http://educate.gast.it.uc3m.es/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/Scaffolding_self-learning_in_MOOCs.pdf 
Kamenetz, A. (2013). The MOOC Revolution. The Weekly Wonk @ newamerica. Retrieved from 
http://weeklywonk.newamerica.net/articles/the-mooc-evolution/ 
Kramsch, C., and Thorne, S. (2002). Foreign language learning as global communicative practice. In D. Block 
and D. Cameron (Eds.), Language learning and teaching in the age of globalization (pp. 83–100). London, 
UK: Routledge. 
Liyanagunawardena, T., Williams, S. and Adams, A. (2013) The impact and reach of MOOCs: A developing 
countries’ perspective. eLearning Papers (33). Reading, UK: University of Reading. Retrieved from 
http://centaur.reading.ac.uk/32452/ 
Milligan, C., Littlejohn, A. and Margaryan, A. (2014). Patterns of engagement in connectivist MOOCs. 
MERLOT Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, 9(2), 149–159. Retrieved from 
http://jolt.merlot.org/vol9no2/milligan_0613.pdf 
Mitros, P., Agarwal, A, & Paruchuri, V. (2014). MOOCs and technology to advance learning and learning 
research: Assessment in digital at-scale learning environments. Ubiquity. April, 2014, 1–9. Retrieved from 
http://delivery.acm.org/10.1145/2600000/2591795/a2-
mitros.pdf?ip=72.84.255.241&id=2591795&acc=OPEN&key=4D4702B0C3E38B35.4D4702B0C3E38B35.4
D4702B0C3E38B35.6D218144511F3437&CFID=395344684&CFTOKEN=75641412&__acm__=140701029
4_7d5e07126fafaed552eb3dc2286 
Saadatmand, M. & Kumpulainen, K. (2014). Participants' perceptions of learning and networking in 
connectivist MOOCs. MERLOT Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, 10(1), 16–30.  Retrieved from 
http://jolt.merlot.org/vol10no1/saadatmand_0314.pdf 
Siemens, G., Gasevic, D., Haythornthwaite, C., Dawson, J., Shum, S. B., Ferguson, R., … Baker, R. 
(2011). Open learning analytics: An integrated and modularized platform. Society for Learning Analytics 
Research (SoLAR).  Retrieved from http://solaresearch.org/OpenLearningAnalytics.pdf 
Sperber, A. (2014). This Tanzanian E-Learning Enterprise Is Beating MOOCs by Going Local. Motherboard. 
Retrieved from http://motherboard.vice.com/blog/this-tanzanian-e-learning-enterprise-is-beating-moocs-by-
going-local 
Wilson, L. and Gruzd, A. (2014). MOOCs: International information and education phenomenon? Bulletin of 
the American Society for Information Science and Technology 40(5), 35–40. 
