Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/emerging.pdf 
June 2014, Volume 18, Number 2 
pp. 9–19 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 9 
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES 
GAMES IN LANGUAGE LEARNING: OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES 
Robert Godwin-Jones, Virginia Commonwealth University 
There has been a substantial increase in recent years in the interest in using digital games 
for language learning. This coincides with the explosive growth in multiplayer online 
gaming and with the proliferation of mobile games for smart phones. It also reflects the 
growing recognition among educators of the importance of extramural, informal learning 
and the interest in finding ways to connect learning to students’ real lives. Given the 
important role that gaming currently plays in the everyday lives of adolescents and young 
adults in developed countries, this spike in interest is not surprising. However, there are a 
number of practical and pedagogical obstacles in the way of incorporating gaming into 
instructed language learning. Among those issues are: what kind of games to choose or to 
create; how to find the opportunities for language learning within gameplay; and how to 
integrate gameplay and its associated activities into the curriculum. In order to address 
these issues, we need research-generated data, which is crucial not only for learning how 
to make gaming more effective in classroom practice, but also in informing future game 
development. Collecting, analyzing, and sharing data collected from digital games is a 
major challenge, but some recent technical developments may present new opportunities. 
This column will not provide answers to the complex set of issues raised in the integration 
of gaming into language learning, but will identify and discuss some recent developments 
and point to possible future directions.  
APA Citation: Godwin-Jones, R. (2014). Games in language learning: Opportunities and 
challenges. Language Learning & Technology 18(2), 9–19 Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/emerging.pdf 
Copyright: © Robert Godwin-Jones 
GAMES IN LANGUAGE LEARNING: OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES 
Game Use in Second Language Instruction 
It’s as meaningless to make general comments about the benefits of gaming in language learning, as to 
say that technology is beneficial–it’s all in the implementation. In the case of games, there is so much 
variety in approach and scope, that gameplay affordances must be tied closely to the type of game and its 
use. There’s a world of difference between a simple drill and practice vocabulary game, completed in five 
minutes, and an immersive 3D multiplayer environment, which can continue and develop over long 
stretches of time. Likewise, there is an immense divide between engaging in an educational game as a 
class assignment and in devoting hours of free time to multiplayer gameplay, making it an essential 
component of one’s everyday life and personal identity. The fact that digital gaming plays a central role in 
the lives of a good many young people today provides a rich opportunity to connect with populations who 
may have limited interest in formal education. If language learning can be tied to popular forms of 
gaming in a way that does not inhibit its enjoyment, that’s a winning situation both for students and 
educators.  
The environments in which digital games are played can vary substantially. Researchers in India 
developed a set of simple games for rural children learning English, based on traditional village games, 
and played on loaned-out cell phones (Kumar et al., 2010). In the course of the project, a number of the 
phones had to be replaced as they were damaged by fluctuating household electrical current; others 
suffered swollen batteries from the intense summer heat. Some families had no power at all and had to 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology 10 
negotiate with village neighbors to get the phones charged. At the opposite end of the gaming spectrum is 
a project that virtually immersed users in the world of a French novel, Flaubert’s Madame Bovary 
(Cavazza, Lugrin, Pizzi & Charles, 2007). It featured a CAVE-based (computer assisted virtual 
environment) virtual world which included full body tracking and a stereoscopic display (through a 
special set of shutter glasses). The four-screen display was generated from a central server which was fed 
graphic information from eight high-powered client computers, two for each screen. The gulf illustrated 
here between low-end, portable gaming and high-end computing environments specifically designed for 
gaming is immense. However, with the advent of ever more powerful mobile devices, along with 
wearable devices such as Google Glass, the potential exists for creating advanced, immersive games that 
do not require a room full of computers. In fact, some of the most exciting developments in educational 
gaming today take advantage of both the power of current mobile devices and their portability to create 
learning opportunities that move out of the classroom and combine virtual and real worlds into a uniquely 
compelling learning experience. On the other hand, there are some interesting recent projects using a 
stationary game console, namely the Microsoft xBox Kinect, which allows users to interact with a game 
through gestures and voice commands.  SpatialEase, for example, uses Kinect for a program inspired by 
the Total Physical Response method. The Lost Manuscript is an entire course in beginning Chinese built 
around a Kinect-based interface (Chang, Sheldon, Si & Hand, 2012). 
Given the vast differences in scope and purpose, the most one can say in general about the utility of 
games is that in optimal environmental contexts, with appropriately selected and trained groups of users, 
playing a well-designed game, a number of positive and effective language learning experiences are 
possible. Peterson’s (2010) meta-analysis of games and second language learning points to a number of 
these. Games can offer an immersive environment in which extensive use is made of the target language. 
To progress in a game, players must often make active use of that language, interacting verbally with 
game objects or other players. This means that they are using language in real and meaningful ways to 
accomplish a task. It also means they use the target language in socially appropriate ways; in the game 
context pragmatic appropriateness is more important than grammatical accuracy. In the process, gamers 
are exposed to cultural and linguistic knowledge that they are unlikely to have encountered in a textbook 
or in the classroom. Typically, gamers will encounter a variety of situations calling for different kinds of 
language use, including requests for help, giving explanations, coordinating planned activities, reporting 
an action, or asking for alternative solutions (Zheng, Newgarden & Young, 2012). Such language use 
arises organically from the game and can involve interaction with players from a variety of backgrounds, 
with game and linguistic knowledge ranging from novice to expert. Players receive a constant stream of 
feedback in response to game events, player interactions, and speech input. Responses to that feedback 
engage the player in repeating, revising, and/or reformulating statements. Gameplay typically involves 
repeated actions in different contexts with increasing levels of difficulty and complexity, providing 
reinforcement of earlier introduced vocabulary and language structures. These activities are taking place 
in a safe and inviting environment which provides enjoyment and a sense of accomplishment, as progress 
through the game is recognized and rewarded (growth in game inventory, moving to a higher level, etc.).  
These are by no means automatic or universal benefits—they depend on a large number of variables, 
including not only the nature and use of the game itself but also the presence or absence of game-related 
activities, whether they be generated by an instructor or take place at the initiative of the gamer. Gamers 
typically will not only engage in gameplay, but are likely to consult websites about the game, such as 
those which give hints or help, provide background information, or offer informal chat about the game. If 
used as a class assignment, an instructor might create “wrap-around” activities for a game (Sykes, 2013). 
Those might include oral reports on game experiences, class discussions around gameplay, game 
journaling, quizzes or exercises based on game vocabulary, or skits based on characters or play action. 
Sykes & Reinhardt’s (2013) recent monograph provides examples of such related in-class activities. 
Gaming can introduce a welcome element of fun and creativity into the language classroom, not always 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology 11 
sufficiently valued in our emphasis on utilitarian and transactional language use (Pomerantz & Bell, 
2007). Language learners should have the same license as native speakers to experiment and play with 
language, increasingly recognized as an important learning and motivating factor (Kramsch, 2009). 
Because of the strong motivational factors involved, game playing can be a powerful agent for learner 
autonomy, a potential resource for long-term language maintenance, and an entry-point for gaining 
interest in learning new languages. The degree of engagement players have in gameplay and its related 
activities is often stronger and more personal than it is for school-related activities. Players create together 
what has been called an “affinity space” (Gee, 2003) in which the shared interest breaks down 
interpersonal and inter-cultural barriers, creating an open and tolerant collaborative environment. The 
give and take among players co-creates a shared space in which language too is co-constructed. This kind 
of dynamic is optimal for learning, as described in the editorial accompanying ReCALL’s special issue on 
gaming: “Games are evoking a shift away from models of learning based on information delivery toward 
theories of human development rooted in experiential problem solving and complex and spatially 
distributed forms of collaboration” (Cornillie, Thorne & Desmet, 2012, p. 245). In this sense, gaming is 
part of a learning constellation which includes other informal online activities such as participation in 
social networks, posting to online forums, or adding commentary to posted media or texts (see Sykes, 
Oskoz & Thorne, 2008).  
Commercial Games: Game-Informed Learning 
Language learning through gameplay can happen in a wide variety of ways, from a planned learning 
activity in an instructional environment to an incidental by-product of a gamer’s interactions with the 
game and its associated online activities. Equally varied is the providence of games and their intent. As 
digital gaming has increased in popularity, we’ve witnessed an ever-greater variety in types of games (see 
this recent compendium). Most games are commercial products, designed for entertainment, not 
education. This doesn’t mean they don’t have educational value, including general benefits such as 
enhancement of digital literacy, increasing socialization, and/or building self-confidence (Arnseth, 2006; 
Steinkueler, 2007). However, curricular integration of commercial, off-the-shelf (COTS) games may be 
challenging. Vocabulary use, syntactic structures, and a range of other linguistic characteristics of the 
language used cannot be determined in advance. In contrast, “serious games” created specifically for 
educational use can be tailored to specific learning and curricular needs. Unfortunately, such games are 
inevitably compared to commercial games familiar to students that were created, at great expense, with 
large teams of graphic experts, online designers, and experienced programmers. Often, educational games 
lack the sophisticated look and feel of COTS games, while the pedagogical intent is all too evident, 
sometimes interrupting the all-important “game flow” (Bellotti, Kapralos, Lee, Moreno-Ger, & Berta, 
2013). If the game is perceived solely as an assignment, a good part of the benefits are lost—especially 
the affective factors.  
Not all successful COTS games lend themselves to use in language learning. I have not seen mention of 
projects using a first-person shooter game such as Doom, or any of the many versions of racing 
adventures such as Grand Theft Auto.  Adventurous language teachers might well find interesting angles 
to exploit even in these kinds of games. One important consideration in evaluating a COTS game is the 
use of the target language. While the most widely sold games are available in multiple languages, it is not 
universally the case. Among the more popular types of COTS games that have been used in language 
learning are those which construct a virtual world in which the user interacts by taking on a role in the 
game, usually through the use of an avatar. The simulated world created can be quite similar to the real 
world or deviate substantially in time (middle ages, far future), space (another planet), and/or might take 
place in a complete fantasy world. These game environments can be open-ended, with game interest 
centered around creating and growing a user-designed environment, or they can be or task-based, with the 
goal being to complete a series of challenges or quests. One of the more popular virtual worlds has been 
Second Life, in existence now for over a decade. It is an open-ended simulation of the real world in which 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology 12 
users can create and customize particular virtual spaces. Over the years Second Life has been customized 
by learners and teachers with areas dedicated to language practice (Cooke-Plagwitz, 2008). However, 
creating such virtual spaces can be time-consuming and expensive. Second Life also is not as open or 
expansive an environment as is offered by many online gaming platforms. In fact, typical uses of Second 
Life in education involve institutionally controlled spaces, which lack the authenticity and motivating 
factors of multiplayer online games (Calongne & Hiles, 2007).  
Virtual worlds where users have to accomplish specific goals have been seen as particularly amenable to 
use in language learning. Of particular interest in recent years has been Blizzard’s World of Warcraft 
(WoW), with a number of studies examining its potential in language learning (Nardi, Ly & Harris, 2007; 
Rama, Black, Van Es, & Warschauer, 2012, Thorne, 2008; Thorne & Fisher, 2012; Thorne, Fisher & Lu, 
2012; Zheng, Neugarden, & Young, 2012). With over 12 million users, WoW is the most popular 
massively multiplayer online game (MMO) on the market today and is available in multiple languages. 
As is the case in the typical MMO, players advance through the game scenario and gain game playing 
skills by completing quests, collecting or making items, and buying and selling goods or services. In the 
process, they must communicate and negotiate with non-playing characters (NPC) as well as with other 
game players. The studies cited above have shown substantial potential in WoW and other MMO games 
for language socialization and for acquisition of skills related to just-in-time linguistic tools and services. 
This is particularly the case if player-learners are committed enough to gameplay to participate in 
auxiliary activities surrounding the game, such as game-related forums or fanfiction (i.e., extending the 
game story). Much of the data and studies on MMO come from game journals, questionnaires, and player 
interviews. Of particular usefulness are unsolicited reports on language learning experiences in MMO 
games, such as those generated by a player inquiry in a forum (Thorne & Fisher, 2012). Although there 
has been considerable work done on MMO games and language learning, there are few empirical studies 
showing gains in second language proficiency (Cornillie, Thorne & Desmet, 2012). Particularly helpful 
would be studies that seek to identify what particular user behaviors, game elements, and game resources 
seem to be the most promising for language learning. Tracking this information poses both 
methodological and technical difficulties, as the constellation of online activities and resources 
surrounding such games as WoW is so large that simply keeping track of what’s available is problematic. 
Another difficulty is that COTS games represent inaccessible black boxes with little likelihood of 
researchers gaining the ability to add tracking tools. There are tools available such as Elephant, to save 
chat logs and record other game information, but they do not provide a full picture of gameplay or of 
game-related sites used. Some researchers have used video recording of game players or eye-tracking 
methods (Collentine, 2011), but analysis of such data can be so labor-intensive and time-consuming as to 
be impractical. 
One recent study of WoW included the results of a questionnaire to players that indicated that the most 
popular aspect of playing the game was its social dimension (Thorne & Fischer, 2012). In fact, gamers 
interact with one another not only during play, but frequently before and after as well. We are starting to 
see some welcome studies on the implications of such activities for language learning (Thorne & Fischer, 
2012; Ryu, 2013). Ryu’s study indicates that the majority of language learning gain among the MMO 
gamers he studied came from “beyond game” activities. In the process, users are exposed to a wide array 
of forms of online communication. Unfortunately, as pointed out by Thorne, Black, and Sykes (2009), 
this kind of knowledge is not always valued in traditional language learning: “Digital vernaculars remain 
largely unaddressed within instructed L2 curricula or, worse, are trivialized or vilified as stigmatized 
varieties” (p. 815). The dismissive attitude towards such forms of communication is likely related to the 
negative social views of online gaming, widely seen as an isolating, unproductive, and dangerously 
addictive activity.   
Educational Games: Game-Based Learning 
In order to gather more information about game players’ activities, one option is to modify or extend a 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology 13 
commercial game, assuming that it is legally and technically possible. Researchers have reported on 
projects that have done just that, modifying for educational purposes the MMO games Ragnarok 
(Reinders & Wattana, 2011) and Divine Divinity (Vandercruysse, Vandewaetere, Cornillie, & Clarebout, 
2013). This is not a trivial undertaking, as those studies demonstrate. It might involve adding additional 
tools to the game, such as voice chat, or creating an entirely new quest scenario. Extensive professional 
help could be required in the process, such as working with voice recordings and sound effects, creating 
3D animations, or lip-syncing. An option that is more likely to be feasible with the limited financial and 
technical resources available to educational developers is to use a game-authoring template or tool. 
Developing or adapting a game specifically for educational purposes of course has advantages beyond the 
ability to capture user data. It allows game developers to focus on particular linguistic goals as well as to 
control the level of language incorporated into the game. This makes it much easier to incorporate 
gameplay into a course or curriculum, since the linguistic environment is fixed and predictable. Of course, 
the challenge remains in making the “serious game” of compelling enough interest that real user 
engagement takes place. The hope is that players will go beyond seeing gameplay as a course assignment 
and will gain enough interest to explore and experiment. Self-generated and self-directed discovery can 
further the kind of intrinsic motivation that commits users to learning more. 
A widely discussed example of a game designed for language learning is Croquelandia, created 
specifically with the goal of enhancing learners’ ability to perform requests and apologies in Spanish. The 
game was created with the Croquet open source development kit, now part of the Open Cobalt project. 
The game features an immersive environment simulating a study abroad experience. Students are 
assigned tasks within the game for which they need to interact in Spanish with objects, NCPs, and group 
members. Advancing towards the game goals requires that the students choose pragmatically correct 
utterances. While the project did not show significant concrete improvement in use of the targeted speech 
acts in Spanish, it did show an increase in students’ awareness of meta-linguistic considerations and of the 
importance of pragmatic appropriateness (Sykes, Oskoz & Thorne, 2008). In fact, the enhanced 
awareness of linguistic features tied to cultural norms and practices is an outcome that seems more likely 
to be achievable through gaming than more narrowly focused language goals. This is in keeping with 
findings resulting from students engaging in other forms of internet-mediated, cross-cultural 
communication. It’s not likely that either gaming or participation in online chats/forums will result in 
users increasing knowledge of grammatical rules, but such activities are likely to result in a gain in 
sociolinguistic skills (choosing the right registers, when to code-switch, etc.), which get scant attention in 
language classrooms.  
Given appropriate resources, language learning games or simulations that target particular linguistic or 
cultural topics can be successful, particularly if they are used in the context in which learners are highly 
motivated by external factors. A case in point is the highly touted Tactical Language and Culture Training 
System from Alelo, designed for use by US military personnel. The system makes rich use of advanced 
technologies including natural language processing, speech recognition, and artificial intelligence agents, 
to provide simulated encounters with native speakers in the target culture. A rich set of ancillary and 
support materials are included. A study of Tactical Iraqi showed overall substantial gains in language 
proficiency (Surface, Dierdorff & Watson, 2007). This is not surprising given the strong motivation on 
the part of the soldiers whose lives may well depend on being able to communicate effectively with native 
speakers. One discussion of the program, cited as evidence of its success, is that in one group of U.S. 
Marines who used the program, there were no casualties during their deployment in Iraq (Johnson, 2010). 
Most language learning game environments do not involve life or death scenarios so can hardly compete 
in terms of motivational factors. However, situations such as having to learn a language well enough to 
secure a job in a new culture or having to cope with being a refugee in a foreign land may well elicit 
nearly as strong a language learning need. 
More typical of language game development in education is the Tower of Babel project, which contrasts 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology 14 
sharply with Tactical Iraqi in technical sophistication and in target audience. This was a product of an 
EU-sponsored project to motivate students to learn languages. The game uses an alternative reality 
environment (ARG) to project a future world in which some languages are threatened with extinction and 
can only be saved “if students collaborate with each other and with ARG characters to bring people from 
different parts of Europe together by learning more about each other’s histories, traditions and daily lives 
of the people” (Connolly, Stansfield & Hainey 2011, pp. 1394-5). Secondary school students from several 
European countries collaborated to complete quests that involved solving puzzles, taking quizzes, 
translating texts, and sharing content. Students communicated in the target language they were learning. 
Given time and financial constraints, the project team elected not to build a game interface from scratch, 
but instead chose to use the Moodle learning management system and to develop a custom theme, as well 
as to create other Moodle system extensions. Screenshots of the game (p. 1396) demonstrate a valiant 
effort to imprint a game skin onto Moodle, with mixed success. While student attitudes towards the game 
were generally positive, the authors conceded that some aspects of the game did not meet students’ 
expectations and that future development would likely move to the implementation of mini-games.  
One of the features of the Tower of Babel game is ease of use, requiring users only to know how to 
navigate a website. A number of other language learning game projects have used this approach as well. 
The browser-based game NineRift, for example, was used in a project precisely because it was easy to 
install and to use (Peterson, 2012). Studies have shown that novice gamers in some MMO games do not 
show the same learning benefits as more experienced gamers (Sundqvist & Sylvén, 2012). Certainly, one 
of the clear findings of game studies is that user training is mandated if there are likely to be novice users, 
particularly if the game offers some level of complexity (Peterson, 2011). In fact, depending on the game, 
more instructor intervention could be necessary, such as, for example, assisting students in getting started 
in an MMO, or helping to find appropriate groups within the game (Rama, Black, van Es & Warschauer, 
2012). Learning to navigate successfully through online games and associated web resources can be an 
empowering experience for students and contribute to their digital literacy. On the other hand, we should 
recognize that gaming is not everyone’s cup of tea and should make allowances for individual 
preferences. That recognition should also include being cognizant of differences in gender preferences in 
game types (Boyle & Conolly, 2008). In any case, gameplay should not be introduced in a language 
classroom without an awareness of the practical, pedagogical, and personal issues involved—careful 
planning is called for. 
One additional advantage of self-developed educational tools is the ability for students to go beyond just 
playing a game to becoming involved in the game creation process. This could happen at a variety of 
levels, from students’ collaborating on developing story ideas to having students collect or edit game 
resources such as photos, audio clips, or video passages. Contributing to game creation or design can 
involve students in deep thinking about approaches to language learning. The kind of peer-level 
perspective students supply can also be valuable in shaping the game design, so that the end product looks 
like something that may engage student interest. Additionally, students may well have valuable technical 
skills to contribute. The creation of Chrono-Ops at Portland State University was largely student-driven. 
The game has an ecological theme: players are tasked with inventing sustainability projects to save the 
planet. Directions are given in one of three different languages. As part of the game, process users write 
texts, record audio, and shoot video, all of which can become assets for future players.  
Authoring Tools and Mobile Gaming 
The hot trend in gaming today is mobile. With the wide use of smart phones, there is a huge installed base 
for game playing. Mobile devices also have features that are not usually present in personal computers 
nor in game consoles, such as GPS, accelerometers, compasses, and cameras. A number of easy-to-use 
game authoring tools developed for mobile games are available, including GameSalad and 
AdventureMaker. For more advanced game design, tools such as Unity mobile or the Unreal Development 
Kit can be used. A mobile game authoring environment that has been successfully used in developing 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology 15 
games for language learning is ARIS, short for Augmented Reality and Interactive Storytelling, an open 
source platform from the University of Wisconsin at Madison. ARIS has been used to develop Mentira, 
Chrono-Ops, and Visitas de la colonia. The basics of developing a game in ARIS are surprisingly easy 
and can be learned in a few hours. The tool allows for creation of games with quite interesting features, 
that combine a virtual environment with real-world locations. QR (Quick Response) codes, for example, 
can be posted in designated areas, which when scanned with a camera provide information on that 
location or further game directions. Game players have access within the app to recording audio and 
video, and there is even an image matching functionality, which compares photos taken with those in the 
game, triggering possible game events. The authoring process itself is of course the easy part - much more 
difficult is devising a compelling story, finding or creating appropriate media, and deciding on user 
interactions. Games created with ARIS can be simple, or quite complex. Mentira is an example of the 
latter, consisting of 70 pages of dialogue and text, 150 graphics, and 4 videos. The game combines virtual 
experiences with real-world visits to locations in Albuquerque, New Mexico. The object of the game is to 
solve a murder mystery and involves students gaining information from site visits and from conversations 
with NPCs in the game. As is the case with all ARIS games, Mentira can be downloaded from the project 
site. 
This kind of place-based augmented reality game is in line with the current interest in applied linguistics 
in emphasizing local language experiences and in connecting academic learning to real-world 
experiences. Mentira illustrates another advantage of self-created games, easy integration into the 
curriculum. In this case, the game was an integral part of a fourth-semester Spanish class, with the hope 
that interest in the game experience might be a contributing motivating factor for students to continue 
their study of Spanish. Contributing, too, to that strategy was demonstrating to the students the real world, 
practical value of speaking Spanish, by sending them out into a local Spanish-speaking community. This 
moves the concept of place from its normally somewhat abstract form in the foreign language classroom 
to something real and meaningful. I agree with the creators of Mentira, that ”place is not a mere 
particularity, an application for academic knowledge, but has a profound influence on what and how we 
learn, and is itself generative”(Holden & Sykes, 2011, p. 4). In fact we know that attaching learning 
activities to concrete places helps long-term retention. 
Games developed with ARIS run exclusively on Apple iOS devices, which may be a concern depending 
on the intended target audience. For use on Android devices an authoring system that has seen 
considerable use in Europe is e-Adventure, developed at Complutense University in Madrid. Games 
created with the e-Adventure can also be used in web browsers (through a Java applet). Since it is 
designed for both desktop and mobile devices, mobile games created with e-Adventure do not take as full 
advantage of the features of a mobile device as those made with ARIS. As is necessarily the case with 
template-based game authoring tools, the look and feel of the game is configurable only up to a certain 
extent. Here, for example, only two major 3D scenarios are available, an open outdoor environment and a 
closed room. Within these constraints customizations are possible. Using an authoring tool is likely the 
only choice for most language educators interested in creating games. Even with the head start templates 
or authoring tools supply, game development is still a time-consuming process. For any game project 
beyond something very simple, a collaborative team will be needed. 
Outlook 
One of the key advantages to using a self-developed game is the ability to track data in order to be able to 
ascertain how the game is being played, so as to correlate game activity with individual learner outcomes 
and attitudes. Authoring tools designed for educational use incorporate mechanisms for collecting data 
and for doing some kinds of assessments. They may also include means for that data to be shared with 
other applications, as appropriate. Most games do not have any kind of reporting out functionality, but 
that is possible from within self-developed game environments. A widely used protocol currently in use 
in education to share data among trusted applications is the Learning Tools Interoperability standard 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology 16 
(LTI) from IMS International. It allows, for example, third-party tools to interact with learning 
management systems (LMS) such as Moodle or Blackboard. Adding an LTI component to a game allows 
for user data to be sent to parts of LMS, including the online grade book. Information sent could include, 
for example, overall time spent, game levels reached, tools or services used, or even transcripts of student 
text input. Several games developers such as Filament and Funbrain have made their games LTI 
compatible.  
There is currently considerable interest in the educational community worldwide in being able to save 
evidence of students’ informal learning alongside formal institutional reports. Mechanisms and standards 
are being developed and deployed to make that feasible, with the goal of collecting individual learner data 
in an online portfolio that represents both formal and extramural learning experiences. The Council of 
Europe’s Autobiography of Intercultural Encounters aims to enable that process. The information 
collected could very well include gameplay, particularly for educational game experiences. One of the 
ways that this could be done is through a successor to the SCORM specification called the Experience 
API or simply xAPI. This defines a standard way of recording discrete user learning experiences, whether 
coming from formal educational endeavors, on-the-job training, MOOC courses, intelligent tutoring 
programs, or virtual game environments. The structure is deceptively simple, based on the idea of triples 
(as in the RDF specification – resource description framework), namely actor (subject), action (verb), and 
result (object). This allows the flexibility for data from a great variety of activities to be represented. The 
data is saved to a Learning Record Store (LRS), unique to every individual. This recording system can be 
used on individuals or for groups of learners (data sent to multiple LRSs) and can be sent from mobile 
devices, or adapted for use in game consoles. Significantly, for game tracking, data can be sent from a 
one-time event, or recorded over a period of time. The company Knowledge Guru has integrated xAPI 
into their games; they feature a game creation wizard for building simple online games. The e-Adventure 
game authoring tool is being modified currently to use xAPI (Martínez-Ortíz at al., 2013).  
The xAPI specification is similar in intent and structure to a joint project from Google, Microsoft, and 
Facebook called ActivityStreams. It also resembles in functionality the Gleaner framework (Game 
Learning Analytics for Education), currently being used in the game prototype ”Lost in space”. Another 
standard that may be of interest is the Caliper Learning Analytics Framework from IMS international.  
It’s impossible to tell at this point which, if any, of these initiatives will prove viable, as all are recent 
developments. Having a standard way to format and record user milestones would be helpful across a 
broad range of applications, services, and learning opportunities. Gaming, when used in education today, 
is most often an isolated activity not fully integrated into the course structure and likely not credited in the 
same way as other course activities. Having standard data collection methods and specifications would 
also be a boon to game researchers, as it would enable wider data collection as well as data sharing. 
Studies of gaming in the service of language learning often suffer from particularism—with results so tied 
to individual game experiences in a particular context that they provide little or no guidance—or from 
overgeneralization in the form of general findings linked to socialization, literacy gains, or growth in 
learner autonomy. Being able to compare results across a large number of studies of the same game (with 
information detailing context of use) could be helpful in resolving the current difficult questions of 
learning benefits from gaming: what kinds of games, what elements of games, what use of games. 
 
REFERENCES 
Arnseth, H. (2006). Learning to play or playing to learn: A critical account of the models of 
communication informing educational research on computer gameplay. Game Studies 6(1). Retrieved 
from http://gamestudies.org/0601/articles/arnseth 
Bellotti, F., Kapralos, B., Lee, K., Moreno-Ger, P., & Berta, R. (2013). Assessment in and of serious 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology 17 
games: An overview. Advances in human-computer interaction, 1–12. Retrieved from 
http://www.hindawi.com/journals/ahci/2013/136864/  
Boyle, E., & Conolly, T. (2008). Games for learning: Does gender make a difference? In T. Conolly & M. 
Stansfield (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2nd European Conference on Games Based Learning (pp. 69–76). 
Reading, UK: Academic Publishing.  
Cavazza, M., Lugrin, J., Pizzi, D. & Charles, F. (2007). Madame Bovary on the Holodeck: Immersive 
interactive storytelling. In Proceedings of the 15th international conference on Multimedia (pp. 651–660). 
New York, NY: ACM. 
Chang, B., Sheldon, L., Si, M., & Hand, A (2012). Foreign language learning in immersive virtual 
environments, In Proceedings of the IS&T/SPIE Electronic Imaging, (pp. 2–9). Burlingame, CA: SPIE 
Digital Library. 
Collentine, K. (2011). Learner autonomy in a task-based 3D world and production.  Language Learning 
& Technology, 15(3), 50-67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/collentine.pdf 
Calongne, C. & Hiles, J. (2007). Blended Realities: A virtual tour of education in Second Life. 12th 
Annual TCC Worldwide Online Conference (pp. 70-90). Retrieved from 
http://etec.hawaii.edu/proceedings/2007/calongne.pdf 
Connolly, T., Stansfield, M. & Hainey, T. (2011). An alternate reality game for language learning: 
ARGuing for multilingual motivation. Computers & Education 57(1), 1389–1415. 
Cooke-Plagwitz, J. (2008). New directions in CALL: An objective introduction to Second Life. CALICO 
Journal 25(3), 547-557. 
Cornillie, F., Clarebout, G., & Desmet, P. (2012). Between learning and playing? Exploring learners’ 
perceptions of corrective feedback in an immersive game for English pragmatics. ReCALL, 24(3), 257–
278.  
Cornillie, F., Thorne, S. L., & Desmet, P. (2012). Editorial: Digital games for language learning: from 
hype to insight? ReCALL, 24(3), 243–256. 
Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York, NY: 
Palgrave Macmillan.  
Holden, C. & Sykes, J. (2011). Leveraging mobile games for place-based language learning. International 
Journal of Game-Based Learning (IJGBL), 1(2), 122. 
Johnson, W. (2010). Serious use of a serious game for language learning. International Journal of 
Artificial Intelligence in Education 20, 175–195. 
Kramsch, C. (2009). The multilingual subject. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.  
Kumar A., Tewari, A., Shroff G., Chittamuru, D., Kam, M. & Canny, J. (2010). An exploratory study of 
unsupervised mobile learning in rural India. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 743–752). New York, NY: ACM. 
Martínez-Ortíz, I., del Blanco, A., Torrente, J., Serrano, A., Moreno-Ger, P., Fernández-Manjón, B., 
Marchiori, E. (2013). Addressing serious games interoperability: The e-adventure journey. JADLET 
Journal of Advanced Distributed Learning Technology, (1), 60–76. 
Nardi, B., Ly, S. & Harris, J. (2007). Learning conversations in World of Warcraft. 40th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 1–10). Retrieved from 
http://evols.library.manoa.hawaii.edu/bitstream/handle/10524/1601/Nardi-HICSS.pdf?sequence=1 
Peterson, M. (2010). Computerized games and simulations in computer-assisted language learning: A 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology 18 
meta-analysis of research. Simulation & Gaming, 41(1), 72–93. 
Peterson, M. (2011). Digital gaming and second language development: Japanese learners interactions in 
a MMORPG. Digital Culture & Education, 3(1), 56–73. 
Peterson, M. (2012). Learner interaction in a massively multiplayer online role-playing game 
(MMORPG): A sociocultural discourse analysis. ReCALL 24(3), 361–380. 
Pomerantz, A. & Bell, N. (2007). Learning to play, playing to learn: FL learners as multicompetent 
language users. Applied Linguistics 28(4), 556–578. 
Rama, P., Black, R., van Es, E. & Warschauer, M. (2012). Affordances for second language learning in 
World of Warcraft. ReCALL 24(3), 322–338. 
Reinders, H., & Wattana, S. (2012). Talk to me! Games and students’ willingness to communicate. In H. 
Reinders (Ed.), Digital games in language learning and teaching (pp. 156–188). Basingstoke, UK: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
Reinhardt, J., & Sykes, J. M. (2012). Conceptualizing digital game-mediated L2 learning and pedagogy: 
Game-enhanced and game-based research and practice. In H. Reinders (Ed.), Digital games in language 
learning and teaching (pp. 32–49). Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Ryu, D. (2013). Play to learn, learn to play: Language learning through gaming vulture. ReCALL 25(2), 
286–301. 
Steinkuehler, C. (2007). Massively multiplayer online gaming as a constellation of literacy practices. 
eLearning, 4(3), 297–318. 
Sundqvist, P. & L. K. Sylvén (2012). World of VocCraft: Computer games and Swedish learners' L2 
vocabulary. In H. Reinders (Ed.), Digital games in language learning and teaching (237–267). 
Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.  
Surface, E. A., Dierdorff, E. C., & Watson, A. (2007). Special operations language training software 
measurement of effectiveness study: Tactical Iraqi study final report. Tampa, FL: Special Operations 
Forces Language Office. 
Sykes, J. (2013), “’Just’ playing games? A look at the use of digital games for language learning”, The 
Language Educator, October, 2013, 32–35. 
Sykes, J., Oskoz, A.  & Thorne, S. (2008). Web 2.0, synthetic immersive environments, and mobile 
resources for language education. CALICO Journal 25(3), 528-546. 
Sykes, J., & Reinhardt, J. (2013). Language at play: Digital games in second and foreign language 
teaching and learning. Boston, MA: Pearson. 
Thorne, S. L. (2008). Transcultural communication in open internet environments and massively 
multiplayer online games. In S. Magnan (Ed.), Mediating Discourse Online (pp. 305–327). Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Thorne, S., Black, R. & Sykes, J. (2009). Second language use, socialization, and learning in internet 
interest communities and online gaming. Modern Language Journal, 93(0), 802–821.  
Thorne, S. & Fischer, I. (2012). Online gaming as sociable media. ALSIC: Apprentissage des Langues et 
Systèmes d’Information et de Communication, 15(1): 1–25. Retrieved from http://alsic.revues.org/2450 
Thorne, S., Fischer, I., & Lu, X. (2012). The semiotic ecology and linguistic complexity of an online 
game world. ReCALL, 24(3), 279–301. 
Vandercruysse, S., Vandewaetere, M., Cornillie, F. & Clarebout, G. (2013). Competition and students’ 
Robert Godwin-Jones Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges 
 
Language Learning & Technology 19 
perceptions in a game-based language learning environment. Education Tech Research, 61, 927–950. 
Zheng, D., Newgarden, K. & Young, M. Multimodal analysis of language learning in World of Warcraft 
play: Languaging as values-realizing. ReCALL 24(3), 339–360. 
 
OTHER MEDIA 
Chrono-Ops. (2012). Portland State University. 
Croquelandia. (2007). University of Minnesota. 
Divine Divinity. (2002). Larian Studios. 
Mentira. (2009). University of New Mexico. 
Ragnarok. (2002). Gravity Co. 
Second Life. (2003). Linden Research, Inc. 
Tactical Iraqi. (2006). Alelo. 
Tower of Babel. (2009). ARG Education. 
Visitas de la Colonia. (2012). University of New Mexico. 
World of Warcraft. (2004). Blizzard Entertainment. 
