Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/parketyanghsieh.pdf 
October 2014, Volume 18, Number 3 
pp. 148–172 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 148 
UNIVERSITY LEVEL SECOND LANGUAGE READERS’ ONLINE 
READING AND COMPREHENSION STRATEGIES 
Jaehan Park, Indiana University 
Jae-Seok Yang, Indiana University 
Yi Chin Hsieh, Indiana University 
With the growing prevalence of Web 2.0 technologies and use of online resources in their 
classrooms, language learners have increasing exposure to online texts. In this study we 
attempted to understand how university level second language (L2) readers construct 
meaning when reading online. We investigated L2 readers’ information-seeking strategies 
and decision-making processes as they read online. Seven participants were asked to read 
two online texts and answer comprehension questions. Observation, think-aloud protocols, 
and interviews were our main sources of data. Through careful thematic coding analysis, 
we were able to characterize L2 readers’ processes of constructing meaning while reading 
online using Internet resources. The findings indicate that L2 readers employ considerable 
prior knowledge of the structure of both offline and online resources to aid their online 
reading. Also, they follow a recursive pattern of self-regulated reading strategies when 
they construct meanings. Some themes highlighted by the study include L2 readers’ online 
knowledge construction, their demonstration of cognitive flexibility, and the emergence of 
new literacy skills. 
Keywords: Reading, Literacy, Language Learning Strategies 
APA Citation: Park, J., Yang, J., & Hsieh, Y. C. (2014). University level second language 
readers’ online reading and comprehension strategies. Language Learning & Technology, 
18(3), 148–172. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/parkyanghsieh.pdf 
Received: October 14, 2012; Accepted: November 26, 2013; Published: October 1, 2014 
Copyright: © Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh 
INTRODUCTION 
As the most broadly used technology for information gathering, the Internet has become one of the most 
important contexts for education. Over 2.9 billion individuals use the Internet (World Wide Web 
Consortium, 2014), and as the number of users of the Internet has increased, literacy practices, 
particularly in the area of reading (Coiro, 2011), have changed in response to the challenges and resources 
of the new media. Past studies have shown that proficient first language (L1) speakers use a variety of 
reading strategies to construct meaning (Langer, Bartolome, Vasquez, & Lucas, 1990; Pressley & 
Afflerbach, 1995), while more recent studies have determined that online reading requires comprehension 
“practices, skills, and dispositions” (Castek, Coiro, Hartman, Henry, Leu, & Zawilinski, 2007, p. 38) that 
go beyond what traditional reading comprehension strategies can inform (Castek et al., 2007; Leu, 
McVerry, O’Byrne, Kiili, Zawilinski, Everett-Cacopardo, . . .Forzani, 2011; Coiro, 2003, Coiro & Dobler, 
2007; Hartman, Morsink, & Zheng, 2010). To become successful readers in the digital age, readers need 
both traditional reading strategies and new skills associated with reading online texts (Afflerbach & Cho, 
2009; Coiro & Dobler, 2007).  
Online reading has become a major source of input for ESL/EFL learners in that the Internet provides 
diverse reading materials with the advantage of instant access to a variety of support resources that can 
facilitate reading comprehension. Previous research has explored online reading strategies of L1 speakers 
of English (Coiro & Dobler, 2007; Coiro, Knobel, Lankshear, & Leu, 2008; Leu et al., 2007; Leu, Kinzer, 
Coiro, & Cammack, 2004) and L2 speakers of German (Lück, 2008), French (Barrière & Duquette, 2002), 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 149 
and English (Kol & Schcolnik, 2000; Lin & Chen, 2007; Mokhtari & Richard, 2004). However, more 
research is needed to understand L2 readers’ strategy use for online texts. In order to develop  L2 online 
readers who can use multiple ways of understanding online texts, there is a pressing need to understand 
L2 users’ online reading strategies and their resource use. A growing body of research has begun to 
explore ESL/EFL online readers’ patterns (Akyel & Erçetin, 2009;; Chun, 2001; Konish, 2003; Park & 
Kim, 2011). Nevertheless, in a review of research on L2 online reading, Chun (2011) pointed out that 
there is a lack of research that investigates how computer software might help activate L2 readers’ 
background knowledge and called for more research on the role of knowledge of text structures and of 
discourse organization. This study is an answer to her call in that we have explored how seven advanced 
online readers employ online reading strategies in order to comprehend non-linear online texts, such as 
blog postings and news articles. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
Reading as a Meaning Construction Process 
Reading is considered to be a process of active meaning construction (Beach, 1993; Langer, Bartolome, 
Vasquez, & Lucas, 1990; NICHD, 2000). In this process, readers make use of both linguistic information 
from the external printed text (Langer et al., 1990) as well as their own internal background knowledge 
(Coiro & Dobler, 2007). In the Internet space, the external text may include multiple modalities of 
knowledge representation such as texts, graphics, video clips and audio resources. As an analytical 
framework for investigating the external and personal resources ESL learners use to support their online 
reading comprehension in this complex environment, we applied the notion of reading as a meaning 
construction process to non-linear online reading,in which the text does not follow a fixed sequence but 
ones in which the text might be embedded in links or presented in varied modalities. 
Self-regulated Reading Strategies 
The term “self-regulated” has been used to describe learners who learn strategically with metacognitive 
awareness of their own learning (Winne & Perry, 2000; Zimmerman, 1990). Hacker (1998) proposed the 
notion of self-regulated reading to elucidate readers’ evaluative and repairing processes in reading. 
Skilled readers regulate their reading by using and evaluating strategies to increase their reading 
efficiency in printed text (Mosenthal & Kirsch, 1991). Coiro and Dobler applied the concept of self-
regulated reading in the context of online reading and expanded the term to mean “the dual metacognitive 
processes of evaluation and regulation that occur during reading on the Internet” (2007, p. 219). With 
such metacognition, readers monitor their online reading processes by evaluating the relevance and 
accuracy of multiple online sources (Block, 1992; Coiro, 2011; Konishi, 2003; Lück, 2008; Mokhtari & 
Sheorey, 2002; Phakiti, 2003), and actively engage in problem solving processes such as adjusting 
reading rate and rereading difficult text (Anderson, 2003) as well as skimming and scanning texts (Lück, 
2008). We adopted the expanded notion of self-regulation as part of our theoretical framework. Given its 
focus on readers’ online reading metacognitive awareness, it provides an instrument to explore the nature 
of L2 online reading processes and how L2 readers manage their reading comprehension.  
Cognitive Flexibility 
Another framework that guides our study is the theory of cognitive flexibility (Spiro, 2004; Spiro, 
Coulson, Feltovich, & Anderson, 2004; Spiro & Jehng, 1990). In Internet reading, according to this 
theory, readers are expected to construct meanings from the information provided in different modalities 
as well as to strategically navigate through the multiple hyperlinks for reading comprehension and 
meaning construction. Such hypertext reading actually provides an environment in which readers are 
allowed to develop their cognitive strategies by trying to assemble knowledge from various sources of 
information (Brandl, 2002; Spiro et al., 2004). Researchers have probed the development and practice of 
online readers’ cognitive flexibility. In Al-Seghayer’s (2005) study, such cognitive strategy use was 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 150 
greatly assisted when ESL learners were presented with an organizational device that provided them with 
an outline of the upcoming text. Ebner and Ehri (2013), who used a think-aloud protocol in their study to 
maintain online readers' engagement in their vocabulary learning on the Internet, found that participants’ 
proactive and self-regulated learning reinforced cognitive flexibility when they learned word meanings 
from multiple online resources. Some skilled readers learn to cope with hypertext reading by 
experimenting with various ways of exploring online resources, while struggling or beginning learners 
may need teacher demonstrations of such cognitive processes (Brandl, 2002). Our study supports as well 
as extends the theory of cognitive flexibility by documenting online readers’ emerging cognitive 
flexibility during information searching and reading comprehension. 
Online Reading Strategies 
Coiro (2003) has argued that the notion of reading comprehension ought to be broadened to include the 
ability to learn, comprehend, and interact with technology in a meaningful way. She suggests that three 
important aspects of reading (reader, text, and task) need to be expanded upon and argues that curriculum 
(i.e. literacy instruction, assessment, and professional development programs for teachers) should be 
modified to accommodate the changes brought about by the advent of hypertext. Damico and Baildon 
(2007), in their study of reading behaviors of ninth graders enrolled in an international school in East Asia, 
found that a number of factors, including purpose for reading, inquiry questions, beliefs about topics, and 
ability to consider multiple perspectives, together shape the ways learners interact with texts. They also 
confirmed that readers' purposes and their own perspectives greatly affect their Internet reading processes 
(Bartlett, 1932). Moreover, Leu, Zawilinski, Castek, Banerjee, Housand, and Liu (2008) explored the 
nature of reading processes of 53 seventh-graders with advanced online reading ability. They reported 
that the students go through a series of steps of inquiry using online texts: developing questions, locating 
information, evaluating the usefulness of information, synthesizing information, and communicating 
information.  
Second Language Online Reading Strategies 
In particular, previous research on online reading in L2 contexts has demonstrated that L2 users employ 
unique and strategic approaches for online reading comprehension (Akyel & Erçetin, 2009; Huang, Chern, 
& Lin, 2009; Konishi, 2003; Park & Kim, 2011). Konishi (2003) studied L2 readers’ strategic patterns for 
browsing and searching information tasks and found that L2 speakers used local strategies (e.g., 
commenting on the meaning of words) and global strategies (e.g., using background knowledge, 
evaluating external sources from the Web). Moreover, L2 readers were engaged in metacognitive process 
such as setting goals of reading, monitoring understanding of the text, and revising their strategy use. 
Akyel and Erçetin (2009) found their L2 learners used such strategies as consulting online glossaries to 
support L2 online reading comprehension. Also the immediate access to glossary annotations 
compensated for the participants’ lack of prior knowledge. Huang et al. (2009) reported that L2 online 
readers predominantly used such support strategies as translation, dictionary consultation, and 
highlighting. Use of these support strategies was a strong predictor of the recall scores of all participants. 
Even though some of these reading strategies, such as using a dictionary, were adopted from paper-based 
reading (Anderson, 2003; Hsieh & Dwyer, 2009; Huang et al., 2009), the use of various types of online 
resources and hypermedia resources has been developed into new reading strategies for online readers 
(Chun & Plass, 1997; Sakar & Erçetin, 2005). More recently, Park and Kim (2011) found that L2 users 
employ diverse hypermedia resources (e.g., videos, pictures) and computer applications and functions 
(e.g., a spell checker, highlighting texts) to facilitate their online reading.  
On the basis of the findings from the previous studies above, the current study extends and deepens our 
knowledge of how college level L2 learners of English use a wide range of online resources to support 
their online reading comprehension, and how they construct meaning during L2 online reading with the 
aid of these resources. Within these theoretical constructs, the study was guided by two main research 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 151 
questions: 
1. What factors inform L2 English readers’ decision-making regarding reading comprehension 
while they read online? 
2. What characterizes the process of their meaning construction using Internet resources when they 
read online text?  
RESEARCH DESIGN 
Participants 
Our participants were seven graduate students from China, South Korea, and Taiwan at a US research 
university in the Midwest (see Table 1). Given the increasing use of information technology in these 
countries (Bilbao-Osorio, Dutta, & Lanvin (2013), the participants reported have spent about 30 hours in 
average reading online. All participants were born and educated in their respective home countries and 
learned English as a foreign language. Although they were second language speakers of English, as 
graduate students at a research university in the US, they were advanced readers of both their native 
languages and English. The participants’ English proficiency was high, as determined by TOEFL scores 
(94 or over in iBT format) except for one participant who had not taken the TOEFL yet, but had a GRE 
verbal score of 610. Among the seven participants, three were from the school of business, two were 
science majors (biology and chemistry), and two were in education. Four of the participants were Korean, 
two Chinese, and one Taiwanese.   
Table 1. Demographic Information of Participants 
Name L1 Gender Age Proficiency
Test  
Language 
score 
Major Years 
in US 
L1 
Internet 
use 
(hrs/wk) 
L2 
Internet 
use 
(hrs/wk) 
Curi Korean M 30 PBT1 620  Business 1 10 15 
Nara Korean F 27 GRE2 610  Chemistry 1 9 1 
Seo Korean F 33 iBT3 98  Business 3 9 12 
Cho Korean M 36 CBT4 225  Business 2 10 4 
JZ Mandarin  M 24 iBT 102  Biology 1 21 35 
QY Mandarin  F 24 iBT 86  Health 
Science 
2 14 21 
Ping Mandarin  M 29 iBT 94  Instructional 
Systems 
Technology 
1 18 38 
Curi 
A Korean male student in the Master in Business Administration (MBA) program with a paper-based 
TEOFL score of 620, Curi had lived in the US for over a year. He spent about 25 hours a week on the 
Internet using Chrome as his preferred browser. Curi reported to be advanced in his computer skills and 
knowledge.  
Nara 
In the US for less than a year, Nara,was a female graduate student majoring in Chemistry, When needing 
online resources to assist with online reading, she preferred to use Naver, a Korean Internet portal site, 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 152 
and she was very knowledgeable about what it could offer. She did not take TOEFL but her combined 
GRE score was 1410 (610 on the verbal section). 
Seo 
Seo,whose iBT score was 98, was another Korean student studying in MBA program. She had been in the 
US for about three years working on a MBA degree.  Based on the background information survey result, 
she reported to spend about 21 hours a week online, including reading news articles, shopping, banking, 
and social networking. She reported having advanced skill in using tools for searching the Web and 
resources in general. In L2 reading online while surfing the Web, she used a monolingual online 
dictionary software (e.g., Dictionary.com) installed in her computer.  
Cho 
Having lived in the US for two years while getting his Masters in Business Administration, Cho reported 
being fairly knowledgeable about searching the Web and using Internet resources. Naver and Wikipedia 
were among his favorite online resources for looking up new words and detailed information about 
unknown terms. He scored 225 on the TOEFL CBT.  
JZ 
At the time of the study, JZ, a student from China, was starting his second year as a graduate student of 
biology in the US. He scored 102 on the TOEFL iBT test. He reported spending an average of about 
seven hours online reading every day, three of which were in English. According to the background 
information survey, he had fairly good mastery of computer skills and knowledge of website affordances, 
so he was able to navigate through different websites adroitly. 
QY  
QY was a Chinese graduate student in health science. She had been in the US for two years to seek a PhD 
degree. Her TOEFL iBT test score was 86 and reports reading online for about five hours per day, two of 
those hours in English. She preferred paper-based reading over online reading but when required to read 
online, she frequently used Youdao online dictionary, which is a popular online dictionary software in 
China. 
Ping  
Hailing from Taiwan, Ping was doing his Master’s in Instructional Systems Technology. He scored 94 on 
the TOEFL iBT. At the time of his interview, he had just stared his second year in the US. He spent 
approximately eight hours daily reading online, which included approximately two and a half hours in 
English. In the background information survey and interview, Ping reported being fairly tech-savvy, so he 
preferred to read everything online, and could navigate through various websites to collect information to 
support his online reading. 
Instruments and Procedures 
The data collection procedure for this study is outlined in Figure 1 below. Details about the procedures 
are described in the following sections.  
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 153 
 
Figure 1. Data Collection Procedures 
Pilot Study 
The overall research design of the current study was based on Coiro and Dobler’s (2007) study. Since the 
contexts and participants in that study were different from those in our study (L1 readers of English in 
elementary school), we modified data collection methods to fit our postsecondary students’ intellectual 
and linguistic levels. For example, the participants in Coiro and Dobler’s study were fifth graders, and 
were only allowed to use one website for answering given questions. Our participants read more 
complicated texts, and were not limited to the kinds of online resources they could use. Data collection 
methods were modified based on the information gathered from a series of pilot studies with four 
evaluators, who had expertise in informatics, simultaneous translation, educational technology, and 
second language education. They went through the modified data collection process and provided helpful 
comments after the process was over. None of them were among the seven participants of this study. 
Before Reading 
The seven participants met one of the researchers individually for the reading and think-aloud tasks. 
Before they read the texts, they completed a pre-study questionnaire (see Appendix A) eliciting their 
demographic information, TOEFL scores, and technology skills. The questionnaire was modified from 
the instrument used in Coiro and Dobler’s (2007) study to elicit the participants’ demographic 
information, language test scores, and the nature of their Internet use. A pre-reading interview elicited the 
participants’ preexisting knowledge about two topics—cloud computing and global warming—on which 
they were about to read. They were notified that they were free to find any information from the Internet 
that might help them understand the online text and answer comprehension questions.  
The Sound Recorder, one of Microsoft Windows’ built-in programs, was used to record the entire data 
collection process including the interview based on the pre-study questionnaire, the pre-study interview, 
the think-aloud protocol, as well as the post-study in-depth interview. CamStudio software was used to 
simultaneously record audio and video data of the think-aloud protocol. 
Think-aloud Instruction 
Prior to the reading task, the participants were instructed to think-aloud. They were allowed to verbalize 
their metacognition in L1 (Mandarin Chinese or Korean), as they felt more comfortable using their native 
language. As Bowles (2010) suggested, the participants were first informed of the rationale and the 
purpose of this research. The researcher then provided participants with instructions for the think-aloud 
task by actually demonstrating it and offering them warm-up tasks to familiarize them with the 
verbalization process (see Appendix B). 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 154 
Reading While Thinking Aloud & Reading texts 
After the pre-reading questionnaire and interview, each participant read two different online texts while 
thinking aloud, answered 18 reading comprehension and vocabulary questions, and verbalized his/her 
metacognition to the researcher. The two texts read by the participants were a blog posting related to 
cloud computing written by an information technology expert entitled, “Telcos Could Be The Future 
Enterprise Software Vendor For Small Business,” and a news article on global warming from the New 
York Times website entitled, “Arctic Melt Unnerves the Experts” (see Appendix C). The following 
criteria were employed for text selection. First, the two texts should be from business and natural science 
fields, because the participants were graduate students from business, science, and a technical area of 
education. Business and education students were expected to be familiar with cloud computing, and the 
science students with global warming. Second, the two texts should be on topics that are growing in 
popularity. Lastly, the texts should contain some terminology specific to the field so that some readers 
would need to seek additional resources to fill the comprehension gap.  
Reading Comprehension and Vocabulary Questions  
Each text had nine questions that measured participants’ comprehension and understanding of key 
vocabulary (see Appendix D). The cloud computing blog posting consisted of one main idea question 
followed by eight questions that checked their vocabulary understanding. From the cloud computing text, 
we wanted to see how they construct meaning from a text containing several unknown words and 
acronyms. The global warming article contained questions that measured participants’ comprehension of 
main idea, inference, vocabulary, and general meaning. There were two rationales behind the question 
development: besides measuring our participants’ reading comprehension of the texts, we also hoped that 
the questions would function as catalysts for meaning construction and also as sounding boards for them 
to verbalize their metacognition.  
There was no time limit for answering the questions. The average score for reading comprehension and 
vocabulary was 94.4 out of 100 (SD=3.2), which signaled their successful comprehension of the texts 
with the aid of online resources.  
After reading 
A post-reading interview was conducted right after each participant completed reading the texts and 
answering the questions in order for us to understand what we observed in the reading process. We asked 
clarifying questions referring to certain actions the participant took and interesting words s/he spoke while 
reading (see Appendix E). After initial data transcription was completed, we met each participant again to 
check for accuracy, as well as to seek confirmation and further illumination of the observation and 
interview data for each participant. 
Data Analysis 
Transcripts of the seven think-aloud protocols were the major source of data for analysis. For each 
comprehension question, a comparison was made among the seven participants as to how they went about 
searching for, evaluating and synthesizing information from online resources. We kept track of the 
websites the participants used, the reasons why they used certain resources, the sequence of using the 
websites, how they used them, whether they succeeded in locating information from one resource, and 
how they verified information through cross-references among different websites.  
We then used Coiro and Dobler’s (2007, p.229) framework of readers’online cognitive strategies as our 
analytical tool. Based on their study on L1 online reading, we tried to generate new themes that reflect the 
nature of L2 reading and add to what had already been discovered about online reading. The themes from 
their study are: (1) the utilization of prior knowledge sources; (2) the development of self-regulated 
reading strategies; and (3) the demonstration of cognitive flexibility. We identified each participant’s 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 155 
information-searching strategies and categorized them into these themes. Through the rereading of the 
transcripts, we developed new themes to reflect the nature of our data, which was second language online 
reading. 
FINDINGS 
In this study, we explored L2 speakers’ online reading with two research questions: (1) what factors 
inform their decision-making as they read online? and (2) what characterizes the processes of their 
meaning construction using Internet resources when they read online text? In the following section, we 
report our findings based on the two research questions. 
Prior Knowledge Sources 
Our second research question was about the factors that inform adult ESL readers’ decision-making as 
they read online. Verbal and visual data suggest that our participants actively used prior knowledge 
during the reading process. Coiro and Dobler (2007) identified four sources of prior knowledge required 
for reading comprehension of young (fifth grade), skilled learnerss: prior knowledge of the topic, prior 
knowledge of printed informational text structure, prior knowledge of informational website structure, 
and prior knowledge of web-based search engines. Our data with advanced adult second language 
learners of English revealed the same categories of prior knowledge, with more complexity resulting from 
reading in a second language. To represent findings more accurately, we revised the four categories to: (1) 
prior knowledge of the topic, (2) prior knowledge of Internet services and their affordances5;(3) prior 
knowledge of informational web structures, (4) prior knowledge of printed text structures, and (5) prior 
knowledge of computer skills. There were two rationales for this revision. First, the participants in Coiro 
and Dobler’s study were fifth graders whose first language was English whereas our participants were 
graduate students who had learned English as a second or foreign language. Second, while their study 
allowed the participants to use only one resource for reading comprehension, Yahooligans (Yahoo for 
young children), our participants could search openly for any online resources. 
Prior Knowledge of the Topic 
Knowledge about specific topics or domains (Alexander, Kulikowich, & Schulze, 1994) and vocabulary 
(Beck, Perfetti, & McKeown, 1982) contributes to reading comprehension and second language readers 
are not an exception (Park & Kim, 2011). For example, business major participants in our study had much 
more background knowledge about cloud computing than other majors, and some of them provided very 
specific answers to the vocabulary questions. They took less time to read and answer all the questions 
than the non-business participants did. Our data confirm Ariew and Erçetin’s (2004) finding that 
background knowledge has a significant positive relationship with reading comprehension. However, they 
reported more difficulty understanding the article on global warming and took longer to finish reading 
and answering questions than the other majors did. This result is similar to what Carrell (1987) found in a 
comparison of two groups of students with Muslim and Catholic heritages. When the two groups were 
asked to read two texts, a Catholic-related text and a Muslim-related text, students were able to recall 
information better from texts they were familiar with.  
The answers provided by our participants for each question differed based on their familiarity with the 
topic. Curi, a business administration major, said that he already knew the meaning of cash cow. Based on 
his pre-existing knowledge and information from the text, he provided a definition of cash cow that was 
specific to his field: “A business category - Traditional business items - i.e. Accounting/payroll/point of 
sales.” Curi seemed to have had specific experiences which he activated as he answered the question 
about cash cow. Non-business participants, Nara, JZ, and Ping, who were unfamiliar with the term, chose 
to simply copy and paste the definition they found from the Internet as their answer. This confirms Ariew 
and Erçetin’s (2004) finding that prior knowledge contributes more to reading comprehension than 
annotation use.  
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 156 
The results from this study indicate that knowledge learned in L1 may be of help when learners try to 
understand certain content written in their L2. JZ specified that he relied greatly on his L1 knowledge 
about cloud computing when he read the article. When he first saw the term cloud computing he did not 
exactly understand what it meant. As soon as he checked the term in Wikipedia and matched it with the 
Chinese term (yun duan ke ji), he said, “Ah yun duan ke ji! I know this. This is like to store things in a 
remote database….” He began to explain what he knew about the notion. The definitional information in 
Wikipedia helped him match what he already knew in his L1 with what he did not know in his L2. Once 
the correspondence occurred, the whole set of information and knowledge was retrieved from his L1 
“database” to help him understand other related terms in the L2. Such L1-L2 term ‘matches’ happened 
constantly when the participants read. When Kuo read the global warming article, she checked arctic in 
an online dictionary and immediately matched the term Arctic Melt with the Mandarin term, pei ji bing 
yuan rong hua. When she encountered the term greenhouse gases, she could easily match it with the 
Mandarin wun shi qi ti and had no difficulty understanding the concept. Such matching does not merely 
signal the significance of translation; rather, it acts as a key to unlock the knowledge that is otherwise 
hidden behind unfamiliar terminology. Online resources help initiate L1-L2 knowledge connections given 
its readily accessible and up-to-date information that is often not available in off-line reading  
Prior Knowledge of Different Online Resources and Their Affordances 
Proficient online readers demonstrate knowledge of different online resources and what they can offer 
(Eagleton & Dobler, 2007). Our participants showed such knowledge in the post-reading interviews as 
shown in the following excerpts:  
Curi:  
I don’t like English monolingual dictionaries because they take more time to understand the 
meaning of words and also sometimes I need to look up more words to understand the definition 
of one word. Usually I go to Naver English dictionary (http://dic.naver.com) for definitions in 
Korean. Also, when I need to understand complicated concepts for reading comprehension, I go 
to blogs written in Korea. For example, let’s suppose I need to know how to use the differences 
between currency exchange rates to do some investment. There are different ways of investment. 
Because I do not know the concept and I do not know how to apply them in real situations.... I go 
to Korean Naver website. It gives me blog postings made by experts. 
Nara: 
I almost always use Naver. Google lists its research results based on the popularity. However, 
Naver provides a variety of information under different categories such as dictionary, 
encyclopedia, Jisikin (Q&A service), blogs, etc. I use blogs, and Jisikin.  
Dictionaries usually provide decontextualized definitions whereas blogs and Jisikin [Q &A] narrate the 
meaning in specific contexts: they are written by people who are knowledgeable about certain topics. Ping 
also noted that he benefited greatly from the visual representation of abstract words or concepts. His 
knowledge of the affordances of the website made his reading comprehension process easier and more 
manageable.  He also stated that “One of the good things about Google is its search engine for images. I 
am a heavily visual learner so it helps me a lot.” 
Content and Lexical Support 
One of the first decisions our online reading participants made when seeking online resources was 
whether they needed lexical (dictionary) or content (specialized and content specific) support. For 
example, when JZ encountered acronyms like VAR or ISV, he decided what the kind of support he needed 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 157 
was not only lexical but also content. Therefore, he resorted to Wikipedia and Google searches to find 
sufficient definitional information for more thorough comprehension beyond what an online dictionary 
could provide. 
Seo’s approach to using online resources for both content and lexical support was based on her empirical 
knowledge of various online resources and their affordances. Seo, while responding to the question, 
“What does VAR mean in this blog posting?” stated: 
According to the blog posting, it [VAR] seems to be a technical term, related to 
telecommunication area. I tend to use Naver [typing Naver address in the address bar] because 
Naver provides both results from Naver encyclopedia and dictionary. [Scrolling down and 
skimming the sub-categories and stopping at the results from Naver encyclopedia] 
With her prior knowledge of different Internet resources (e.g., Naver encyclopedia and Naver dictionary), 
she narrowed down the results in a strategic way. When looking for definitions of target words, she used 
contextual cues from the online text and decided which Internet resources would help her understand the 
unknown target words. For example, to answer “What does VAR mean in this blog posting?” she used 
Naver because she needed both content and lexical knowledge of the target word. On the other hand, to 
answer “What does cloud mean in this blog posting?”, she used Google and Wikipedia to search the key 
words cloud computing to get more content knowledge. She said the results from Google tended to be 
more diverse than those from Naver. 
L1 or L2 
As second language speakers of English, our participants usually began their search for online resources 
to assist their reading comprehension by deciding whether to seek services written in English or their first 
language. Ping particularly favored the Google search engine function that sorts out and presents results 
in Chinese. He typed in an English term and clicked on “show results in Chinese”, which made it easier 
for him to navigate. Knowing about this Google search engine affordance helped him search for necessary 
information more efficiently. 
Prior Knowledge of Informational Website Structures 
Our participants activated their knowledge about the structures of informational websites. Their 
knowledge included “how to recognize and negotiate hierarchical and nonlinear hyperlinks, navigational 
icons, interactive multimedia, and browser toolbars” (Coiro & Dobler, 2007, p. 230). They used different 
web browsers and customized them for convenient browsing. Curi and Ping used the Chrome browser 
because they found it much faster than other browsers. Curi also liked the fact that he could customize 
and freely move tabs on the Chrome browser.   
Such knowledge facilitated their decision-making. Curi was aware of Google’s preview function and used 
it effectively to check if a page appeared to be useful. Nara favored Naver because it prioritizes categories 
based on the nature of a search word. For example, when she entered SaaS (Software as a service) in the 
search window, Naver displayed three result entries with the encyclopedia category at the top of the page. 
Although all three results for SaaS showed the same definition, each of them explained the concept as it 
was used in a different field. After she clicked on one with the sub-category “social science - economics - 
economics general,” she said, “Naver is very convenient because it has sub-categories for each entry. I 
don’t have to guess what an entry will show before I click the link. Naver categorized for me.” 
Familiarity with online dictionary structures was also an important aid for some participants. JZ and QY, 
for example, had specific reasons for favoring particular online dictionaries. JZ mostly visited Iciba 
because of the simple layout of its entries and its rich collection of sample sentences. QY preferred 
Youdao for its clear Chinese-English and English-English definitions and the provision of frequently used 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 158 
collocations. She also downloaded Youdao to her handheld device particularly for its “21st Century 
English-Chinese Dictionary,” which gives meanings as they are used in different fields. Such background 
knowledge of the structures and affordances of online dictionaries helped them find ways to 
accommodate their various learning styles, content requirements, and other needs. 
Prior Knowledge of Printed Text Structures 
Readers apply substantial prior knowledge of printed text structure and features to the reading of online 
text. Awareness of text structure, including surface structure order and explicit linguistic and graphic cues 
(see Goldman & Rakestraw, 2000), contribute to reading comprehension (Carrell, 1985; 1985; Englert & 
Hiebert, 1984). Linguistic cues, also known as discourse markers, include connectives, rhetorical devices, 
function and relevance indicators, and enumeration devices. Graphic cues, which delineate the overall 
structure, include titles, headings, subheadings, and paragraph spacing. QY, for example, relied on her 
knowledge of printed text structure as she skimmed through the two online texts to grasp general ideas. 
She applied what she knows about the structure of an essay such as heading, lead-in and conclusion 
sentences to help her obtain a general idea of what the online text was about: 
I think it’s [reading online] just like reading something on the paper, I read headings in each 
paragraph before I peruse through the article. And I also read the introductory and concluding 
sentences in a paragraph to get a general meaning. Especially longer text like the environmental 
one. 
Prior Knowledge of Computer Skills 
Our participants employed diverse computer skills when answering the reading comprehension questions, 
including using the ”Ctrl + F” function to locate key words in the online text, highlighting selective parts 
using the cursor, and copying and pasting important phrases or sentences by using the ”Ctrl + C” and the 
“Ctrl + V” function. Moreover, they customized their online reading environment by adjusting screen or 
text size. For example, Seo and JZ coordinated various windows while comparing findings retrieved from 
different web pages. To skim through search results for information related to a target word, Seo used the 
“Ctrl + F” search function frequently and selectively read phrases or sentences around instances of a key 
word. Ping was adept at using the “Window + tab” and “Alt + tab” functions to navigate from one 
window to another to facilitate checking different web pages concurrently. 
Self-regulated Reading Strategies 
Recursive Pattern of Self-regulated Reading 
According to Coiro and Dobler (2007), compared to printed texts, a more complex metacognitive process 
is involved when learners tackle online text in a non-linear environment. Self-regulated strategies emerge 
as recursive cycles of decision-making processes that include planning, predicting, monitoring and 
evaluating (p. 235). We based our analysis on this framework to understand how our participants 
demonstrated each strategy. Interestingly, we found that our data drew a more complex picture than the 
original analysis, due to second language reading being involved. Online references and resources in the 
participants’ L1 come into play in the analysis of self-regulated online reading strategies. 
Planning 
Online readers execute planning strategies for deciding what they need to find out and where to do so 
among the various websites. We found that besides deciding with which website to begin, an important 
decision for our participants was whether to pursue lexical or content support. JZ, for instance, based this 
decision on his initial understanding of a term. He went straight to the dictionary when the word he 
encountered was new, and he visited Wikipedia and Google when a term was not entirely new, but might 
have further meanings he was unaware of (e.g., VAR, SaaS). 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 159 
Another factor that influenced our participants’ planning was the language of the websites. Curi preferred 
Korean language websites for lexical support. He said he could understand a definition more clearly and 
quickly when he used an English-Korean dictionary and resorted to an English dictionary only when a 
Korean definition was not sufficient. However, for English acronyms, he chose to go to Wikipedia or 
Google because he believed that the acronyms, specific to English, would be better explained on English 
language websites.  
Predicting 
At this stage, readers make predictions as to where a certain decision (e.g., a hyperlink) will lead them 
and what information they can obtain from a certain website. A major concern of our participants was 
whether a website could help them understand unfamiliar words and concepts. Prediction was closely 
related to participants’ prior knowledge of website structure discussed above. The more familiar they 
were with the website structure, the more precisely they were able to predict if they could obtain what 
they needed from it. Following are some excerpts that illustrate their predicting strategies: 
“Often times I use Youdao dictionary. I think Youdao dictionary is sufficient enough for me to get the 
meaning of the word… [typed Telcos in Youdao].” (QY) 
“From the dictionary I know what ‘leverage’ means…. But I cannot fit the meaning into this 
passage….Let me check Google Image—maybe it can give me some other answers….” (Ping)  
“I am going to use Naver’s general search and see if Naver encyclopedia can provide    information that I 
need to answer the question. [typed ‘ISV’ in Naver].” (Nara) 
Monitoring 
Readers need to constantly monitor their comprehension and the relevance of the resources they find. Our 
participants appeared to go through two stages of monitoring. The first stage was monitoring a list of 
links provided by search engines and clicking on a link that looked right (Park & Kim, 2011). The second 
stage was monitoring whether the website contained information that the participant needed for better 
reading comprehension. For example, participants had to skim through eight Wikipedia results for the 
acronym ISV.  JZ, who constantly applied this strategy when he visited Wikipedia and Google, indicated 
that he did so in order to monitor the relevance of a hyperlink. Seo used two different websites (Naver and 
Google) simultaneously in order to evaluate the relevance of information through triangulation. Finally, 
she came back to the target text to confirm the contextual meaning of a target word. Our findings thus 
illustrate that skilled readers are actively involved in sequential process of monitoring comprehension 
through finding relevant information from online resources.  
Evaluating 
Critically evaluating information is an important aspect of online reading (Leu, et al, 2011) that involves 
the ability to determine the accuracy and reliability of information and to recognize biased information. 
Our participants consulted multiple resources to verify the information they found. When QY searched 
for Telcos in the Youdao dictionary, she found that it gave her “a very weird definition in Chinese. I am 
sure this is not what I want…So I need to look it up somewhere else…” Realizing immediately that the 
dictionary was not an appropriate tool in this case, she went to Wikipedia.  
Such verification of information was critical for obtaining accurate and complete information. QY knew 
that she needed other resources to complement her understanding of leverage when she found the literal 
Chinese definition in the Youdao dictionary. She then went to Wikipedia and found a finance-related 
definition that she was able to link to the text. After she had evaluated and synthesized the information, 
she was able to conceptualize leverage in context. Within this stage we found a cycle of evaluating and 
verifying recurring until a participant had satisfactorily grasped the meaning of a term. 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 160 
All four stages appeared to be involved in recursive cycles of decision-making processes (Figure 2) as 
participants tried to understand the vocabulary in the readings. If they found the information incomplete, 
inappropriate, or dissatisfying, they went back to previous stages to recommence the search in a different 
search engine, or clicked on a link that took them to a new website (in either the L1 or the L2). The 
arrows in Figure 2 represent the recursive nature of the decision-making process. The trial was sometimes 
repeated several times until participants felt they had obtained accurate and useful information.  
 
Figure 2. Recursive pattern of self-regulated reading (Based on Coiro & Dobler, 2007, p. 235) 
DISCUSSION 
L2 Online Readers’ Knowledge Construction 
Based on our participants’ online reading behaviors that demonstrated their self-regulated reading 
strategies, we have conceptualized how L2 online readers construct knowledge in the online environment 
as follows. During the reading process, they were creating a “web of knowledge” from various sources as 
illustrated in Figure 3. They navigated between dictionaries (L1-English and English-English), Wikipedia, 
search engines, various website resources, and other language-specific websites to accumulate and verify 
information. The arrows are bi-directional, which shows that the knowledge construction process is not a 
one-way process.  They recursively went back and forth among various online resources and affordances 
to construct knowledge of a term or a concept.  
It has been found that an important feature that characterizes second language learners’ online reading 
comprehension is how they resort to their first language in the process of creating the web of knowledge 
(Chun, 2011; Grabe, 2009). From the very beginning (planning), over half started by determining whether 
they needed lexical support or content support, which is a striking difference from L1 online reading 
comprehension processes as reported by Coiro and Dobler (2007). For lexical support, five out of seven 
went to online dictionaries in their L1 and some even visited more than one dictionary site to verify word 
meanings. For content support, they used sites that gave definitional information both in their L1 and in 
English, constantly switching back and forth between their L1 sites and English sites for triangulation. 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 161 
 
 
Figure 3. Construction of the web of knowledge 
Demonstration of Cognitive Flexibility 
As skilled readers rely on a flexible use of reading strategies (Spiro, 2004), our study attempted to extend 
the theory of cognitive flexibility (Spiro et al., 2004; Spiro & Jehng, 1990) and also to support Coiro and 
Dobler’s (2007) findings. The online reading environment in particular allows readers to develop 
cognitive flexibility with the immense resources available in that medium (Coiro & Dobler, 2007). The 
findings from this study allow us to observe the way the participants explored the knowledge online, 
which is represented and demonstrated from multiple perspectives. Such non-linear yet resource-abundant 
online environment enables learners to develop cognitive flexibility (Brandl, 2002), ultimately leading to 
the restructure of their knowledge (Spiro & Jehng, 1990; Spiro et al., 2004). We found that they (1) 
assembled relevant information by fully harnessing advanced computer and search skills, and (2) 
integrated and evaluated the information retrieved from various resources, to achieve the construction of 
knowledge. We extended the theory by explicating that, such flexibility was manifested in the following 
domains according to our observation: diverse knowledge gains, broadened scope of information 
searching, and personal applications of online resources.   
Diverse Knowledge Gains 
The non-linear online reading environment, which poses a challenge for readers to locate and critically 
evaluate information, necessitates their learning to be more flexible and open to all possible ways of 
locating necessary information, which creates opportunities for them to gain diverse knowledge (Coiro, 
2003). For instance, it was not easy for these participants to determine the meaning of telcos. Although it 
could mean telephone companies, our participants had difficulty deciding that this was the meaning the 
author intended and used several different resources to verify it. Curi used a European tele-
communication company’s website, Google, and Wikipedia, which gave him information from different 
perspectives. Ping referred to both texts and images to help him understand the concept. In such ways, 
participants exercised the cognitive flexibility to gather and synthesize knowledge from a range of 
resources to reach adequate understanding of a phrase or a concept. This supports Ebner and Ehri’s (2013) 
study, which indicates that vocabulary learners’ cognitive flexibility and learning are facilitated when 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 162 
they effectively construct meanings from multiple online resources. 
Broadened Scope of Information Searching 
We found that during the process of constructing meanings and restructuring knowledge from multiple 
resources, the participants learned to broaden the scope of information searching. JZ researched the term 
Telcos with an online dictionary in the beginning and then went to Wikipedia, but the search was not 
successful. He then went to Google and found that one of the search result entries was about a company 
called Telcos Systems. Having predicted that he might find something useful, he clicked on the link and 
found a definition he considered authentic. He said, “This is very neat. Isn’t the company’s definition of 
the word the best one? That’s what they do, so we definitely can find the most precise definition from 
them…” In the interview, he indicated that he learned there are multiple ways to search for something 
online. People need not be confined to the information in Wikipedia or dictionaries; rather, they should 
explore other resources for verification of the information. This strategy made JZ’s searches more 
productive. Such display of cognitive flexibility parallels Brandl’s (2002) study that online readers learn 
to cope with online texts by experimenting with various ways of exploring online resources. 
Personal Applications 
Because the online environment involves greater complexity and demands greater cognitive capability, 
readers devised their own personal applications (Coiro, 2003) of search engines, such as strategic 
approaches to narrowing down possible results. For instance, while pursuing the meaning of cloud, Cho 
first used Google and Wikipedia. When he realized that using the broad key word cloud would retrieve 
too many irrelevant results, he used cloud computing instead. JZ, too, typed in VAR agreement and ISV 
acquisition rather than merely the acronyms VAR and ISV in Wikipedia, to obtain more precise 
information. He said, “I found that when you type in a complete phrase instead of word, you get more 
precise meaning.”  
JZ developed another personal appropriation of search engine application. When he searched Google for 
leverage the cloud, he used different word orders (leverage cloud, cloud leverage, leverage the cloud, and  
the cloud leverage) in Google and retrieved different search results. By doing this, he was able to examine 
a wide variety of options for verification and finally found a satisfying answer.  
The two strategies, using computer search skills and integrating information, were demonstrated 
throughout the tasks as a manifestation of cognitive flexibility. The first strategy aligns with the findings 
in Lück’s (2008) study that indicated that skimming and scanning, which require learners’ computer 
search skills, are essential in L2 online reading. This observation also supports Al-Seghayer’s (2005) 
study that well-structured hypertext appears more conducive to learners’ knowledge construction, due to 
the fact that some participants obtained better understanding when they visited better-structured websites 
like Wikipedia.  
New Literacy Skills Required in Online Reading Environments 
With the perspective of new literacy which is essential, even required, for readers who have to tackle 
different problems and difficulties emerging from the online reading environment (Castek, Coiro, 
Hartman, Henry, Leu, & Zawilinski, 2007; Coiro, 2003; Coiro & Dobler, 2007), we attempted to 
highlight the ESL online readers’ use of new literacy skills involved in problem-solving processes with 
informational online text in which limitless resources and information are presented in a non-linear 
manner. As findings from our participants indicated, text reading strategies were not sufficient to support 
learners’ achievement of successful online reading comprehension; they thus needed to develop new 
literacy skills demanded by the nature of the online reading environment.  
These new literacy skills were associated with the following five domains: (1) identifying problems and 
questions, (2) locating information from multiple online resources, (3) critically evaluating information 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 163 
online, (4) synthesizing information online, and (5) communicating and exchanging information online. 
These strategies parallel those found among L1 readers of English (Coiro, Knobel, Lankshear, & Leu, 
2008; Leu, Kinzer, Coiro, & Cammack, 2004; Mokhtari et al., 2008) though the strategies of the 
international graduate students appeared to be more complex, multiple, and extended than were those 
reported by L1 studies. Though some of these strategies are clearly related to second language users (e.g. 
consulting resources in L1), it is unclear to what extent other more elaborate strategies may be attributed 
to differences in age rather than in language background. Our data allow us to concentrate on three 
domains of new literacy skills: (1) locating information, (2) critically evaluating information, and (3) 
skillfully synthesizing information. 
Locating Information  
Online readers need to know where and how to locate useful or critical information. This may include 
knowing how to use search engines and interpret the results, which websites to visit, and how to navigate 
through embedded hyperlinks and multiple modalities of information representation like texts, graphics or 
video clips. These skills help learners to effectively find resources to support their online reading 
comprehension. We observed our participants developing such skills when they went through the 
planning and predicting stages.  
Evaluating and Synthesizing Information  
In cyberspace, where everyone can publish his or her own opinions and interpretations, it is particularly 
essential for readers to be able to evaluate the authenticity of Internet information and critically 
distinguish between biased and unbiased sources (Leu et al., 2004) and knowing how to verify 
information from various resources emerges as a key skill for assessing authenticity. After this evaluation, 
the next phase was to use the information to solve problems by synthesizing information from multiple 
online resources.  
When our participants proceeded to the monitoring and evaluating stages, we observed such new literacy 
skills emerge as they tried to put pieces of information into a big picture. For some participants (JZ and 
QY), this set of skills developed during several unsuccessful trials of locating accurate information. JZ 
specifically reported what he learned from the information searching experiences in the interview. 
IMPLICATIONS  
While we have gained a wealth of insights in this study, we suggest that it is only the beginning of needed 
research on self-regulated online reading strategies of L2 speakers. The current study examined online 
reading of only particular Asian students, and there exists the need for extension of this research to other 
groups who may bring different educational experiences and backgrounds to the online reading process. 
Future studies could replicate our design with larger groups of similar participants or investigate a wider 
range of readers, including K-12 students, professional and non-professional adults, as well as all levels of 
post-secondary education. We also suggest that researchers particularly investigate online strategies of 
less proficient second language learners, which could help teachers understand how to aid those who are 
left behind in terms of online reading ability. In addition, we also suggest longitudinal studies in order for 
researchers to discover more emergent literacy practices that might not be found in short-term studies. 
Until now, few studies have investigated language learners’ use of online resources to activate 
background knowledge during their L2 reading (Chun, 2011). In this study, we identified five different 
kinds of prior knowledge being activated during their L2 online reading: prior knowledge of the topic, 
Internet services and their affordances, informational web structures, printed text structures, and computer 
skills. L2 reading education can benefit from this new knowledge gained in our study. Since successful 
readers demonstrate higher levels of metacognitive knowledge (Paris, Lipson, & Wixson, 1983), L2 
reading instruction should enable students to engage in metacognitive awareness and monitoring during 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 164 
their reading, and we hope that what we have reported in this paper will benefit L2 online reading 
educators.  
 
APPENDIX A. Pre-Study Questionnaire 
1. Name 
2. What is your home country? 
3. What is your major? 
4. What is your gender? 
  Female 
  Male 
5. What is your degree program? 
  Undergraduate 
  Graduate 
  IEP 
6. What is your English test score? (e.g. TOEFL, IELTS, TOEIC, etc.) 
7. How many years have you stayed in the US?   
8. How many hours in a week do you use the Internet? 
9. What kind of tasks do you do online? (Please, check all that applied) 
  Reading newspaper 
  Reading magazines 
  Reading documents 
  Shopping 
  Hotel/travel reservation 
  Social networking (e.g. Facebook, Myspace, etc.) 
  Running Personal website/Blog 
  Banking 
  Photo sharing (e.g. Flickr, Picasa, Photobucket,etc.) 
  Listening to music (Pandora, Live365, Jango, etc.) 
  Movie/TV (Rotten Tomatoes, Netflix, etc.) 
  Game  
 
APPENDIX B. Think-aloud protocol instructions 
1. Reason for thinking aloud 
  In this research we investigate how English as second language readers comprehend online 
texts and how they are using online resources to aid their understanding. Therefore, we are 
interested in what you think when you complete the two online reading tasks. During the task, 
you will be given two different online texts written in English: one is a blog posting about 
cloud-computing in business, and the other is a news article about global warming in natural 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 165 
science.  
2. Think-aloud instruction 
  As you go through reading two online texts, you are asked to think-aloud. What we mean by 
“think-aloud” is that we want you to say out loud whatever you are thinking in your mind while 
you read. The “think-aloud” is more like saying to yourself while reading, so you don’t 
necessarily have to explain your thoughts. 
3. Think-aloud demonstration and Warm-up practice 
  The researcher gives you a brief demonstration of think-aloud in reading. After the 
demonstration, you are asked to do a short warm-up practice of think-aloud. If you have any 
questions, please feel free to ask. 
 
APPENDIX C. Screenshots of Online Reading Texts 
 
 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 166 
 
 
APPENDIX D. Reading Comprehension Questions: Cloud Computing &Arctic Melt Unnerves the 
Experts 
Cloud Computing 
1. What is this blog posting about? 
2. What does telcos mean in this blog posting? 
3. What does leverage mean in this blog posting? 
4. What does ISV mean in this blog posting? 
5. What does VAR mean in this blog posting? 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 167 
6. What does SaaS mean in this blog posting? 
7. What does cash cow mean in this blog posting? 
8. What does cloud mean in this blog posting? 
9. What does leap frog mean in this blog posting? 
Arctic Melt Unnerves the Experts 
1. What is this news article mainly about? 
2. What instrument or tools did Son Nghiem use in his research?  
3. According to the reading, what seems to be related to the global warming?  
4. According to the reading, which countries seem to pay attention to the issue of global warming?  
5. According to the reading, why is the ice retreat likely to be bigger next summer?  
6. What does Arctic Oscillation mean?  
7. Why did many Arctic researchers warn that it was still far too soon to start sending container ships 
over to the Arctic region?  
8. Name three of the Arctic experts mentioned in the article.  
9. In the last paragraph, what does ace up her sleeve mean?  
 
APPENDIX E. Post-Reading Interview Questions 
1. How was today's reading? Article 1, Article 2?  
2. Why do you use ________ (website or an online tool)? 
3. What other strategies do you usually use when you read online texts? 
4. Why was it easy, or difficult?  
5. Who do you think are good online readers? 
6. Do you think reading online helps L2 readers? Why?  
7. Is online reading different from traditional reading? To what extent?  
8. Can you share anything today's activity made you think? 
(The researchers may add some more questions that they think are necessary. But the total interview 
time will not be over thirty minutes.) 
 
NOTES 
1. PBT: The TOEFL® paper-based Test, scored on a scale of 310 to 677 points. Retrieved from 
http://www.ets.org/toefl/pbt/scores/understand/.  
2. GRE: The GRE® General Test, scored on a scale of 200 to 800 points. This was discontinued and 
replaced by the GRE Revised General Test in August 2011. Retrieved from 
https://www.ets.org/gre/revised_general/scores/. 
3. iBT: The TOEFL® Internet-based Test, scored on a scale of 0 to 120 points. Retreived from 
http://www.ets.org/toefl/ibt/scores/understand/. 
4. CBT: The TOEFL® computer-based Test, scored on a scale of 0 to 300 points. This was discontinued 
and replaced by iBT in September 2006. Retreived from http://www.ets.org/toefl. 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 168 
5. Affordance is defined as the quality of an environment, which allows an individual to perform an act. 
In this study, this term is used to indicate what online resources can offer for readers to perform 
efficient online reading. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We would like to thank three anonymous LLT reviewers for their insightful and constructive comments 
on the previous drafts of this article. We also would like to give special thanks to Dr. Larry J Mikulecky 
and Dr. Sharon Pugh for reading our drafts multiple times. We also thank Sang Jai Choi and Myungseok 
Ji for their contributions to data collection. Lastly, we are grateful to the seven study participants and four 
pilot testers for their time and insights they shared with us.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Jaehan Park is currently a Ph.D. candidate in the School of Education at Indiana University. He has taught 
English in Asia and in the US and is interested in understanding how technology interacts with and can be 
used to improve curriculum, learning, and instruction. 
E-mail: jp31@indiana.edu  
Jae-Seok Yang, Ph.D. (corresponding author) is an associate instructor in the School of Education at 
Indiana University Bloomington. He teaches Computer-Assisted Language Learning. His research areas 
include vocabulary learning strategies, mobile-assisted language learning, and the use of technologies in 
language teaching and learning. 
E-mail: yang52@indiana.edu  
Yi Chin Hsieh is currently a Ph.D. candidate in the School of Education at Indiana University. Her 
research interests have been in language learners' interactions in collaborative learning, and the 
effectiveness of technology incorporation into collaborative learning. She has been teaching English in 
high school in Taiwan for seven years. 
E-mail: yihsieh@indiana.edu  
 
REFERENCES 
Al-Seghayer, K. (2005). ESL readers' perceptions of reading in well structured and less structured 
hypertext environment. CALICO Journal, 22(2), 191–212. 
Afflerbach, P., & Cho, B.-Y. (2009). Identifying and describing constructively responsive comprehension 
strategies in new and traditional forms of reading. In S. E. Israel & G. G. Duffy (Eds.), Handbook of 
research on reading comprehension (pp. 69–90). London, UK: Routledge. 
Akyel, A., & Erçetin, G. (2009). Hypermedia reading strategies employed by advanced learners of 
English. System, 37(1), 136–152. 
Alexander, P. A., Kulikowich, J. M., & Schulze, S. K. (1994). How subject-matter knowledge affects 
recall and interest. American Educational Journal, 31, 313–337. 
Anderson, N. J. (2003). Scrolling, clicking, and reading English: Online reading strategies in a 
second/foreign language. The Reading Matrix, 3, 1–33. 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 169 
Ariew, R., & Erçetin, G. (2004). Exploring the potential of hypermedia annotations for second language 
reading. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 17(2), 237–259. 
Barrière, C., & Duquette, L. (2002). Cognitive-based model for the development of a reading tool in 
FSL.Computer Assisted Language Learning, 17(5), 469–482. 
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: An experimental and social study. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Beach, R. (1993). A teacher’s introduction to reader response theories. Urbana, IL: National Council of 
Teachers of English. 
Beck, I. L., Perfetti, C. A., & McKeown, M. G. (1982). Effects of long-term vocabulary instruction on 
lexical access and reading comprehension. Journal of Educational Psychology, 74, 506–521. 
Bilbao-Osorio, B., Dutta, S., & Lanvin, B. (2013, June). The global information technology report 2013. 
In World Economic Forum. Retrieved from 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GITR_Report_2013.pdf 
Block, E. (1992). See how they read: Comprehension monitoring of L1 and L2 readers. TESOL Quarterly, 
26, 319–343. 
Bowles, M. A. (2010). The think-aloud controversy in second language research. New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Brandl, K. (2002). Integrating Internet-based reading materials into the foreign language curriculum: 
From teacher-to student-centered approaches. Language Learning & Technology, 6(3), 87–107. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num3/pdf/brandl.pdf 
Carrell, P. L. (1984). The effects of rhetorical organization on ESL readers. TESOL Quarterly, 18(3), 
441–469. 
Carrell, P. L. (1985). Facilitating ESL reading by teaching text structure. TESOL Quarterly, 19(4), 727–
752.  
Carrell, P. L. (1987). Content and formal schemata in ESL reading. TESOL Quarterly, 21(3), 461–481. 
Castek, J., Coiro, J., Hartman, D. K., Henry, L. A., Leu, D. J., & Zawilinski, L. (2007). Thinking about 
our future as researchers: New literacies, new challenges and new opportunities.  In M. B. Sampson, S. 
Szabo, F. Falk-Ross, M. M. Foote & P. E. Linder (Eds.), Multiple literacies in the 21st century: The 
twenty-eighth yearbook of the College Reading Association (pp. 31–50). Logan, UT: College Reading 
Association. 
Chun, D. (2001). L2 reading on the web: Strategies for accessing information in hypermedia. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 14(5), 367–403. 
Chun, D. (2011). CALL technologies for L2 reading post web In N. Arnold & L. Ducate (Eds.), Present 
and future promises of CALL: From theory and research to new directions in language teaching (pp. 
131–170). San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Chun, D., & Plass, J. L. (1997). Research on text comprehension in multimedia environments. Language 
Learning & Technology, 1(1), 60-81. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/chun_plass/default.html 
Coiro, J. (2003). Exploring literacy on the Internet: Reading comprehension on the Internet: Expanding 
our understanding of reading comprehension to encompass new literacies. The Reading Teacher, 56(5), 
458–464. 
Coiro, J. (2011). Predicting reading comprehension on the Internet: Contributions of offline skills, online 
reading skills, and prior knowledge. Journal of Literacy Research, 43(4), 352–392. 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 170 
Coiro, J. (2011). Talking about reading as thinking: Modeling the hidden complexities of online reading 
comprehension. Theory into Practice, 50(2), 107–115. 
Coiro, J., & Dobler, E. (2007). Exploring the online reading comprehension strategies used by sixth-grade 
skilled readers to search for and locate information on the Internet. Reading Research Quarterly, 42(2), 
214–257. 
Coiro, J., Knnobel, M., Lankshear, C., & Leu, D. J. (Eds.). (2008). Handbook of research on new 
literacies. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Damico, J., & Baildon, M. (2007). Examining ways readers engage with websites during think-aloud 
sessions. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 51, 254–263. 
Eagleton, M. B., & Dobler, E. (2007). Reading the Web: Strategies for Internet inquiry. New York, NY: 
Guilford. 
Ebner, R. J., & Ehri, L. C. (2013). Vocabulary learning on the Internet: Using a structured think-aloud 
procedure. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 56(6), 480–489. 
Englert, C. S., & Hiebert, E. H. (1984). Children’s developing awareness of text structures in expository 
materials. Journal of Educational Psychology, 76, 65–74. 
Goldman, S. R., & Rakestraw, J. A. (2000). Structural aspects of constructing meaning from text. In M. L. 
Kamil, P. B. Mosenthal, P. D. Pearson, & R. Barr (Eds.), Handbook of reading research (Vol. 3, pp. 311–
335). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Grabe, W. (2009). Reading in a second language: Moving from theory to practice. New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Hacker, D. (1998). Self-regulated comprehension during normal reading. In D. Hacker, J. Dunlosky & A. 
Graesser (Eds.), Metacognition in educational theory and practice (pp. 165–191). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Hartman, D. K., Morsink, P. M., & Zheng, J. (2010). From print to pixels: The evolution of cognitive 
conceptions of reading comprehension. In E. A. Baker & D. J. Leu (Eds.), The new literacies: Multiple 
perspectives on research and practice (pp. 131–163). New York, NY: Guilford. 
Hsieh, P., & Dwyer, F. (2009). The instructional effect of online reading strategies and learning styles on 
student academic achievement. Educational Technology & Society, 12(2), 36–50. 
Huang, H., Chern, C., & Lin, C. (2009). EFL learners’ use of online reading strategies and comprehension 
of texts: An exploratory study. Computers & Education, 52(1), 13–26. 
Miniwats Marketing Group (2011). Internet World Stats. Retrieved from 
http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm 
Kol, S., & Schcolnik, M. (2000). Enhancing screen reading strategies. CALICO Journal, 18(1), 67–75. 
Konishi, M. (2003). Strategies for reading hypertext by Japanese ESL learners. The Reading Matrix, 3(3). 
97–119 
Langer, J. A., Bartolome, L., Vasquez, O., & Lucas, T. (1990). Meaning construction in school literacy 
tasks: A study of bilingual students. American Educational Research Journal, 27(3), 427–471. 
Leu, D. J., Kinzer, C. K., Coiro, J. L., & Cammack, D. W. (2004). Toward a theory of new literacies 
emerging from the Internet and other information and communication technologies. In R. B. Ruddell & N. 
J. Unrau (Eds.), Theoretical models and processes of reading. Newark, DE: International Reading 
Association. 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 171 
Leu, D. J., McVerry, J. G., O’Byrne, W. I., Kiili, C., Zawilinski, L., Everett-Cacopardo, H., Kennedy, C., 
& Forzani, E. (2011). The new literacies of online reading comprehension: Expanding the literacy and 
learning curriculum. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 55(1), 5–14. 
Leu, D. J., Zawilinski, L., Castek, J., Banerjee, M., Housand, B., Liu, Y., & O’Neil, M. (2007). What is 
new about the new literacies of online reading comprehension? In A. Berger, L. Rush, & J. Eakle  (Eds.), 
Secondary school reading and writing: What research reveals for classroom practices (pp. 37–68). 
Chicago, IL: National Council of Teachers of English. 
Lin, H., & Chen, T. (2007). Reading authentic EFL text using visualization and advance organizers in a 
multimedia learning environment. Language Learning & Technology, 11(3), 83–106. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num3/pdf/linchen.pdf 
Lück, K. (2008). Web-based foreign language reading: Affective and productive outcomes. CALICO 
Journal, 25(2), 305–325. 
Mehta, C. (2010, September 21). Telcos could be the future enterprise software vendors for small 
businesses. Retrieved from http://cloudcomputing.blogspot.com/2010/09/telcos-could-be-future-
enterprise.html 
Mokhtari, K., Kymes, A., & Edwards, P. (2008). Assessing the new literacies of online reading 
comprehension: An informative interview with W. Ian O’Byrne, Lisa Zawilinski, J. Greg McVerry, & 
Donald J. Leu at the University of Connecticut. The Reading Teacher, 62(4), 354–357 
Mokhtari, K., & Reichard, C. A. (2002). Assessing students’ metacognitive awareness of reading 
strategies. Journal of Educational Psychology, 94(2), 249–259. 
Mokhtari, K., & Reichard, C. A. (2004). Investigating the strategic reading processes of first and second 
language readers in two different cultural contexts. System, 32, 379–394. 
Mokhtari, K., & Sheorey, R. (2002). Measuring ESL students’ awareness of reading strategies. Journal of 
Developmental Education, 25(3), 2–10. 
Mosenthal, P. B., & Kirsch, I. S. (1991). Toward an explanatory model of document literacy. Discourse 
Processes, 14, 147–180. 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. (2000). Report of the National Reading 
Panel. Teaching children to read: An evidence-based assessment of the scientific research literature on 
reading and its implications for reading instruction. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office. 
Paris, S. G., Lipson, M., & Wixson, K. (1983). Becoming a strategic reader. Contemporary Educational 
Psychology, 8, 293–316. 
Park, H.-R., & Kim, D. (2011). Reading-strategy use by English as a second language learners in online 
reading tasks, Computers & Education, 57, 2156–2166. 
Phakiti, A. (2003). A closer look at gender and strategy use in L2 reading. Language Learning, 53(4), 
649–702. 
Pressley, M., & Afflerbach, P. (1995). Verbal protocols of reading: The nature of constructively 
responsive reading. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Pressley, M., & Harris, S. (2006). Cognitive strategies instruction: From basic research to classroom 
instruction. In P. Alexander & P. Winne (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology (2nd ed., pp. 265–
86). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erblaum. 
Revkin, A. C. (2007, October 2). Arctic melt unnerves the experts. The New York Times. Retrieved from 
http://www.nytimes.com/2007/10/02/science/earth/02arct.html 
Jaehan Park, Jae-Seok Yang, & Yi Chin Hsieh Second Language Online Reading and Comprehension 
 
Language Learning & Technology 172 
Rosenblatt, L. M. (1982). The literary transaction: Evocation and response. Theory into Practice, 21(4), 
268–277. 
Sakar, A., & Erçetin, G. (2005). Effectiveness of hypermedia annotations for foreign language reading. 
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 21, 28–38 
Spires, H. A. , & Estes, T. H. (2002). Reading in Web-based learning environments. In C. C. Block & M. 
Pressley (Eds.), Comprehension instruction: Research-based practice (pp. 115–125). New York, NY:  
Guilford. 
Spiro, R. J. (2004). Principled pluralism for adaptive flexibility in teaching and learning. In R.B. Ruddell 
& N. Unrau (Eds.), Theoretical models and processes of reading (5th ed., pp. 654–659). Newark, DE: 
International Reading Association 
Spiro, R. J., & Jehng, J. (1990). Cognitive flexibility and hypertext: Theory and technology for the non 
linear and multi-dimensional traversal of complex subject matter. In D. Nix and R. Spiro (Eds.), 
Cognition, education, and multimedia: Exploring ideas in high technology (pp. 163–205). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Spiro, R. J., Coulson, R. L., Feltovich, P. J., & Anderson, D. K. (2004). Cognitive flexibility theory: 
Advanced knowledge acquisition in ill-structured domains.  In R. B. Ruddell & N. Unrau (Eds.), 
Theoretical models and processes of reading (5th ed., pp. 640–653). Newark, DE: International  Reading 
Association. 
Winne, P. H., & Perry, N. E. (2000). Measuring self-regulated learning. In P. Pintrich, M. Boekaerts, & 
M. Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation (pp. 531–566). Orlando, FL: Academic Press. 
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). (2014). Internet live stats. Retrieved from 
http://www.internetlivestats.com/internet-users/.  
Zimmerman, B. J. (1990). Self-regulated learning and academic achievement: An overview. Educational 
Psychologist, 25, 3–17. 
