Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/action2.pdf 
June 2014, Volume 18, Number 2 
pp. 36–56 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 36 
DOES SECOND LIFE IMPROVE MANDARIN LEARNING BY 
OVERSEAS CHINESE STUDENTS? 
Yu-Ju Lan, National Taiwan Normal University 
The aim of this study was to determine the effectiveness of Second Life (SL) for 
improving the oral output of overseas Chinese students learning Mandarin Chinese 
(hereafter referred to as Mandarin). More than 1000 overseas Chinese students attend a 
university in northern Taiwan every year to learn Mandarin as a heritage language after 
graduating from high school in their own countries. These students strive to learn 
academically, but rarely actively speak Mandarin either inside or outside the classroom. 
This two-stage study evaluated the use of SL in improving their oral output. The focus of 
stage 1 was to confirm the potential of SL for promoting the oral output of overseas 
Chinese students in Mandarin language classes. Twenty overseas Chinese students 
learning Mandarin participated in this stage. In stage 2, 24 overseas Chinese students were 
taught 3 learning units in Mandarin in SL. Analysis of the results showed that learning 
Mandarin in an SL environment significantly increased the in-class oral output of those 
students. They also made significant improvements in oral performance and learning 
attitudes toward Mandarin. 
Keywords: Virtual environment, Chinese as a Second Language, Mandarin, Task-Based 
Learning. 
APA Citation: Lan, Y. J. (2014). Does second life improve mandarin learning by 
overseas Chinese students? Language Learning & Technology, 18(2), 36–56. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/action2.pdf 
Received: September 12, 2013; Accepted: November 26, 2013; Published: June 1, 2014 
Copyright: © Yu-Ju Lan 
INTRODUCTION 
Chinese as a foreign language (CFL) has recently been emerging as a popular research topic and is of 
increasing interest in the educational market because of China’s increasing economic influence and 
military capabilities (National Taiwan Normal University, 2010). There has also been a global change in 
attitudes toward learning Mandarin Chinese (hereafter referred to as Mandarin) (Lan, Kan, Hsiao, Yang, 
& Chang, 2013; Rhodes & Pufahl, 2009; TIME Asia, 2006). Mandarin is the official and most commonly 
spoken language in Taiwan (Wikipedia, 2014), which has become a popular country for learners of 
Mandarin as a second language (L2) from all over the world, and especially for overseas Chinese students 
Mandarin is the official and most commonly spoken language in Taiwan (Wikipedia, 2014), which has 
become a popular country for learners of Mandarin as a second language (L2) from all over the world, 
and especially for overseas Chinese who are people of Chinese birth or descent who live outside 
the People's Republic of China and Republic of China (Taiwan). More than 100,000 overseas Chinese 
students have traveled from more than 100 countries throughout the world to enroll in Taiwanese 
universities to learn Mandarin since 1956 (Jiang, 2007). 
The university where the author teaches (National Taiwan Normal University, NTNU) is an especially 
well-known institution that draws almost 2000 overseas Chinese students from many countries to learn 
Mandarin every year. Some of these students, from elementary to high-school age, join short-term (e.g., 
6-week) courses, though the majority enroll in longer-term courses. After graduating from high school in 
their home country, they come to Taiwan to complete a 1-year Mandarin course provided by the college 
of International Studies and Education for Overseas Chinese at National Taiwan Normal University 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
(NTNU) to prepare themselves for entering a university in Taiwan. 
My involvement in helping overseas Chinese students with academic learning has led to the identification 
of some of the challenges faced by these students. The greatest concern is their oral communication 
abilities. Most of the students tend to associate with other students from the same country of origin, and 
outside the classrooms speak their common first language rather than Mandarin. Regarding in-class 
behavior, these students maintain a passive attitude toward oral interactions. Speech within the classroom 
appears to come mostly from the teachers rather than from the overseas Chinese students. A lack of oral 
communication skills is likely to influence the academic achievements of these students on entering 
Taiwanese universities and their adaptation to life in Taiwan because they may not be understood by their 
teachers or peers (Hsu, 2007; Su, 2006). 
These problems were approached in the present study using a two-stage design. The aim of the study was 
to enhance the Mandarin learning of overseas Chinese students by applying Second Life (SL), a multiuser 
virtual environment to Mandarin teaching. SL was chosen because of its potential for increasing the social 
interactions of foreign language (FL)/L2 learners (Deutschmann, Panichi, & Molka-Danielsen, 2009; Lan 
et al., 2013). The experiences obtained and lessons learned from the study will serve as a valuable 
reference base for improving language education for overseas Chinese students, and will add to the 
knowledge pool of research on teaching and learning FL/L2 in virtual worlds. 
Mandarin Language Education for Overseas Chinese Students in Taiwan 
The overseas Chinese students in Taiwan come from many countries via various entrance pathways. In 
those countries where Mandarin learning opportunities are provided, such as Malaysia, students use their 
Unified Examination Certificate (UEC) scores when applying to Taiwanese universities. The UEC is a 
standardized test specifically and only for independent high school students organized by The United 
Chinese School Committees’ Association of Malaysia and the Examinations Bureau of The United 
Chinese School Teacher’s Association of Malaysia. The UEC is available in two levels: Junior Middle 
and Senior Middle, which are further divided into Vocational and Regular. Junior Middle is for students 
who have completed the three years’ junior education, while Senior Middle is for students who have 
completed the three years’ education in science, art, or commerce. Test takers are awarded with the UEC 
(Wikipedia, 2011). Students from Japan and the Republic of Korea take the same entrance examinations 
as Taiwanese students, since the countries have schools that offer the same curricula Taiwan. In other 
countries where there are no Taiwanese schools, such as Singapore, Thailand, and the Philippines, 
students can complete the Overseas Composite Attainment Test which is an entrance examination for 
students in the areas mentioned above (University Entrance Committee for Overseas Chinese Student, 
2014). How students are selected to different universities in Taiwan depend on their test scores. The test 
is based on local high school teaching materials while taking the real situations into consideration. 
Students from yet other countries, such as the USA, Canada, and the European countries, use their high-
school grades to apply to Taiwanese universities since none of the aforementioned opportunities are 
available to them (Su, 2008). 
In addition to these various entrance pathways, there is another opportunity for overseas Chinese students 
without a Mandarin qualification to enter Taiwanese universities: they may enroll in a 1-year immersive 
course provided by NTNU to learn Mandarin in addition to other materials that are taught in Taiwanese 
high schools. Upon completion of this course, the students can then apply to Taiwanese universities 
(Chen, 2009; Su, 2008). Those students who complete the 1-year immersive course were the target 
population for the present study. In addition to Mandarin, the students take other classes, such as 
mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology, and social studies, all of which are taught in Mandarin. For the 
Mandarin language classes, students usually learn to read modern Mandarin articles in the first 
semester and then learn to read classical Mandarin, such as “倫語 (Confucian Analects)” in the 
following semester. 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 38 
The learning workload is very heavy, not only because all subjects are taught in Mandarin, but also due to 
its high degree of difficulty. Since their academic achievement in this intensive course will determine 
their college education in Taiwan after its completion, the students strive to succeed in their academic 
learning, but rarely speak Mandarin actively neither inside nor outside the classroom setting, and usually 
maintain a passive attitude toward oral interactions in class (Hsu, 2007; Su, 2006). This is an exam-
oriented course, and thus although the students' academic achievement has met the requirements to enter 
the universities in Taiwan, there is still room for improvement in their Mandarin oral communication 
skills.  (Su, 2006; Sung, 2005; Yao, 2011). The lack of communication skills among these students will 
influence their academic learning and interpersonal interactions after entering university (Wu, 2005). 
Given the increasing number of overseas Chinese students learning Mandarin as a heritage language 
(Curdt-Christiansen, 2006; He, 2006; He & Xiao, 2008), the above-mentioned problems encountered by 
overseas Chinese students in Taiwan are worthy of more attention from researchers and educators of 
Mandarin teaching and learning. In response to there being few studies that have focused on the identified 
gap between the practical research and the reality of Mandarin learning by overseas Chinese students, 
some inventive teaching approaches to enhance oral communication skills and intentions of engaging in 
oral communication should be proposed and investigated. 
Second Life for Mandarin Teaching and Learning 
Immersive virtual environments, such as SL, possess a unique and distinctive feature that fosters the 
realization of language educational purposes, something that is not easily achieved in an asynchronous 
web-based learning environment or even in a face-to-face learning situation. Hedberg and Alexander 
(1994), show that three-dimensional virtual environments provide learners with an interface in which 
users are able to directly control the objects in the context of the virtual world. The superior learning 
experience of SL increases “immersion and active learner participation,” (Hedberg & Alexander, 1994) 
and “social interaction” (Ellis, 1996), all the while being “authentic” (Lan et al., 2013), all of which are 
factors that are essential for successful language learning. Since 2006, this ability of SL to establish a 
community and assist the breaking down of barriers to communication, and to provide an immersive 
environment in which FL or L2 learners can become actively, collaboratively, and socially involved in 
authentic language learning activities has been drawing special attention from many FL/L2 researchers 
and educators (Chen, 2010; Cooke-Plagwitz, 2008; Godwin-Jones, 2011; Grant, 2010; Henderson, 
Huang, Grant, & Henderson, 2012; Hundsberger, 2009; Lan et al., 2013; Peterson, 2008; Stevens, 2006; 
Thorne, Black, & Sykes, 2009). 
Regarding studies of Mandarin teaching and learning in SL, Chen (2010) suggested that the instructor 
needs to develop pedagogically sound tasks to motivate learners to want to learn. Henderson et al. (2012) 
found that SL improved the self-efficacy beliefs of CFL students with respect to engaging in tasks. In 
addition to the affective dimension, Lan and her colleagues (2013) found that CFL beginners behaved 
more actively and engaged in more inter-peer interactions—consequently improving their Mandarin 
performance—when they were involved in executing language tasks in SL. 
In spite of the increasing interest in the potency and importance of SL in Mandarin teaching and learning, 
few studies have investigated the potential contribution of SL to the oral output and communication 
performances of overseas Chinese students. The effects of SL on Mandarin learning by overseas Chinese 
students were confirmed by answering the following questions: 
1. How and to what extent does SL influence the in-class oral output of overseas Chinese students? 
2. What are the effects of SL on the Mandarin language performances and learning attitudes of 
overseas Chinese students? 
 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 39 
MOVING FROM THE CONVENTIONAL TO THE VIRTUAL CLASSROOM 
As noted above, most overseas Chinese students enrolling in Taiwanese universities act passively in oral 
interactions in Mandarin language classes. Based on the positive evidence for CFL teaching in SL 
(Henderson et al., 2012; Lan et al., 2013), a two-stage action study was conducted to confirm the effects 
of SL on Mandarin learning by overseas Chinese students. Stage 1 focused on whether SL could 
effectively increase students' in-class oral output through comparing the results of students’ oral output in 
two different learning environments- the conventional classroom versus SL. Once these potential effects 
have been confirmed, stage 2 focuses on the extent to which SL enhances the overseas Chinese students’ 
performances and learning attitudes toward Mandarin by investigating their improvement in both Chinese 
oral communication performances and learning attitudes toward Chinese learning after they performed the 
Mandarin learning tasks in SL. The methods and results of each stage are described briefly below. 
Stage 1: Confirming the Effects of SL on the In-Class Oral Output of Overseas Chinese Students 
Participants 
The participants in stage 1 were 20 overseas students of Chinese (mean age, 20.1 years; 10 males and 10 
females), comprising 12 from Indonesia, 2 from Japan, and 6 from Vietnam. These students voluntarily 
enrolled in the study and were assigned to one of two groups via a random number generator: control (odd 
numbers) or experimental (even numbers). Each group was comprised of 10 overseas students of Chinese: 
six from Indonesia, one from Japan, and three from Vietnam. Table 1 lists the detailed demographics data 
of the participant in Stage 1.   
Table 1. Stage 1 Participants’ Demographics. 
 Experimental group (n=10) Control group (n=10) 
Age 19.1 20.8 
Gender F= 3; M= 7 F=4; M=6 
Nationality   
Indonesia 6 6 
Japan 1 1 
Vietnam 3 3 
Research design 
The experimental design adopted for stage 1 involved the students in the control group learning Mandarin 
in a conventional classroom, while those in the experimental group learned in SL. Both groups were 
taught by the same instructor, learned identical material, and performed the same activities; the only 
difference between them was their learning environment. All of the teaching processes in both groups 
were recorded and analyzed to allow comparison of the differences in classroom talk during the lessons. 
Besides, the participating teacher was asked to write down her reflection on her teaching after 
each class.  
Instruments 
In-Class Interaction Analysis Scheme 
The scheme used to analyze in-class interactions was a revised form of Moskowitz’s FLint System 
(Moskowitz, 1971), as shown in Appendix A. In the revised scheme, as in the original, there are two 
categories of classroom talking: teacher and student. New dialog types, however, were added to the 
original subcategories to incorporate the actual conversation transcripts obtained from the recorded videos. 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 40 
Teaching Plans and Environments 
Two teaching units were designed for stage 1, both of which involved task-based learning. The first 
focused on teaching overseas Chinese students how to order meals at a restaurant, while the aim of the 
second was to encourage students to choose a movie that all of the group members would like to go see 
together. Both teaching units were taught following an identical procedure, (described in the Procedure 
section). In addition, the teaching environments included conventional classroom and SL scenes: in the 
former, practical teaching aids were used to help students understand the authentic contexts in which the 
conversations were happening, while in the latter, virtual scenes were created to help students to immerse 
themselves in an authentic context. Figure 1 shows the two classrooms used in stage 1. 
 
Figure 1. Two classrooms used in stage 1: conventional (left) and virtual (right). 
Procedure 
Before the treatment (i.e., teaching phase), the experimental group received training on operating SL for 
two hours, such as avatar moving (including walking, running, and flying), moving objects, and wearing 
and removing objects. After completion of the training, the two groups worked on two units of materials 
for two weeks: one unit per week for one hour each. To avoid disturbing the students’ regular classes, the 
pilot Mandarin language classes were arranged during students’ availablility.  
Each learning unit included two parts: basic skill training and task execution. For the basic skill training, 
new Mandarin words and sentence patterns were introduced to the students, who were then assigned 
missions to execute as individuals or as a group. During the task execution, the teacher played the role of 
a learning supporter to provide students with real-time assistance. For example, in unit one the students 
first learned the dishes and food items served in a restaurant, including appetizer, main dish, and dessert. 
They then worked in groups, first in small groups of three or four to discuss what combinations their 
restaurant should serve. They then role-played as customers and restaurant owners, in turn, to practice 
ordering meals and providing services at a restaurant. 
During the treatment, all of the teaching processes and classroom talking were recorded and analyzed. 
The learning processes in SL were recorded via a free screen-recording software program (Fraps). In 
contrast, the learning processes in the conventional classroom were recorded via two digital video 
cameras. All of the recorded videos were then transcribed and analyzed by two decoders who focused 
both on the teacher and on the student speech in class, following the in-class interaction analysis scheme 
(Appendix A). 
Results 
The Spearman coefficient of concordance was computed from the decoded results obtained from the two 
decoders. The Pearson correlation was .948 (significant at the <.001 level). Table 2 lists the decoding 
results plus the results from the chi-square analysis of the two teaching environments in the two teaching 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
units. The level of statistical significance was set at p<.05. 
Table 2. Results of Video Decoding & Chi-Square Analyses of Two Environments in Two Teaching Units. 
Teaching unit (U) 
and environment 
Classroom talking 
Teacher talking (%) Student talking (%) 
TI TD TC SSp SO SSi SCWO SCNW
O 
SN Chi-
square 
U1 Conventional 
classroom 
12.5 47.32 0 23.66 8.04 1.79 3.57 .45 2.68 30.4*** 
Second Life 10.26 35.38 1.03 12.31 37.95 1.54 1.54 0 0 
U2 Conventional 
classroom 
19.25 38.82 6.21 21.43 4.97 1.24 5.90 1.00 1.24 15.2 
Second Life 11.93 41.56 4.94 24.69 15.23 1.23 .41 0 0 
U1&2 Conventional 
classroom 
16.48  42.31  3.66  22.34  6.23  1.47  4.95  .73  1.83  18.7** 
Second Life 11.19  38.81  3.20  19.18  25.34  1.37  .91  0 0  
Notes *p < .05 **p < .01 ***p < .001; TI= teacher talking (indirect influence); TD=teacher talking (direct influence); TC=teacher 
talking (command); SSp=student talking (specific response); SO=student talking (open-ended response); SSi=student talking 
(silence); SCWO=student talking (confusion, work-oriented); SCNWO= student talking (confusion, non-work-oriented); 
SN=student talking (nonverbal) 
As listed in Table 1, the percentage of students talking was much higher in SL than in the conventional 
classroom. Furthermore, much more open-ended student talking was observed in SL than that in 
conventional classroom. The chi-square analysis revealed a significant difference between the two 
environments: unit 1, χ=30.4, df=8, p=.000; unit 2, χ=15.2, df=8, p=.055; units 1 plus 2, χ=18.7, df=8, 
p=.016. 
The results obtained from the video analysis described above are in line with the teacher’s reflection of 
her teaching, as follows: 
Using more teaching resources, such as ‘text chat,’ and more linguistic input (e.g., teaching 
adjectives ‘interesting’) in SL would foster greater engagement by more students than using 
solely PPT in the conventional classroom.  
The dialog taking place in SL is more effective and successful than the dialog in the conventional 
classroom, because students are immediately engaged in the real-life-like setting. 
In contrast to these positive results, there were also some challenges in teaching Mandarin in SL. The 
greatest problem is that some of the functions provided in SL make it easy to disturb the teaching process. 
For example, it was found that students liked to fly around when doing some of the activities, such as the 
content introduction and group discussions. They also liked to keep running from one group to another, 
which sometimes introduced difficulties for the teacher during group discussions in SL; for example, one 
teacher said: “…Sometimes I was unable to group students in SL, so I decided to have each individual 
student work on their own…” This kind of task-structure-related problem was also observed by Chen 
(2010). In addition, some students were not efficiently engaged in the learning activities at the beginning 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 42 
of the process, because they were not sufficiently familiar with the SL functions, as noted by the teacher: 
…sometimes in SL, students were unfamiliar with the functions for buying and selling items 
when doing activities, so that they needed more time to catch up with the teaching activities… 
Fortunately, these challenges did not hinder the overseas Chinese students from contributing to in-class 
oral conversations. Moreover, the above-mentioned challenges could be conquered through better task 
design and SL skill pre-training (Lan et al., 2013). 
The potential of SL for promoting in-class oral output by overseas Chinese students was confirmed by the 
findings of this stage. However, in order to determine the real effects of SL on teaching Mandarin to 
overseas Chinese students, more attention needs to be paid to both the task design and to guidance, as 
well as to SL function training in order to avoid the identified challenges to the teaching process in SL. 
Stage 2: Confirming the Effects of SL on the Performance of and Learning Attitudes Toward 
Mandarin of Overseas Chinese Students 
The aim of stage 2 was to confirm the effects of SL on the performance of and learning attitudes toward 
Mandarin of overseas Chinese students in regular Mandarin language classes. The CUE model proposed 
by Lan and her colleagues (2013) was adopted in order to prevent the problems identified in the task-
execution process, a well-structured task design based on the cognition (“C,” focusing on basic skill 
introduction), usage (“U,” focusing on individual task execution), and expansion (“E,” aimed at using 
Mandarin to execute cooperative task process). I anticipated that the performance and the learning 
attitudes of the students would significantly benefit by embedding Mandarin language classes in SL, but 
without the problems identified in stage 1. 
Participants 
One class of 24 overseas students of Chinese (2 from South Africa, 2 from Vietnam, and 20 from 
Indonesia; mean age 19.5 years) in NTNU participated in stage 2. Of these, only four had previous 
experience learning CFL before they arrive in Taiwan. The students were expected to acquire sufficient 
Mandarin language abilities, both written and oral, during the first year at university to prepare them for 
entrance to their target universities in Taiwan. 
Research design 
Both the performance of and learning attitudes toward Mandarin before and after the teaching process 
were assessed, as described in Instruments, using a quantitative approach. The collected data were 
analyzed via dependent-sample t-test to evaluate the improvements made by the students in both 
parameters due to the use of SL. 
Instruments 
Mandarin language learning-attitudes questionnaire 
The questionnaire was revised according to studies by Dörnyei (1990, 1998), Schmidt (1996), and Wei 
(2007), and included three dimensions: affective (18 items), pragmatic (7 items), and educational context-
related (8 items) as shown in Appendix B. The responses to all of the items were on a 4-point Likert scale, 
from strongly agree (4) to strongly disagree (1). Furthermore, the affective dimension contained four sub-
dimensions: pleasure experience (e.g., “I find great pleasure in learning Mandarin”), self-satisfaction 
(e.g., “learning Mandarin broadens my view”), goal-related (e.g., “I plan to continue studying Mandarin 
for as long as possible”), and self-concept-related (e.g., “my communication ability in Mandarin is 
good”). The pragmatic dimension measured the perceptions of learners’ gains in extrinsic benefits, such 
as taking an L2 for living better (e.g., “learning Mandarin is helpful for my future career”). The 
educational context-related dimension measured the attitudes of learners toward the learning atmosphere, 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
learning environment, and learning activities (e.g., “the language tasks of Mandarin lessons in SL are 
interesting and helpful”). In addition to the 4-point Likert scale, one open-ended question was included at 
the end of the questionnaire to allow students to express any ideas that were not covered by the 
aforementioned items. 
Mandarin language oral performance online test 
The aim of this test was to determine the communication abilities of the foreign students of Chinese, 
including two categories, each including 10 items: Mandarin words and grammar. All of the items were 
first confirmed by three content experts and then uploaded to an online test system developed by the 
author. In order to avoid the interference of unknown Mandarin characters, the test items included audio–
picture pairs for listening comprehension and picture-recording for the oral component. Figure 2 shows an 
example of the test items used in stage 2. 
 
Figure 2. An example of the test items used in stage 2. 
Teaching plans and environments 
Three teaching units, described in detail below, were taught in stage 2, which were designed based on the 
CUE model proposed by Lan et al. (2013). The themes of the used units were asking directions (unit 1), 
arranging the room (unit 2), and visiting friends (unit 3). In addition, corresponding SL scenes were 
created to provide overseas Chinese students with authentic contexts. Taking unit 3 as an example, a gift 
store was created in SL (Figure 3) where the students could go to choose gifts for their friends. 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
 
Figure 3. A gift store in SL where students can buy gifts for friends. 
Procedures 
The duration of stage 2 was nine weeks, and 1 hour per week. Both the Mandarin performance test and 
Mandarin learning-attitude questionnaire were administered in the first week as a pretest. The students 
received training on the operation of SL during the second week. Some additional opportunities for SL 
practice were also provided before the Mandarin language classes started in the third week. Students 
practiced controlling their avatars and interacting with SL objects during their free time. After they 
acquired the operational skills needed for the class, the three units were taught from the third week, each 
for 2 weeks. Furthermore, all of the classes were arranged during the students’ regular timetables. In the 
final week, both the Mandarin performance test and Mandarin learning-attitude questionnaire were re-
administered as a posttest. 
The teaching procedure of each unit followed the CUE model. For each unit, the “C” (cognition) and “U” 
(usage) parts were executed in the first week, while “E” (expansion) was executed in the second week. 
The procedure in unit 3, which involved visiting friends, is described in detail below as an example. 
First, for “C,” students were taught the words and sentence patterns for describing object positioning, 
such as “書本在桌子上面 (the books are on the table)”, the quantities of objects, such as “我有五顆蘋果 
(I have five apples),” and a perfect tense sentence, such as “我去過法國 I have been to France).” Next, 
for “U,” students entered a room with food, soft drinks, and souvenirs. They were asked to guess in which 
room the host had eaten and where he had been before, based on what they saw in the room (see Figure 4).  
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
 
Figure 4. The room used for “U” (usage) in unit 3. 
Finally, for “E,” the students were grouped into small groups of four or five, and a gift-picking mission 
was assigned to each group. They were provided with some note cards with cues to complete the mission. 
Each group was asked to determine what gift and how much/many of them should be bought, and which 
friend they should visit. After all of the groups had reached a consensus, they went to the supermarket 
(see Figure 3) to buy the gifts, then went to visit the friend. Finally, the teacher rewarded the groups who 
successfully completed the assignment with a motorcycle as a prize (see Figure 5). 
 
Figure 5. Motorcycles were given as a prize to students who successfully completed the assigned mission. 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
Results 
Gains in the Mandarin oral performance test 
The scores of both the Mandarin oral performance test and Mandarin learning-attitude questionnaire were 
collected and analyzed in Stage 2. The Mandarin oral performance test was administered online to all the 
participants before and after completion of the Mandarin language teaching course. Table 3 lists the 
means and standard deviations for the online Mandarin oral performance test plus the results of the t-test 
analysis. Five students were absent from the posttest because they were either unwell or had returned to 
their home country during the semester; therefore, the scores of 19 students were analyzed. 
Table 3. Means and Standard Deviations (SDs) for Mandarin Oral Performance Test and t-test Analyses 
(n=19). 
Test Mean SD t 
Pretest 29.68 14.32 -6.412* 
Posttest 48.11 11.68 
Note: *p < .05 **p < .01 ***p < .001 
The overseas Chinese students made significant improvements after using SL as the learning environment 
for Mandarin (t=-6.412, df=18, p=.000<.05). Furthermore, the standard deviation was smaller at posttest 
than at pretest, which suggests that learning in SL reduces the inter-peer gaps in the Mandarin oral 
performances of overseas Chinese students. 
Improvements in Mandarin language-learning attitudes 
In addition to Mandarin oral performances, the attitudes of overseas Chinese students toward Mandarin 
learning were a focus of stage 2. Table 4 lists the scores on the 4-point questionnaire response scales 
obtained before and after the teaching activities. The same five students who were absent for the 
performance posttest were also absent for this posttest; therefore, the scores of the same 19 students were 
analyzed. 
Table 4. Results for the Mandarin Learning-Attitude Questionnaire (n=19). 
Dimension Pretest Posttest t 
Mean SD Mean SD  
Affective      
 Pleasure experience 3.11 .38 3.13 .39 –.244 
Self-satisfaction 3.18 .51 3.25 .46 –.552 
Goal-related 3.04 .45 3.35 .41 –3.356* 
Self-concept-related 2.87 .40 2.92 .28 –.506 
Subtotal 3.04 .36 3.16 .28 –1.738 
Pragmatic 3.24 .44 3.40 .39 –1.343 
Educational context-related 2.86 .28 3.59 .46 –6.391* 
Total 2.60 .26 3.21 .28 –10.514* 
Note: *p < .05 **p < .01 ***p < .001 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
The data in Table 3 indicate significant improvements in the total questionnaire scores of the overseas 
Chinese students (t=-10.514, df=18, p=.000). Regarding dimension-based comparisons, the affective 
dimension did not differ significantly between the pre- and posttest, but the goal-related subdimension 
was significantly improved at the posttest, which means that learning Mandarin in SL significantly 
increased the interest of the overseas Chinese students. The pragmatic dimension, however, did not differ 
significantly between the two tests. The score of the educational context-related dimension was 
significantly improved at posttest, which indicates that the students regarded the learning environment 
and activities in SL highly. 
Despite the positive results, the low scores (pretest: 2.87, posttest: 2.92) in the self-concept-related 
(affective) subdimension were of concern to the author although the posttest score improved. This might 
have been due to the short learning period, amounting to only six hours, for learning the three units. 
Regarding the students’ responses to the open-ended question, no written responses were provided in the 
pretest, but some comments were collected at the posttest. These comments fell into three categories: (1) 
comments regarding SL as a Mandarin language learning environment, (2) the desire for more similar 
opportunities to learn Mandarin, and (3) complaints about the network connection quality. For the first 
category, all of the students’ comments showed approval of the learning activities and the authentic 
contexts in SL. Some examples are as follows: 
“I love to learn Mandarin in this way.” 
“To execute Mandarin learning missions in SL is very interesting and helpful. I can make 
improvement in my Mandarin language abilities.” 
“The basic one makes it easier to learn the themes such as clothes, house, etc.” 
“I think SL helped me to think in Mandarin and try to learn about its pronunciation. It also helps me 
to practice and think with others. It’s interesting.” 
“Learning in SL is more interesting than in the conventional classroom. That’s because only the 
teacher talked in the conventional classroom rather than the students.” 
As to the students’ desire to learn, they expressed a hope for more Mandarin language classes running in 
SL, such as: “The time is too short. I want more.” Some students not only expressed their desire for more 
SL classes, but also complained about the Internet connection sometimes being of poor quality. Some 
examples are as follows: 
“SL is great, but the computers should be upgraded.” 
“It’s actually fun to learn through this new environment, but due to the Internet speed we can barely 
feel the effect sometimes.” 
“Sometimes I could not successfully login to SL, which may be caused by the network connection. 
However, learning in SL is truly fun.” 
In summary, learning Mandarin in SL significantly improved the oral performances of and learning 
attitudes toward Mandarin of the international students of Chinese. It also inspired them to engage more 
in the language-learning activities and to orally interact with others. 
LIMITATION AND CONCLUSIONS 
According to the suggestions of Krashen (1981), Long (1996), and van Lier (1996), FL/L2 learners will 
only become fluent if they have opportunities to engage themselves in authentic linguistic social 
practices. In order to promote the oral outputs and interpersonal conversation skills of overseas Chinese 
students, SL was adopted for Mandarin language classes. The results obtained from stage 1 indicated that 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
overseas Chinese students behaved more actively in interpersonal interactions and talked more frequently 
in SL than in the conventional classroom. The strong desire to perform orally might be attributable to the 
ownership and personalized avatars provided in SL, as proposed by Peterson (2008), who stated that the 
use of personalized avatars supports users with a strong sense of immersion within virtual worlds and 
consequently enhances involvement, enjoyment, and interest in interactions. 
The authentic environments in SL also provided overseas Chinese students with an essential context for 
enhancing the L2 comprehension process. Hadley (2001) suggests that language learning activities that 
provide relevant context should be helpful for activating the knowledge that students have of the world 
and the familiarity of the discourse structure. The activities executed in stage 2 were accompanied by 
authentic contexts for helping overseas Chinese students to comprehend when, where, and why the 
conversations happened. The significant improvement in Mandarin oral performance made by the 
students not only confirmed Hadley’s argument, but it is also consistent with the research on applying SL 
in CFL teaching conducted by Lan et al. (2013). The results obtained from stage 2 also confirm the effects 
of SL in promoting the learning attitudes of foreign Chinese students toward the Mandarin language, and 
were in line with the English as a foreign language (EFL) research conducted by Wang and his colleagues 
(Wang, Song, Xia, & Yan, 2009), who found that students had positive attitudes toward SL as a learning 
platform for EFL learning and wanted to use it for EFL learning more often in the future. 
The behaviors of the foreign Chinese students during the task-completion process revealed that the 
reorganized task structure based on the CUE model benefited them both when performing the individual 
and group tasks. Their attention was focused on the learning tasks and they produced useful output after 
completion. The findings confirm the importance of task structure for language learning suggested by 
many researchers, such as Chen (2010) and Jauregi and her colleagues (Jauregi, Canto, de Graaff, 
Koenraad, & Moonen, 2011). 
In contrast to these positive results, the index of students’ self-conception in Mandarin learning attitude 
remained lower than 3 on the 4-point scale at the posttest (score range: 2.4–3.4, average: 2.92). This result 
is not consistent with those of Henderson et al. (2012), who found that collaborative language lessons 
using SL results in a statistically significant increase in self-efficacy beliefs among students across a 
range of specific and general language skills. These discrepant results may be attributable to the very 
short learning period in the present study (only one hour per week for six weeks), and suggest that more 
effort is required to improve the self-efficacy beliefs of overseas Chinese students in concert with their 
proven performance improvements. 
In addition to Mandarin learning-related issues, the problems caused by the Internet connection that 
hampered the teaching process were also an important concern of this study. A similar problem has also 
been encountered by other researchers using SL in language learning, (e.g. Chen, 2010 and Wang et al., 
2009. Thus, it is clear that technological problems represent an important challenge for language 
educators and researchers attempting to help FL/L2 learners gain benefits from the use of virtual worlds. 
To deal with the problem, both learners’ computer performance and bandwidth should be taken into 
account. Regarding the computer performance, computers equipped with independent Graphic Card have 
the potential to make SL run more smoothly. On the other hand, according to Linden Lab 
(http://wiki.secondlife.com/wiki/Lag), bandwidth generally needs a connection speed at least 500 kilobits 
per second (kbps) to adequately run SL, i.e. to execute basic operations of SL and, in fact, needs higher 
bandwidth to reduce Internet latency. However, based on the experiences learned from a later study 
conducted by the author, it is suggested that the researchers/instructors could simplify the structure of the 
architectures in SL, or have the learners check if their avatars put too many complex objects on them in 
order to reduce the Internet latency. In addition to the practical suggestions given above, another point 
worthy of greater attention and efforts from researchers is how to create a virtual context that possesses 
similar features to SL, as described above.  Because of the small sample size, a short period for the 
experimental procedure, and the non-upgraded computer equipment used in this study, the research 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
results could become a general reference to the related research only after further investigation and 
evaluation. 
In conclusion, SL was successfully applied to a Mandarin language course, yielding improvements in the 
oral output, performance, and learning attitudes toward Mandarin among overseas Chinese students. 
Future studies should attempt to confirm the effects of SL in promoting overseas Chinese students’ self-
conception and efficacy beliefs in the target language by expanding the experimental period and enrolling 
more participants. 
 
APPENDIX A. In-Class Interaction Analysis Scheme (Revised From Moskowitz’s Flint System) 
Category Code Description 
Indirect 
influence 
1 Deal with feelings: In a nonthreatening way, accepting, discussing, referring to, or 
communicating understanding of past, present, or future feelings of students. 
2 Praises or encourages: Praising, complimenting, and telling students why what they 
have said or done is valued. Encouraging students to continue, trying to give them 
confidence. Confirming answers are correct. 
2a Jokes: International joking, kidding, making puns, and attempting to be humorous, 
providing that the joking is not at anyone’s expense. Unintentional humor is not 
included in this category. 
3 Uses ideas of students: Clarifying, using, interpreting, and summarizing the ideas of 
students. The idea must be rephrased by the teacher but still recognized as being a 
student contribution. 
Direct 
influence 
4 Asks questions: Asking questions to which an answer is anticipated. 
5 Gives information: Giving information, facts, own opinion or ideas, lecturing, or 
asking rhetorical questions. 
5a Directs pattern drills: Giving statements that students are expected to repeat exactly, 
to make substitutions in, or to change from one form into another. 
6 Repeats a student’s response verbatim: Repeating the exact words used by students. 
6a Corrects without rejection: Telling students who have made a mistake the correct 
response without using words or intonations that communicate criticism. 
6b Criticizes a student’s response: Telling the student his response is not correct or 
acceptable and communicating by words or intonation criticism, displeasure, 
annoyance, or rejection. 
7 Gives directions: Giving directions, requests, or commands that students are 
expected to follow. 
7a Criticizes student behavior: Rejecting the behavior of students, trying to change 
unacceptable behavior, communicating anger, displeasure, annoyance, and 
dissatisfaction with what the students are doing. 
Student 
response 
8 Specific response (individual): Responding to the teacher by an individual student 
within a specific and limited range of available or previously shaped answers. 
Reading aloud. 
8a Specific response (combined): Combined response by all or part of the class. 
8b Student repeats what the teacher demonstrates (individual): Student repeating what 
the teacher demonstrates or says. 
8c Students repeat what the teacher demonstrates (combined): Combined repetition of 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
what the teacher demonstrates or says by all or part of the class. 
9 Open-ended response: Responding to the teacher with the student’s own ideas, 
opinions, reactions, and feelings. Providing one from among many possible answers 
that have been previously shaped but from which students must now make a 
selection. Initiating the participation. 
9a Student-initiated questions: Asking open-ended questions based on what the teacher 
has said. 
9b Student-initiated response: Responding to or giving comments to other students’ 
responses. 
9c Peer talking: work-oriented, clear interpeer talking. 
9d Work-oriented response: More than one person at a time clearly responding to the 
teacher’s open-ended questions. 
Silence 10 Pauses in the interaction. Periods of quiet during which there is no verbal 
interaction. 
Confusion 11 Confusion (work-oriented): More than one person at a time talking, so the 
interaction cannot be recorded. Students call out excitedly, eager to participate or 
respond, and concerned with task at hand. 
11a Confusion (non-work-oriented): More than one person at a time talking, so the 
interaction cannot be recorded. Students talking out-of-order, not behaving as the 
teacher wishes, and not concerned with the task at hand. 
Nonverbal 12 Laughter: Laughing and giggling by the class, individuals, and/or the teacher. 
n Nonverbal: Nonverbal gestures or facial expressions by the teacher or the student 
that communicate without the use of words. This category is always combined with 
one of the categories of teacher or pupil behaviors. 
Mother 
tongue 
m Use of students’ native language by the teacher or students. This category is always 
combined with one of the other categories described above. 
 
APPENDIX B. Mandarin Language-Attitudes Questionnaire 
Dear Student, 
 
Thank you for taking the time to complete this survey. Your feedback is important to us in helping 
understand learners’ Chinese learning experience and how they feel while using Second Life to learn 
Chinese. The survey takes about 5-10 minutes of your time. All survey results will be used only for 
academic research purposes. Your answers will not affect how the teacher grades your progress. 
 
Thank you again for your help. 
 
你對中文學習的看法 Your Opinion of Chinese Learning 
題目 Question 非常同意 
Extremely 
Agree 
同意 
Agree 
不同意 
Disagree 
非常不同意 
Extremely 
disagree 
我可以從學中文的過程中得到樂趣。 
I find great pleasure in learning Chinese. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
當遇到和課程中學習內容相似的情況時，我有信心
能和說中文的朋友用中文溝通。 
I have confidence to communicate with a Chinese 
friend in Chinese on topics similar to those covered in 
this class. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
說中文能讓我從事更好、更有趣的工作。 
If I can speak Chinese, I can find more interesting and 
better jobs. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
中文課裡的任務活動很有趣，對我的中文能力也有
幫助。 
The language tasks in our Chinese lessons are 
interesting and helpful! 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
學習中文可以擴展我的視野。 
Learning Chinese broadens my horizons. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
我常常思考如何把中文學得更好。 
I often think about how I can learn Chinese better. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
中文讓我成為更有競爭力的求職者。 
Chinese will makes me more competitive in the job 
market. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
我喜歡學中文。 
I enjoy learning Chinese. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
我覺得中文課裡的任務活動對於提高我的中文水準
很有用。 
I found the task-based lessons we have done were 
useful to improve my Chinese.  
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
如果我在中文課表現得很好，是因為我很努力。 
If I do well in this course, it will be because I work 
hard. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
我會盡全力學習中文。 
I can honestly say that I really put my best effort into 
trying to learn Chinese. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
我必須參加 TOCFL或HSK之類的中文考試。 
I have to take TOCFL, HSK, or other Chinese 
qualifying examinations. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
我對中華文化、歷史及文學有興趣。 
I am interested in Chinese culture, history and/or 
literature. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
我和老師在中文課裡的互動很重要。 
My interaction with the teacher in Chinese class is 
important to me. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
我的中文溝通技巧不錯。 4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
My communication ability in Chinese is good. 
我希望到臺灣或中國等說中文的國家旅行。 
I would like to travel to a Chinese-speaking country, 
such as Taiwan or China. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
如果我被要求在中文課發言會覺得不舒服。 
I feel uncomfortable if I am asked to speak in my 
Chinese class. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
在這個課程結束後，我會繼續學習中文，因為它對
我很重要。 
After I finish this class, I will keep learning Chinese, 
because studying Chinese is important to me. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
能在符合真實語境的環境裡頭學習語言是有趣的。 
It is fun to learn language in an authentic context & 
environment.  
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
學中文幫助我了解說中文的人和他們的生活方式。 
Learning Chinese helps me understand Chinese-speaking 
people and their way of life. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
如果我會說中文，我就有更多因公參訪的機會。 
If I can speak Chinese, I can travel more for official 
purposes. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
我認為學習中文能讓我得到更好的教育機會。 
I think learning Chinese will enable me to get a better 
education opportunity. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
我覺得我的中文還不錯。 
I think my Chinese is quite good. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
我會盡可能地持續學習中文。 
I plan to continue studying Chinese for as long as 
possible. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
我在中文課的出席率很高。 
My attendance in Chinese class is good. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
如果我在中文課堂上表現不好，是因為課程太難了
。 
If I don’t do well in this class, it will be because the 
class is too difficult. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
我希望能和中文母語者用中文進行工作上的溝通。 
I want to use Chinese to work and communicate with 
Chinese speakers. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
在匿名的學習環境裡，我不會擔心是否說錯中文。 
In an anonymous environment, I am not afraid of 
making mistakes while speaking Chinese. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
學習中文讓我覺得有成功感。 
Learning Chinese makes me feel successful. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
學習中文對我未來的事業有幫助。 
Learning Chinese is helpful for my future career. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
課堂中使用的詞彙很合適，既不會太多也不會太少
，不會太難也不會太簡單。 
The vocabulary used in my Chinese class is 
appropriate. (neither too much nor too little; neither too 
difficult nor too easy) 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
符合真實語境的學習環境能幫助我把學到的語言技
巧和知識用到真實世界中。 
Learning in a realistic context helps me transfer 
language skills and/or knowledge to the real-world 
contexts. 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
在電腦教室中進行的中文任務課程有趣且對我有幫
助。 
The language tasks of Chinese lessons in the computer 
lab are interesting and helpful! 
4□ 3□ 2□ 1□ 
其他意見 Other Opinions and Comments 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The author would like to thank the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan, R.O.C., for financially 
supporting this research under Grant No. NSC 101-2511-S-003-031-MY3. She is also thankful that this 
research is partially supported by the “Aim for the Top University Project” of National Taiwan Normal 
University (NTNU), sponsored by the Ministry of Education, Taiwan, R.O.C., the “International 
Research-Intensive Center of Excellence Program” of NTNU and the Ministry of Science and 
Technology, Taiwan, R.O.C. under Grant No. NSC 103-2911-I-003-301.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Yu-Ju Lan is currently an Associate Professor of Department of Applied Chinese Language and Culture 
at National Taiwan Normal University. Her research interests include technology enhanced foreign 
language learning, online synchronous teacher training, language learning in virtual worlds, and mobile 
learning. 
E-mail: yujulan@gmail.com 
 
REFERENCES 
Chen, D. (2010). Enhancing the learning of Chinese with Second Life. Journal of Technology and 
Chinese Learning Teaching, 1(1), 14–30. 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
Chen, L. Y. (2009). A diverse learning place for Asia-Pacific students: A case study of college of 
international studies and education for overseas Chinese of National Taiwan Normal University. 
Proceedings of 2009 Asia-Pacific International Conference on Language and Culture Education, 57-76. 
Pingtung County, Taiwan: National Pingtung University of Education Press. Retrieved from 
140.127.82.166/bitstream/987654321/2056/1/9.pdf 
Cooke-Plagwitz, J. (2008). New directions in CALL: An objective introduction to Second Life. CALICO 
Journal, 25(3), 547–557. 
Curdt-Christiansen, X. L. (2006). Teaching and learning Chinese: Heritage language classroom discourse 
in Montreal. Language, Culture and Curriculum, 19(2), 189–207. 
Deutschmann, M., Panichi, L., & Molka-Danielsen, J. (2009). Designing oral participation in Second 
Life- a comparative study of two language proficiency courses. ReCALL, 21(2), 206–226. 
Dörnyei, Z. (1990). Conceptualizing motivation in foreign-language learning. Language Learning, 40(1), 
45–78.  
Dörnyei, Z. (1998). Motivation in second and foreign language learning. Language Teaching, 31, 117–
135. 
Ellis, S. (1996). Presence of mind: a reaction to Thomas Sheridan’s ‘Further musings on the 
psychophysics of presence’. Presence, 5(2), 247–259. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2011). Emerging technologies- Autonomous language learning. Language Learning & 
Technology, 15(3), 4–11. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/emerging.pdf 
Grant, S. (2010). About Monash Chinese Island. Retrieved from 
http://www.virtualhanyu.com/?page_id=87 
Hadley, A. O. (2001). Teaching language in context (3rd ed.). Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle. 
He, A. W. (2006). Toward an identity theory of the development of Chinese as heritage language. 
Heritage Language Journal, 4(1), 1–28. 
He, A. W., & Xiao, Y. (2008). Chinese as a heritage language: Fostering rooted world citizenry. 
Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai‘i Press. Retrieved from 
http://www.nflrc.hawaii.edu/PDFs/MG02TOC.pdf 
Hedberg, J. & Alexander, S. (1994). Virtual reality in education: Defining researchable issues. 
Educational Media International, 31(4), 214–220. 
Henderson, M., Huang, H., Grant, S, & Henderson, L. (2012). The impact of Chinese language lessons in 
a virtual world on university students' self-efficacy beliefs. Australasian Journal of Educational 
Technology, 28 (Special issue, 3), 400–419. Retrieved from 
http://www.ascilite.org.au/ajet/ajet28/henderson.html 
Hsu, C. Y. (2007). A qualitative study of overseas Chinese university students’ process of successful 
adaptation (Master’s thesis). Retrieved from http://ndltd.ncl.edu.tw/cgi-
bin/gs32/gsweb.cgi?o=dnclcdr&s=id=%22095NTNU5051014%22.&searchmode=basic 
Hundsberger, S. (2009). Foreign Language learning in Second Life and the implications for resource 
provision in academic libraries. Retrieved from http://arcadiaproject.lib.cam.ac.uk/docs/second_life.pdf   
Jauregi, K., Canto, S., de Graaff, R., Koenraad, T., & Moonen, M. (2011). Verbal interaction in Second 
Life: Towards a pedagogic framework for task design. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 24(1), 77–
101. 
Jiang, X. M. (2007). The current situation and reflection of TCFL. Paper presented at 2007 Multicultural 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
and Ethnic Harmony International Conference, Taiwan, Taipei, November 23-24, 2007. Retrieved from 
http://r9.ntue.edu.tw/activity/multiculture_conference/file/2/3.pdf 
Krashen, S. D. (1981). Second language acquisition and second language learning. Oxford: Pergamon 
Press. 
Lan, Y. J., Kan, Y. H., Hsiao, I, Y. T. , Yang, S.J.H., & Chang, K. E. (2013). Designing interaction tasks 
in Second Life for CFL learners: A preliminary exploration. Australasian Journal of Educational 
Technology, 29(2), 184–202. 
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C. 
Ritchie & K. B. Tej (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413-468). San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press. 
Moskowitz, G. (1971). Interaction analysis: A new modern language for supervisors. Foreign Language 
Annals, 5(2), 211–221. 
National Taiwan Normal University (2010). The aim for the top university project-Center of learning 
technology for Chinese (CLTC). Retrieved from http://140.122.100.145/topntnu/cltc/e/1.html 
Peterson M. (2008). Virtual worlds in language education. The JALT CALL Journal, 4(3), 29–36. 
Rhodes, N., & Pufahl, I. (2009). Foreign language teaching in U.S. schools: Results of a national survey. 
Washington, DC: Center for Applied Linguistics. Retrieved from 
http://www.cal.org/projects/pdfs/foreign-language-national-survey-executive-summary.pdf 
Schmidt, R., Boraie, D., & Kassagby (1996). Foreign language motivation: Internal structure and external 
connections. In R. Oxford (Ed.), Language learning motivation: Pathways to the new century (pp. 9–56). 
Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai’i Press. 
Stevens, V. (2006). Second life in education and language learning. TESL-EJ, 10(3). Retrieved from 
http://tesl-ej.org/ej39/int.pdf   
Su,Y. L. (2006). The orientation and school achievement of overseas Chinese students studying in 
Taiwan.  Taipei, Taiwan: National Institute of Educational Resources and Research. 
Su, Y. L. (2008). The study of expatriate education policy in the main countries. Taipei, Taiwan: 
Overseas Community Affairs Council Republic of China (Taiwan). 
Sung, J. Y. (2005). From "learner" to "educator": A study on the training of TCSOL for Overseas Chinese 
university students. Retrieved from 
http://online.sfsu.edu/hdomizio/LinLaoshi/899/101_%B1q%BE%C7%B2%DF%AA%CC%A8%EC%B1
%D0%BE%C7%AA%CC.pdf 
Thorne, S. L., Black, R. W., & Sykes, J. M. (2009). Second language use, socialization, and learning in 
Internet interest communities and online game. The Modern Language Journal, 93, 802–823. 
Time Asia (2006). Get ahead, learn mandarin: China’s economic rise means the world has a new second 
language—and it isn't English. Retrieved from http://clta-gny.org/article/GetAhead.htm  
University Entrance Committee for Overseas Chinese Student (2014). 2014 Handbook of studying in 
Taiwan for overseas students (Northern Thailand). Retrieved from 
http://www.overseas.ncnu.edu.tw/index/news/qa/qa 
van Lier, L. (1996). Interaction in the language curriculum: Awareness, autonomy and authenticity. 
London, UK: Longman. 
Wang, C., Song, H., Xia, F., & Yan, Q. (2009). Integrating Second Life into an EFL program: Students’ 
perspectives. Journal of Educational Technology Development and Exchange, 2(1), 1–16. 
Yu-Ju Lan Mandarin Learning by Overseas Chinese Students  
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
Wei, M. (2007). The interrelatedness of affective factors in EFL learning: An examination of motivational 
patterns in relation to anxiety in China. TESL-EJ, 11(1). Retrieved from http://tesl-ej.org/ej41/a2.html 
Wikipedia (16 September, 2011). Unified examination certificate. Retrieved from 
http://zh.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E7%8B%AC%E4%B8%AD%E7%BB%9F%E4%B8%80%E8%80%83%
E8%AF%95 
Wikipedia (9 March, 2014). Taiwanese Mandarin. Retrieved from 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taiwanese_Mandarin 
Wu, Y. L. (2005).  The study of overseas Chinese students’ campus experiences and academic 
achievements (Master’s thesis). Taipei, Taiwan: National Taiwan Normal University. 
Yao, Y. S. (2011). The study of overseas Chinese students’ educational experience and adapting to 
school. Retrieved from http://ctld.nccu.edu.tw/ctld/?p=8950 
