Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/review3.pdf 
October 2014, Volume 18, Number 3 
pp. 47–51 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 47 
REVIEW OF ASSESSMENT IN GAME-BASED LEARNING 
Assessment in Game-Based Learning:  
Foundations, Innovations, and Perspectives 
 
Dirk Ifenthaler, Deniz Eseryel, and Xun Ge (Editors) 
2012 
ISBN: 978-1-4614-3545-7 
US $ 104.00 
476 pp. 
Springer 
New York 
 
 
Review by Katerina Zourou, Sør-Trøndelag University College 
Far from being a new concept to computer assisted language learning (CALL), gaming is attracting 
growing interest due to the increasing variety and sophistication of digital games, and more importantly, 
to the development of game-based learning (GBL) (Prensky, 2001) as a research field that has acquired 
academic credibility through a research agenda, scientific events, and specialized publication means (for a 
list of GBL journals, see SEGAN, n. d). Complementarity with concomitant educational fields in a 
collective attempt to understand learning in its various aspects is an ongoing exercise, and the research 
and practice of GBL are evolving in interdisciplinary ways that can add to this inquiry. The CALL 
community demonstrates its interest in GBL through numerous monographs, special journal issues, and 
edited books that have recently been published (Cornillie, Thorne, & Desmet, 2012; Peterson, 2013; 
Reinders, 2012; Reinhardt & Sykes, 2014). 
There are three motivations to review Assessment in Game-Based Learning for a CALL audience. The 
first is the cross-sectoral potential that the book may have for studies on CALL in general, and 
particularly those on game-based language learning. The second motivation is the lack of a solid body of 
empirical studies on curricular, task-based integration of digital games in formal learning contexts 
(Thomas, 2012) and the relevance of the book in respect to this type of evidence. The third motivation 
relates to the emerging trend of gaming in non-game digital environments. These motivations will be 
raised in the conclusion.  
Book objectives and content 
The book responds to a clearly identified need: to bridge game-based learning and game-based 
assessment, particularly in assessing complex problem-solving processes and outcomes in a digital game-
Katerina Zourou                           Review of Assessment in Game-Based Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  48
based learning environment. The book covers assessment in GBL from a theoretical, methodological, and 
technological perspective. 
The editors opt to not define learning and assessment in their preface, which may be intentional, as this 
choice would reflect a willingness to leave this task to the various contributors in relation to each book 
chapter. Indeed, the definitions of learning and assessment in a cross-disciplinary book such as this is 
challenging, even impossible, as the book gathers contributions from researchers in educational 
psychology, educational diagnostics, computer engineering, educational technology, and the learning 
sciences. This interdisciplinarity does not imply that a consensus of those crucial to the topic of the book 
should be met by all contributors. It does, however, illustrate the various understandings that the 
combination of the two terms can take in the different learning contexts in which they apply. As an 
indication, throughout the book “learning” takes on several meanings, understood variously as behaviour, 
skills, digital activity patterns, knowledge, emotions, mental models, or processes in a schooling 
environment. Accordingly, the book contributions reflect a range of understandings of the term 
“assessment”, linked to a problem-based gaming model, a set of achievement indicators, a response to 
computer-adaptive testing, or automated measurement artefacts—all depending on the theoretical 
perspective taken. Research foci also vary. These are reflected in how each chapter approaches the 
literature review, the development of assessment artefacts within game environments, the analysis of 
GBL practices online and offline, and curricular integration of gaming. From this point of view, Daniel T. 
Hickey and Ellen Jameson, in Chapter 20, offer an insightful contribution into the ways that various 
disciplines examine assessment in GBL. Their chapter offers an understanding of the tensions that emerge 
when designing, using, and assessing educational video games from these points of view. 
The book’s content is structured in three sections: a) foundations of game-based assessment, b) 
technological and methodological innovations for assessing game-based learning, and c) realizing 
assessment in game-based learning. 
In Part 1, Ifenthaler, Eseyrel and Ge (Chapter 1) provide the background of learning and assessment in 
game-based environments through a historical synopsis, followed by a critical review on implementation 
of assessment into games.  In Chapter 2, “Are All Games the Same?”, Schrader and McCreery examine 
three paradigms of serious game research (games as interventions; games as interactive tools; and 
immersive games) and explain the theoretical and methodological underpinnings of Brain Age, a game on 
mental fitness; SPORE, a science education game; and World of Warcraft, [provide brief descriptor for 
parallel structure here]. In Chapter 3 Brian Bellard raises the question of how formative assessments 
might be designed to measure student progress during games. He describes a crucial step in this process: 
the specification of learning goals and associated constructs. In Chapter 4 Shute and Ke address the 
question of how to embed assessments within games to provide a way to monitor a player’s current level 
on evaluated competencies, and then use that information as the basis for support. This first section 
concludes with Chapter 5 by Mislevy, Behrens, Dicerbo, Frezzo and West that defines three things game 
designers need to know about assessment: compatibility of principles of assessment design with those of 
game design; structure of reasoning as fundamental in assessment design; and necessity of addressing key 
constraints of assessment design from the very beginning of the design process. 
The second part presents technological and methodological innovations for assessing game-based 
learning.  Chapter 6, by Klaus Jantke, discusses patterns of game-playing behaviour and the ways these 
behaviours can function as indicators of mastery.  In the next Chapter, Shelton and Parlin identify a set of 
design decisions as the result of building an automated assessment prototype within an open-ended 3D 
learning environment (OELE). In Chapter 8, Christian Loh shows how the information trails approach 
represents a next step for in-process assessment of game-based learning, which refers to an ongoing 
formative assessment conducted throughout the game-based learning while the game session is ongoing. 
These information trails can serve for remote tracking and data collection. Chapter 9, authored by Reese, 
Seward, Tabachnick, Hitt, Harrison and McFarland, explores The Timed Report tool (synopsis of player 
Katerina Zourou                           Review of Assessment in Game-Based Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  49
behaviour at 10-second intervals), which represents another sensitive measurement of learning within 
games. In Chapter 10, Clark, Martínez-Garza, Biswas, Luecht and Sengupta explore computer adaptive 
testing and hidden Markov modeling as a methodology for driving assessment of students’ explanations 
in game dialogue. The Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge (TPACK) framework regarding 
the role of genre and content for game-based assessment is further developed in the Play, Curricular 
Activity, Reflection and Discussion (PCaRD) model, by Foster (Chapter 11). In Chapter 12, Gosper and 
McNeill provide a guide to learner-centered design and assessment for implementing game-based 
learning with the MAPLET framework (matching aims, processes, learner expertise and technologies). 
Finally, Csapó, Lörincz and Molnár address the assessment technology ODAS (Online Diagnostic 
Assessment System) in educational games designed for young students. 
The third part provides an insight into the latest empirical research findings and best practice examples of 
game-based assessment. Eseryel, Guo and Law (Chapter 14) discuss the interactivity design and 
assessment framework for educational games to promote motivation and complex problem-solving skills. 
The rapidly emerging field of computer-based assessment for gaming from the perspective of sound 
measurement principles is highly important for future principles of game-based assessment (Scalise & 
Wilson, Chapter 15). Challenges and recommendations for using institutional data to evaluate game-based 
instructional designs are highlighted next (Warren & Bigenho, Chapter 16). The seemingly incongruous 
use of 2D media avatar drawings and 3D media-math-based digital gameplay is reported on by Katz-
Buonincontro and Foster in Chapter 17. Ghergulescu and Muntean describe current trends in the 
assessment of learner motivation (Chapter 18), and emotion assessment methods are covered by Novak 
and Johnson in Chapter 19. A design model for obtaining diverse learning outcomes in innovative 
learning environments is exemplified by Hickey and Jameson in Chapter 20.  To close the volume, Frey 
(Chapter 21) makes a critical contribution by questioning computer games as preparation for future 
learning. 
CONCLUSION 
Overall, Assessment in Game-based Learning is a highly recommended book and one that fills a gap in 
existing literature, as it provides a range of evidence-based studies in a research field with a need for what 
Peterson (2012) has called a “balanced and critical approach to development that acknowledges the 
potential of computer games and builds on previous research while also recognizing the challenges 
associated with their use” (p. 132). The book covers assessment in GBL from various aspects of 
empirically driven research, which is undoubtedly an asset, especially in this rapidly evolving field. In 
addition, assessment is conceptualized as a complex phenomenon calling for research in several areas, 
and this is highlighted by the choice of editors to embrace this variety. A monograph on GBL from the 
perspective of assessment is an invaluable contribution to the GBL research community, which is eager 
for insightful and well-documented studies in this field. 
The book does offer insightful contributions on curricular, task-based integration of digital games in 
formal learning contexts. There are several chapters in this direction. To take the example of only two, in 
Chapter 21, Rick Frey critically raises the point of how to leverage knowledge acquired in a digital game 
environment in a formal assessment environment by highlighting the role of instructional activity. In 
Chapter 12, Maree Gosper and Margot McNeill suggest a framework consisting of three phases (early, 
intermediate and late), each associated with an outcome, a process, a possible game, and an assessment 
mechanism. Alignment with the curriculum is discussed through analysis of the framework with an actual 
computer game.   
What might be regretted is the lack of investigation into assessment of GBL in non-game contexts. Due to 
their impact on online human activity, game components (or game mechanics) have started to appear in 
non-game environments, generating the concept of gamification that can be defined as "[the incorporation 
of] game elements into a non-gaming software application to increase user experience and engagement" 
Katerina Zourou                           Review of Assessment in Game-Based Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  50
(Domínguez et al., 2013, p. 381). The most common game mechanics are recommendation systems, 
rating systems, badges, and scores (for a review in a CALL setting see Zourou & Lamy, 2013). Several 
CALL researchers stress the interest of further exploring gaming in non-game environments and of 
embracing these “peripheral” gaming/learning contexts in the GBL agenda (Reinhardt, 2013). As an 
example, Reinhardt and Sykes (2014) have recently augmented their Framework for examining research 
and practice in digital games by adding a third type of research—game-informed research that pertains to 
“game and play principles applied in digital and non-digital contexts outside the confines of what one 
might typically consider a game” (p. 3). Their previous 2012 study (Reinhardt & Sykes, 2012) included 
two types of research, one on game-enhanced research (regarding L2 affordances of commercial games in 
formal pedagogical environments) and a second on game-based perspectives (related to pedagogical 
digital games explicitly designed for pedagogical purposes). This third dimension, added within just a 
two-year span may well reflect the research interest in addressing gaming and its learning potential in a 
broader way, independently of whether learners use self-contained games or non-game settings. Along the 
same lines, Peterson (2013), in his monograph Computer Games and Language Learning, among key 
areas and issues for investigation in future research, also points out that informal network based computer 
gaming has potential to afford authentic opportunities for task based language learning (p. 140). It may be 
claimed that these current studies point to an understanding of gaming as a concept that embraces not 
only games, but also game mechanics that are appearing more frequently in informal social network-
based learning contexts. A web conference on this topic was organised by IATEFL LTSIG & TESOL 
CALL-IS (2014) and recordings of talks are available online. 
Assessment In Game-based Learning is an invaluable, collective endeavor that addresses learning and 
assessment in designed gaming environments, both commercial and educational. As gaming spreads in 
non-gaming environments, this book offers a solid piece of research on which studies on gaming, be it 
gaming or non-gaming environments, can be grounded. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Katerina Zourou is a Senior Researcher at the Sør-Trøndelag University College, Tronheim, Norway on 
network-based peer learning systems. She is co-editor of books and journal special issues (such as Social 
Networking for Language Education, 2013, with Marie-Noëlle Lamy), as well as author of peer-reviewed 
articles and other scientific publications. 
E-mail: Katerina.Zourou@hist.no 
 
REFERENCES 
Cornillie, F., Thorne, S. L., & Desmet, P. (2012). Editorial: Digital games for language learning: From 
hype to insight? ReCALL, 24(3), 243–256. 
Domínguez, A., Saenz-de-Navarrete, J., de-Marcos, L., Fernández-Sanz, L., Pagés, C., & Martínez-
Herráiz, J.-J. (2013). Gamifying learning experiences: Practical implications and outcomes. Computers & 
Education, 63, 380–392. 
IATEFL, LTSIG & TESOL CALL-IS (2014). 2nd Web Conference: Gaming and Gamification: A win 
win for language learning. Retrieved from http://ltsig.org.uk/events/future-events/220-1404-web-
conference.html 
Peterson, M. (2013). Computer games and language learning. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan 
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital game-based learning. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 
Katerina Zourou                           Review of Assessment in Game-Based Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  51
Reinders, H. (2012). (Ed.). Digital games in language learning and teaching. New York, NY: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Reinhardt, J. (2013, November 8). Gamification: Sweetening the work of foreign language learning. 
FLTmag. Retrieved from http://fltmag.com/gamification-sweetening-the-work-of-foreign-language-
learning/  
Reinhardt, J., & Sykes, J.M. (2014). Special issue commentary: Digital game activity in L2 teaching and 
learning. Language Learning & Technology, 18(2), 2–8. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/commentary.pdf   
Reinhardt, J., & Sykes, J. (2012). Conceptualizing digital game-mediated L2 learning and pedagogy: 
Game-enhanced and game-based research and practice. In H. Reinders (Ed.), Digital games in language 
learning and teaching (pp. 32–49). New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 
SEGAN, Serious Games Network. (n.d.). GBL Journals. Retrieved from 
http://seriousgamesnet.eu/journals  
Thomas, M. (2012). Contexualizing digital game-mediated L2 learning and pedagogy: Transformational 
paradigm or business as usual? In H. Reinders (Ed.), Digital games in language learning and teaching 
(pp. 11–31). New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan 
Zourou, K., & Lamy, M.-N. (2013). Social networked game dynamics in web 2.0 language learning 
communities. ALSIC, 16(1). Retrieved from http://alsic.revues.org/2642 
 
OTHER MEDIA 
Brain Age. (2012). Nintendo. 
