Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/tareetal.pdf 
October 2014, Volume 18, Number 3 
pp. 208–227 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 208 
EFFECTS OF INTERACTIVE CHAT VERSUS INDEPENDENT WRITING 
ON L2 LEARNING 
Medha Tare, University of Maryland 
Ewa M. Golonka, University of Maryland 
Karen Vatz, University of Maryland 
Carrie L. Bonilla, University of Maryland 
Carolyn Crooks, University of Maryland 
Rachel Strong, University of Maryland 
This study examines the importance of interaction for second language (L2) acquisition by 
analyzing outcomes from two types of out-of-class activities. The study compared: (a) 
interactive homework, completed via text chat, and (b) individual homework, completed 
via independent writing. In a between-subjects design, participants in two intermediate-
level Russian classes were assigned to the two conditions and completed study tasks three 
times a week for six weeks. In the interactive condition, student pairs engaged in 
synchronous text-chat sessions, completing tasks designed to encourage interaction 
through information-, reasoning-, or opinion-gaps. In the individual condition, students 
completed comparable writing activities on their own. Both conditions provided the same 
language input and required production, over an equivalent amount of time. Language 
gains were assessed through vocabulary, writing, and speaking pre- and post-tests. 
Students in the interactive condition showed greater gains in vocabulary knowledge and 
oral production than students in the individual condition; no differences were found in 
students’ writing accuracy or complexity. Students in the interactive condition also 
produced more Russian types and tokens in their homework assignments than students in 
the individual condition, both at the beginning and later in the study. These results support 
the benefits of interactive homework for L2 learning and production. 
Keywords: Computer-Mediated Communication, Instructional Design, Language 
Teaching Methodology 
APA Citation: Tare, M., Golonka, E. M., Vatz, K., Bonilla, C. L., Crooks, C., & Strong, 
R. (2014). Effects of interactive chat versus independent writing on L2 learning. Language 
Learning & Technology, 18(3), 208–227. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/tareetal.pdf 
Received: October 17, 2013; Accepted: March 21, 2014; Published: October 1, 2014 
Copyright: © Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn 
Crooks, & Rachel Strong  
INTRODUCTION 
In order to learn a new language, learners need not only exposure to the language (input) and practice 
producing the language (output), but also opportunities to communicate with other speakers, that is, 
interaction. Interactionist research has shown second language (L2) advantages from performing tasks 
interactively compared to individually (Gass & Varonis, 1994; Mackey, 1999). Technology can provide 
opportunities for learner interaction (Golonka, Bowles, Frank, Richardson, & Freynik, 2014); specifically, 
synchronous computer-mediated communication, or text chat, offers a method to make homework, which 
typically involves independent study, more interactive. Benefits of synchronous text chat for foreign 
language learning and teaching, many of which stem from its interactivity, have been well established 
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 209 
(Blake, 2009; Kern, 1995; Lin, Huang & Liou, 2013). 
Motivated by these empirical findings of the beneficial interactivity of text chat, this study examined how 
different types of out-of-class assignments affected language development in intermediate-level adult 
students of Russian in the US. We tested the effects of interactive homework, completed through text 
chat, compared with independent writing homework on multiple measures of language proficiency 
including vocabulary knowledge, writing complexity and accuracy, and oral production and fluency.  
Interaction Hypothesis  
The importance of student interaction in the L2 has been formalized in the Interaction Hypothesis (Long, 
1981, 1996), which posits that interaction between speakers often requires negotiation for meaning, or 
working to achieve mutual comprehension, through requests for clarification or comprehension checks. 
This process, in turn, results in language modifications that facilitate the language learning process. 
Specifically, learners indicate communication breakdowns, prompting interlocutors to modify their 
speech, typically through repeating, elaborating, or simplifying, thus rendering the input comprehensible 
(Gass & Varonis, 1985). According to Mackey (1999), “when learners are struggling to communicate and 
are engaged in trying to understand and to be understood, their attention may be on language form as well 
as meaning” (p. 562). Negotiation for meaning during interaction promotes noticing of target language 
form, which is a necessary component for acquisition (Schmidt, 1990).  
In addition to comprehending the input during interaction with another speaker, a learner must produce 
the target language. If this output is incomprehensible to a learner’s interlocutor, as indicated by 
clarification requests, it must be modified. Similar to the benefits of modified input discussed above, 
modifying output in the target language requires the learner to pay attention to grammatical form, again 
promoting noticing of target language features (Swain, 1985). 
A study by Mackey (1999) demonstrated the advantage of participating in tasks interactively, in which the 
learner engages in both input and output, compared to performing tasks without engaging in interactive 
communication. Over a period of one week, 34 learners of English performed story completion, picture 
sequencing, and picture drawing tasks that provided a context for producing the target linguistic structure 
(question formation) and the opportunity for interaction between interlocutors. Participants were assigned 
to (a) an interaction group, in which they worked with a native speaker partner to complete the tasks, or 
(b) a non-interaction group, in which they either completed the task with a native speaker who followed a 
tightly controlled script, thus preventing negotiations for meaning, or simply observed a participant and 
native speaker from the interaction group complete the task. A control group did not participate in any of 
the experimental activities. Participants in the interactive group made significant gains in their English 
question formations and produced more higher-level questions than participants in the non-interactive 
groups. Participants who observed interactions, but did not participate in them, showed more limited 
developmental gains, and participants in the scripted group, who engaged in interaction but had no 
opportunity to negotiate, did not show any developmental gains, nor did they produce any higher-level 
questions. The results of this study indicate that performing tasks interactively, specifically, engaging in 
negotiation for meaning, is beneficial to second language development. 
Furthermore, it is not only learner-native speaker interactions that facilitate second language 
development. Interaction between learners has also been shown to be beneficial. In a study of learners’ 
spoken interaction during a task-based activity, González-Lloret (2003) found that students were 
committed to completing the task and, as a result, worked to negotiate meaning by asking for 
clarifications, primarily when one or both of them did not understand a lexical item. There was also 
evidence that when one speaker knows an L2 form, not only does exposure to an interlocutor’s incorrect 
use of that same form not impact the speaker’s correct usage, but, the speaker may correct the 
interlocutor’s error or model the correct use (González-Lloret, 2003). In another study, Kawaguchi and 
Ma (2012) found that corrective feedback and negotiation for meaning happened most often in mixed 
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 210 
proficiency pairs of non-native speakers.  
Evidence Supporting the Use of Text Chat  
As discussed above, negotiation for meaning is an integral part of foreign language learning during face-
to-face interaction with another speaker. However, researchers have also observed this language learning 
process in text-chat interactions. Smith (2008) found that negotiation for meaning in voice chat and text 
chat occurs at a similar rate. Furthermore, Kitade (2000) found that students negotiated meaning and self-
corrected without teacher supervision during group synchronous text chat. A detailed analysis of the text-
chat transcripts of mixed proficiency students of English by Shekary and Tahririan (2006) showed that 
mini-dialogues about the language itself (e.g., asking a partner for a clarification or definition) offered the 
opportunity to notice new linguistic items and retain that information.  
Several studies have compared the effectiveness of different types of interactive discussion for improving 
language production, that is, how well students learn when interacting via text chat versus face-to-face 
conversation. Due to its real-time, conversational nature, researchers have predicted that language 
production via chat would be at least as beneficial for students as spoken conversation. In fact, these 
studies showed that students using text chat produced more typed utterances and variety of discourse 
functions than students in the spoken condition (Beauvois, 1998; Kern, 1995). They also showed 
increased oral fluency compared to students in the spoken condition (Blake, 2009; Payne & Whitney, 
2002; Satar & Özdener, 2008). 
Research also shows that participation in text-based chat can ameliorate affect for students who are shy or 
less confident. In a face-to-face conversation, more confident students usually dominate the conversation, 
and less confident students can be hesitant to join the conversation. In text-based chat, less confident 
students are more likely to open up and participate (Kern, 1995; Owen, 1993; Sullivan & Pratt, 1996; 
Warschauer, 1996). In addition, because the instructor’s role is usually diminished in chat discussions, 
students naturally take more responsibility for the discussion; therefore, speakers share the floor more 
equally, giving everyone opportunities to learn (Chun, 1994; Ortega, 1997).  
The use of chat for out-of-class homework assignments has also been investigated. For example, chat was 
assigned as homework in a tandem learning situation where 26 pairs of Korean- and English-speaking 
high-school students in Canada each worked to learn the other’s native language (Chung, Graves, 
Wesche, & Barfurth, 2005; Chung, 2006). Content analysis of the transcripts revealed that participants 
were able to teach and learn appropriate linguistic and cultural behaviors, such as Korean honorific 
discourse or chat jargon, and were able to negotiate meaning. Furthermore, students demonstrated gains 
in vocabulary knowledge after each set of chat activities.  
In a study that compared two types of L2 online writing, Razagifard (2013) examined how oral fluency 
was affected by synchronous interaction using text chat compared to asynchronous postings made on a 
web bulletin board. The 63 ESL students were randomly assigned to the synchronous or asynchronous 
experimental conditions, or to a control group that did not complete any out-of-class work. Students in the 
two experimental groups completed tasks designed to encourage negotiation such as decision-making or 
problem-solving. Students in the synchronous condition completed the chat tasks during 45-minute 
sessions, and students in the asynchronous condition posted messages over the course of the week. Post-
test measures of oral fluency showed that students in the synchronous text-chat group performed 
significantly better than both the asynchronous forum discussion group and the control group in the 
speaking tasks; the asynchronous and control groups did not differ from each other. These results support 
other findings that have shown a benefit of chat for fluency, likely due to the real-time language 
production, albeit written, and ability to track the recorded conversation. 
A meta-analysis by Lin, Huang, and Liou (2013) summarized the effects of text-based synchronous 
computer-mediated communication on second language acquisition based on 10 studies conducted 
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 211 
between 1990 and 2012. By calculating the weighted effect sizes for these studies, a significant positive 
mean effect (m = .33) indicated that chat aided language development for the experimental groups 
compared to the control and comparison conditions across studies. Certain chat characteristics were found 
to favorably affect language development: assigning chat to higher proficiency learners as opposed to 
beginners, including longer and regular chat sessions, and dividing the students into pairs or small groups 
rather than chatting as a whole class. While the number of studies eligible for the meta-analysis was 
small, the results demonstrate that participation in chat consistently affords greater gains in language 
development compared to control groups.  
Overall the literature suggests that various types of real-time interaction in the L2, including through text 
chat, are beneficial for learners. Comparing this type of practice to more traditional forms of homework, 
which are typically carried out independently, could shed light on the best ways to help students improve 
various aspects of language proficiency. 
Research Questions 
In the present study, we build on the literature examining interaction in second language acquisition by 
comparing two types of out-of-class activities, both of which involve written input and output in the L2, 
but only one of which also incorporates interaction between learners. We created two assignment 
conditions: (a) interactive, which required task completion with a partner via text chat, and (b) individual, 
which required task completion alone via independent writing activities. Participants in two intermediate-
level Russian classes were assigned to one of the conditions. Both conditions covered the same language 
and topic content over an equivalent amount of time. We expected language gains for both groups, but 
predicted that the interactive chat group would show greater gains due to the benefits of interaction, as 
described above. In particular, we hypothesized that this group would demonstrate better oral language 
production and vocabulary learning. Because both conditions involved writing in the target language, we 
also examined the effects of the two different kinds of L2 practice (chat vs. composition) on writing 
complexity and accuracy. Finally, we also examined the amount and complexity of students’ target 
language output in the homework assignments themselves with the hypothesis that the benefits of 
interactive language activities would be evident in the assignments as well. 
The primary research questions that guided our analyses were:  
1. Do vocabulary knowledge, writing complexity and accuracy, and oral production and fluency 
differ for students who participated in the individual and interactive conditions, and if so, how?  
2. Does language production differ and change over time for students in the interactive and 
individual groups in later homework assignments compared to the earliest homework 
assignments, and if so, how? 
METHOD 
Participants  
Students enrolled in two intermediate-level Russian classes at an intensive language training institution in 
the US participated in this study; classes were assigned as intact groups to one of the conditions. Students 
in the two classes followed the same school-developed curriculum, and were at similar points in their 
courses, with proficiency roughly equivalent to three semesters of college-level courses. Students in each 
class completed the interactive or individual homework tasks, as assigned by their instructors. For 
analyses of the individual and chat homework data, the individual condition had 20 students (5 female, 15 
male; Mean age: 25.7 years; Mean education: 2-3 years of college) and the interactive condition had 25 
students (6 female, 19 male; Mean age: 22.3 years; Mean education: 1 year of college). All students but 
one across both conditions reported being native speakers of English. Due to scheduling constraints, a 
subset of students in the two classes took part in the pre- and post-testing; for these comparisons, data 
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 212 
from 16 students (5 female; 11 male) from the individual condition and 9 students (2 female; 7 male) 
from the interactive condition were analyzed. 
Measures  
Vocabulary Knowledge Scale  
Vocabulary knowledge in this study was measured by using a Vocabulary Knowledge Scale (VKS) as a 
pre- and post-test measure of the breadth and depth of students’ vocabulary. The VKS includes self-report 
responses ranging from “I don’t remember having seen this word” to “I can use this word in a sentence.” 
The test was used because it combines self-report and performance items, which provides information 
about learners’ memory of exposure to the words as well as knowledge of their meaning (Paribakht & 
Wesche, 1997). An example of the VKS is shown in Table 1. The test consisted of 54 Russian words 
falling into three categories: (1) 18 Control words that students were exposed to in course lessons prior to 
the start of the study, (2) 18 Course words found in both the students’ standard course materials and the 
new activities developed for the experiment, and (3) 18 Experimental words only present in the 
experimental activities (See APPENDIX for vocabulary list). Categories (2) and (3) were sets of target 
words that differed by how much students would be exposed to them; that is, multiple times in the case of 
the course words and likely only during the study task for the experimental words. These 36 words were a 
subset of the vocabulary used in the study activities’ texts and glossaries. The VKS words were placed in 
a randomized order into four separate study forms to control for the order of presentation across 
participants. Students received the same form of the task at the pre-test and the post-test sessions to 
control for effects of motivation and fatigue when completing the task, which took about 15–20 minutes. 
Each of the 54 items received a vocabulary knowledge scale score, which took into account students’ 
accuracy in defining the word and confidence in their self-report, as well as a binary score indicating 
whether the correct translation was provided. Two researchers coded a subset of the tests for reliability; 
their percentage agreement was 96%. 
Table 1. An Example of a Vocabulary Knowledge Scale Item (Wesche & Paribakht, 1996) 
 Self-report categories 
I. I don’t remember having seen this word before. 
II. I have seen this word before, but I don’t know what it means. 
III. I have seen this word before, and I think it means _______________. 
IV. I know this word. It means __________________. 
V. I can use this word in a sentence: _______________________________. 
Summary writing  
To assess students’ writing mechanics, including accuracy and complexity, at the pre-test and the post-
test, students read a short article in Russian and wrote a brief summary of the article (50-60 words) in 
Russian that conveyed the essential information. Two texts of similar difficulty were used as prompts for 
this task: Article A, which described the new fastest train in Russia, and Article B, which described an 
Aeroflot airplane crash. Students received either Article A or B at the pre-testing and the opposite article 
at post-testing. Along with the text, students were provided with a glossary listing potentially unfamiliar 
Russian words. Participants had 10 minutes to read the Russian text before it was collected and replaced 
with the English translation, which was provided to help students remember the details. Participants then 
had 20 minutes to write a summary of the text, and were allowed to use the English translation as well as 
the Russian-English glossary for reference. Summary writing was used as an elicitation technique to 
acquire a target language writing sample. Participants’ summaries were not evaluated for content such as 
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 213 
whether the main idea was conveyed or major points were captured, instead, the written summaries were 
analyzed by a native speaker and teacher of Russian to assess grammatical, spelling, and semantic errors. 
In general, each word with an error was counted as one error, including cases where one grammatical 
error was carried over multiple words (e.g., subject-verb agreement) as well as multiple occurrences of 
the same error in the same word in the text. Multiple errors of the same kind in one word were counted as 
one error. Accuracy was calculated by dividing the number of words with errors by the number of words 
in the summary. Lexical diversity was determined using the CLAN program (Computerized Language 
Analysis, MacWhinney, 2000) to calculate the type:token ratio. Type:token ratio is a common measure of 
lexical diversity and is used as an indication of the complexity of a student’s working vocabulary and the 
quality of the lexical knowledge that is demonstrated (Nation & Webb, 2011). Tokens refer to all running 
words in the text, and types refer to unique words in the text. A type:token ratio is calculated by dividing 
the number of types by the number of tokens.  
Speaking   
A 60-second speaking task was administered to assess oral production and fluency at the pre-test and the 
post-test. Students were given a prompt in English, after which they had 10 seconds to gather their 
thoughts. They then responded to the prompt in Russian and were allowed to speak freely for up to 60 
seconds; responses were audio recorded. Two prompts were used: “Describe your favorite city” (pre-test), 
and “Describe your favorite vacation” (post-test); these prompts were chosen because students were 
expected to be able to talk about these topics unrehearsed based on previous lessons. All sound files were 
analyzed using Praat version 5.3.16 (Boersma & Weenink, 2012), software that allows transcription and 
analysis of speech samples. Segments were first marked automatically as silence or speech after which 
they were labeled manually as silent pauses, filled pauses, or speech segments. A pause was defined as a 
completely silent segment of at least 200 milliseconds in duration. A filled pause was a sound segment 
such as “um.” The sound segments were defined as runs, (i.e., speech segments) occurring between 
pauses. Next, a near-native Russian speaker inspected all identified runs, filled pauses, and silent pauses, 
and transcribed the words, annotating the number of syllables produced. 
Several measures of production and fluency were calculated for both the pre- and post-tests based on the 
duration and number of pauses and syllables produced by the learners. Specifically, the sum and length of 
syllables, runs, pauses, and filled pauses were counted as measures of speech production, and were also 
used to calculate the length of all pauses (filled and non-filled), the overall time speaking including all 
pauses, the overall time speaking excluding all pauses, and the overall time speaking excluding filled 
pauses. These values were used to calculate three measures of fluency: Mean Length of Run [MLR] (total 
number of syllables/total number of runs), Average Length of Pauses [ALP] (total length of all pauses/ 
total number of pauses), and Phonation Time Ratio [PTR] (total length of time speaking excluding filled 
pauses/total length of time including pauses). These are global measures of fluency that can indicate 
changes in L2 oral proficiency over time (Blake, 2009; Vercellotti, 2012). Phonation time ratio is a global 
fluency measure related to speed. Since it includes pauses, improvements on this ratio would reflect more 
fluid speech with fewer pauses. Mean length of run (MLR) and average length of pauses (ALP) provide 
information about how much speech they are producing between pauses and how long learners are 
pausing between words, two complementary measures of oral fluency that change as a learner gains 
proficiency (Vercellotti, 2012).  
Materials  
The study materials were designed by near-native speakers of Russian to complement the standard course 
materials used for the classes. Activities were developed that matched the topics covered in class lessons 
which would be taught over the course of the study: weather and nature, transportation, housing, hobbies 
and free time, health, military, and post office. Glossaries accompanied each activity providing students 
with any new vocabulary needed to understand the information presented and discuss it.  
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 214 
Task-based activities were designed for student dyads in the interactive condition, as these characteristics 
have been found to encourage interaction (Tudini, 2010). Each homework activity included a specific 
goal. All chat activities included information-, reasoning-, or opinion-gaps that learners needed to fill to 
complete the task (Pica, Kanagy, & Falodun, 1993; Prabhu, 1987). In the information-gap tasks, each 
learner received only part of the information, and they needed to work together to transfer information 
from one to another. Examples include role-play scenarios, where participants received information 
relevant to the characters they played (e.g., patient/doctor or victim/policeman) and needed to exchange 
information with their partner such as diagnosing a patient or taking a police report about an incident. In 
the reasoning-gap tasks, learners needed to use forms of reasoning, such as deduction or inference, to 
derive new information from information given to them. Examples include coming up with the best way 
to arrive at a certain place using metro and street maps and discussing potential solutions to problems 
such as traffic jams in Moscow. In the opinion-gap tasks, learners were asked to express their personal 
preferences, opinions, or feelings regarding a given issue. Examples of this type of task include 
expressing opinions about a controversial medical treatment or voicing preferences when deciding how to 
spend free time. Some tasks included more than one type of gap. For instance, in a guessing game, 
participants did not know the guessing object (information-gap) and needed to use available clues to make 
a final guess (reasoning-gap). 
For the individual condition, comparable activities with the same resources were given. These activities 
were very similar in the content they asked students to consider; however, the written responses were 
expected to be different. For example, for one activity, interactive condition students were given different 
sets of authentic Russian apartment rental ads with a budget and a set of criteria and were asked to chat 
about the apartments and decide together which one to rent. The individual condition students were also 
given the same ads, budget, and criteria but were asked to write a paragraph of at least five to six 
sentences describing their choice of apartment and reasons for choosing it. All activities were designed to 
take approximately 20 minutes to complete.  
Procedure 
Pre-testing was conducted over two days. During the first pre-testing session, the participants completed 
consent forms, followed by the Summary Writing task and the Speaking task. In the second pre-testing 
session, participants completed the Vocabulary Knowledge Scale.  
The homework tasks were administered three times a week over a six-week period, beginning the week 
after the pre-testing sessions. Students in the two Russian classes were assigned to complete the activities 
for homework. Each Monday, the materials for that week’s three tasks were uploaded to the classes’ 
learning management website. For the class assigned to the interactive condition, these materials included 
partner assignments, instructions for chatting using the site, and the tasks with any supporting files, such 
as maps or pictures, required for completing the activity. Students in the interactive condition were 
assigned a new partner each of the six weeks to ensure a variety of interactions and encourage negotiation 
for meaning (Shekary & Tahririan, 2006). For the class assigned to the individual condition, students 
were instructed to post their written responses on the site; their materials included tasks and supporting 
files required for completing the independent writing activity. Students in both conditions were instructed 
to space out the assignments over a period of five to seven days, rather than completing all three on the 
same day. 
The post-tests were conducted the week after participants completed the homework assignments and were 
administered in one or two sessions depending on students’ schedules. The procedures followed for all 
tasks were the same as during the pre-test session. The Summary Writing task was conducted first, 
following by the Vocabulary Knowledge Scale task, and the 60-second Speaking task.  
 
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 215 
RESULTS  
Research Question 1: Do vocabulary knowledge, writing complexity and accuracy, and oral production 
and fluency differ for students who participated in the individual and interactive conditions, and if so, 
how?  
The following sections outline the results for the three pre- and post-tests administered for the study. Due 
to various constraints, the number of students who completed each of the three tasks at both the pre-test 
and the post-test differs by test; therefore, the specific numbers for each analysis are indicated in the 
results sections below. All examined variables for each of the pre- and post-tests (the VKS, the Summary 
Writing, and the Speaking task) were tested for normality using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests. Since 
most of the datasets were normal, we report the results of the parametric tests (independent and paired 
samples t tests) in each section. Nonparametric versions of the parametric tests (Mann-Whitney t tests and 
Wilcoxon signed ranks tests, respectively) were also run for all analyses, and the results did not change. 
In order to correct for multiple comparisons, the False Detection Rate (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995; 
Benjamini, 2010) correction was calculated using the statistical program R (R Development Core Team, 
2012).  
Vocabulary Knowledge Scale 
Students’ responses to each item on the Vocabulary Knowledge Scale were given a binary score (0–1), 
which reflects breadth of knowledge through the number of words known, and a scale score (1–5), which 
reflects depth of knowledge through accuracy and confidence. Although the VKS scoring typically goes 
up to 5 for students who have provided a correct sentence, we found that students were not completing 
this section of the items on the post-test as often, and for the same words, as they did on the pre-test, 
likely due to a lack of motivation and to time constraints. Therefore, we capped the scale scores at 4 in 
order to more accurately determine the range of knowledge/confidence without the optional sentence 
section. These scores were summed to give each student scores (see Table 2) for the three categories of 
words included in the test: 18 target words, each of which were only in the experimental materials 
(Experimental) or in both experimental and course materials for the lessons covered in the study (Course), 
and 18 control words which were from earlier lessons (Control).  
Table 2. M and SD for Students’ Vocabulary Knowledge Scale Scores by Condition 
Target Word 
Category 
Individual 
Pre-test** 
Individual    
Post-test 
Difference Interactive 
Pre-test*** 
Interactive 
Post-test 
Difference 
 M SD M SD M SD M SD M SD M SD 
Experimental 
Binary 
4.38 1.2 5.00 1.4 .63 1.2* 3.75 1.2 5.88 1.0 2.13 1.4* 
Experimental 
Scale 
34.41 4.7 37.81 4.4 3.41 3.3* 31.25 3.1 37.38 2.6 6.13 2.4* 
Course 
Binary 
8.06 1.2 13.56 1.7 5.50 1.3* 6.75 1.5 14.00 1.2 7.25 2.0* 
Course Scale 44.91 3.1 62.22 4.1 17.31 3.3* 39.63 3.5 61.56 3.3 21.94 5.4* 
Control 
Binary 
14.44 2.5 15.38 1.2 .94 1.9 15.25 1.3 14.75 1.0 -.50 1.5 
Control Scale 63.34 4.9 66.06 2.8 2.72 3.8 64.19 2.6 63.88 1.6 -.31 3.5 
Notes. * indicates significant change from pre- to post-test within condition, p < .05; **Individual condition, n=16; 
***Interactive condition, n=8.  
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 216 
Overall, students in both conditions knew the most Control words (by design), followed by Course words 
and then Experimental words at both the pre-test and the post-test. Paired samples t tests and independent 
samples t tests were run to test differences in mean scores within the groups and between the two groups, 
respectively. Cohen’s d was calculated for the t tests to calculate effect sizes. Values of 0.20, 0.50, and 
0.80 were considered small, medium, and large respectively (Cohen, 1992). The Course and Experimental 
words were those that were targeted in the study activities; therefore, students were expected to improve 
on this vocabulary after engaging in the activities. Paired samples t tests comparing pre- and post-test 
binary and scale scores for the three categories of words showed significant improvement for Course and 
Experimental word knowledge within each condition (p’s < .05). The t tests did not show a significant 
change in Control word knowledge for either condition for binary scores but did show a significant 
increase for the individual group for the control scale score, (p < .05), indicating somewhat more 
familiarity with the control words but not complete knowledge.  
To compare gains by condition, independent samples t tests were conducted comparing the students’ 
difference scores (post-test score minus pre-test score) for the individual and interactive groups. Students 
in the interactive condition had significantly greater gains in their Experimental binary scores, t(22) = -
2.85, p < .01, d=1.22, and scale scores, t(22) = -2.09, p < .05, d=0.89, than students in the individual 
condition. Students in the interactive condition also had significantly greater gains in their Course binary 
scores, t(22) = -2.64, p < .05, d=1.13, and scale scores, t(22) = -2.60, p < .05, d=1.11, than students in the 
individual condition. Differences for Control binary and scale scores were not significantly different (p’s 
> .05). In sum, while learners in both conditions showed improvement in breadth of vocabulary 
knowledge, the gains for the interactive group were greater than those of the individual group for the 
words targeted in the study, both in the Experimental (limited exposure) category and the Course 
(multiple exposure) category.  
Summary writing 
Students’ summary writing was analyzed to assess complexity and accuracy. Complexity was analyzed 
using a type:token ratio of Russian words used in the summary. Accuracy was assessed by examining 
students’ total grammar, lexical, and spelling errors and the ratio of the total number of words with errors 
to the number of written words. Table 3 presents means for these measures. 
Table 3. M and SD of Types, Tokens, and Errors in the Summary Writing by Condition 
  Individual  
Pre-test* 
Individual  
Post-test 
Interactive 
Pre-test** 
Interactive  
Post-test 
  M SD M SD M SD M SD 
Type:Token Ratio  0.83 .1   0.83 .1  0.79 .1   0.83 .1 
Total Errors  16.60 6.6 16.73 7.2 17.33 9.7 16.78 7.5 
Errors:Tokens Ratio  .29 .1 .25 .1 .22 .1 .26 .1 
Notes. *Individual condition, n=15; **Interactive condition, n=9 
Paired samples t tests and independent samples t tests were run to test changes in mean scores within the 
groups and between the two groups, respectively. Paired samples t tests did not show any significant 
differences between pre- and post-test scores for either condition. All independent sample t tests were 
non-significant for all measures between both groups (p > .05). In sum, students’ writing samples did not 
reveal any significant changes with respect to complexity or accuracy within conditions or between 
conditions.  
 
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 217 
Speaking 
The speaking tasks were analyzed for multiple measures of production and fluency (see Table 4). 
Students were allowed to speak freely for up to 60 seconds in response to the prompts; time spoken, 
excluding pauses, on the pre-test and post-test ranged from 6.89 seconds (minimum) to 38.47 seconds 
(maximum). Paired samples t tests and independent samples t tests were run to test differences in mean 
scores within the groups and between the two groups, respectively. Paired samples t tests  showed 
significant increases between the pre-test and post-test for the interactive group on number of runs [t(6) = 
-3.29, p <.05, d=0.83], number of pauses [t(6) = -3.18, p < .05, d=0.97], and overall time speaking 
excluding the pauses [t(6) = -4.09, p < .01 d=1.22]. Paired sample t tests  were non-significant for the 
individual group (p > .05) on all measures except average length of pause, which showed a significant 
decrease from the pre-test to the post-test, t(5) = 3.64, p < .05, d=0.80. All independent sample t tests 
comparing groups were non-significant for all measures (p > .05).  
Table 4. M and SD for Fluency Measures (Time Measured in Seconds) by Condition 
 Individual  
Pre-test** 
Individual 
Post-test 
Difference Interactive 
Pre-test*** 
Interactive 
Post-test 
Difference 
 M SD M SD M SD M SD M SD M SD 
Syllables 81.83  25.0 91.33 17.7 9.50 30.6 75.71 33.1 88.14 20 12.43 15.7 
Runs 20.50  6.1 23.00   4.1 2.50  7.1 21.57   4.5 25.29 4.5 3.71   3.0* 
Pauses 37.00 10.4 38.67   7.9 1.67 11.3 40.86   6.6 48.86 9.6 8.00   6.7* 
****Time 
speaking  
23.85  5.8 27.21   3.8 3.37   7.1 21.87   4.7 26.88 3.4 5.02   3.2* 
Run length 4.02  0.9 3.97   0.4 -0.5   0.8 3.44   1.0 3.49 0.4 .04    .7 
Pause 
length 
.73  0.2 .57   0.2  -.16    .1* .59     .1 .50   .1 -.09    .2 
Phonation 
time ratio 
.86  0.1 .86   0.1 .00     .0 .83     .1 .83   .1 .00    .0 
Notes. * indicates significant change from pre- to post-test within condition, p < .05; **Individual condition, n=6; ***Interactive 
condition, n=7; **** Without pauses. 
Statistically, the interactive group produced more runs and spoke for a longer duration of time in Russian 
on the post-test compared to the pre-test. They also produced more pauses on the post-test, however, their 
pause:run ratio did not change (p >.05). In other words, overall production increased from the pre-test to 
post-test, including runs and pauses, but number of pauses per run, a measure of general fluency, did not 
change. In contrast, the individual group only showed a decrease in average length of pauses to a length 
more comparable to that of the interactive group, indicating that one measure of fluency improved to 
match that of the interactive group, but their overall production did not increase. 
Research Question 2: Does language production change over time for students in the interactive and 
individual groups in later homework assignments (week 4) compared to the earliest homework 
assignments (week 1), and if so, how? 
The chat transcripts from the interactive condition and the writing assignments from the individual 
condition were analyzed to compare learners’ L2 production by condition and over time. After compiling 
all of the chat transcripts and written assignments during the six-week period of the study, Weeks 1 and 4 
were chosen for detailed analysis because data from the largest number of participants from both 
conditions were available. All written data were then analyzed using CLAN to obtain counts of Russian 
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 218 
types, (i.e., the number of unique words), and tokens, (i.e., the total number of all running words, 
including repeated words); data were averaged for each participant across the three assignments that were 
part of Week 1 and Week 4 (see Table 5). 
Table 5. M and SD for Measures of Language Production per Assignment by Condition 
 
 
Individual     
Week 1* 
Individual    
Week 4 
Difference Interactive   
Week 1** 
Interactive     
Week 4 
Difference 
 M SD M SD  M SD M SD  
Types 33.67 10.9 34.64 9.4 .97 49.61 10.9 42.42 10.5 -7.19 
Tokens 42.29 13.3 44.04 12.7 1.75 67.51 15.9 54.68 15.8 -12.83 
Type:Token 
Ratio 
.80 .1 .81 .0 .01 .75 .1 .79 .1 .04 
Notes. *Individual condition, n=18 for Week 1 and n=13 for Week 4; **Interactive condition, n=25 for both weeks  
Paired samples and independent samples t tests were conducted to investigate whether there were 
differences in production within or between the two groups over time. Regarding change within the 
groups between the two time points, the individual group showed little change between Week 1 and Week 
4 (p > .05), while the interactive group did produce fewer types, t(24) = 3.04, p < .01, d=0.67, and tokens, 
t(24) = 4.33, p < .01, d=0.81, in Week 4 compared to Week 1. Independent samples t tests showed 
differences between the groups on homework production at Week 1 and Week 4. For Week 1 homework, 
the students in the interactive group produced significantly more word types, t(41) = -4.71, p < .01, 
d=1.47, and more tokens than the students in the individual group, t(41) = -5.48, p < .01, d=1.71. These 
differences carried over into the Week 4 homework, as the interactive group continued to produce 
significantly more word types, t(35) = -2.17, p < .05, d=0.73, as well as tokens, t(35) = -2.03, p < .05, 
d=0.69, than the individual group. As for type:token ratio, the individual group had a higher type:token 
ratio during Week 1, t(41) = 2.71, p < .05, d=0.85, but both groups had a similar ratio during Week 4. In 
sum, students in the interactive group produced significantly more word types and tokens on the 
assignments than the individual group during both the first week of homework and the fourth week of 
homework, although the number of types/tokens they produced decreased over time. 
To examine the use of target Russian words (i.e., the specific words assessed on the Vocabulary 
Knowledge Scale) in the individual and interactive homework assignments, we ran an analysis using 
CLAN which searched the assignments for the target words (i.e., word roots marked with a wildcard 
asterisk to capture as many variations as possible) in the Week 1 and Week 4 data. The CLAN output was 
then reviewed by a Russian expert to ensure correctness. Table 6 provides the average number of target 
word types and tokens used per assignment.  
Table 6. M and SD for Use of Target Words per Assignment by Condition 
 
 
Individual     
Week 1* 
Individual    
Week 4 
Interactive   
Week 1** 
Interactive     
Week 4 
 M SD M SD M SD M SD 
Types .33 .37 .74 .67 .45 .33 .77 .49 
Tokens  .35 .42 .90 .94 .46 .33 .88 .53 
Notes. *Individual condition: n=18 for Week 1 and n=13 for Week 4; **Interactive condition: n=25 for both weeks 
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 219 
Overall, students used less than one target word type and token per assignment of the 54 target words 
analyzed. There were no differences in target word use by condition. This does not mean that students 
were not using many words relevant to the topics of the activities or other words from the activity 
glossaries; this analysis only searched for the relatively small set of items assessed on the VKS.  
We further examined the chat transcripts for instances of “modeling” where a student used at least one 
target word in a chat session that his/her partner did not use. Across the six chat assignments examined, 
an average of 6.5 students (26%) engaged in modeling target words for their chat partner per assignment. 
DISCUSSION  
This study examined how different types of out-of-class assignments affected language development in 
intermediate-level students of Russian. Students were assigned to either the individual condition, where 
they completed independent writing activities, or the interactive condition, where they completed 
synchronous text-chat activities. Proficiency gains in vocabulary, and written and oral production, as well 
as change in language production on the assignments were measured over time.  
Overall, students in both the individual and interactive conditions improved their vocabulary knowledge 
over the course of the study, which was to be expected given that the homework activities were designed 
to provide students with exposure to the target words. However, students in the interactive condition 
showed greater gains in vocabulary knowledge than students in the individual condition, on both the 
words that were unique to the experimental homework activities and the words that were also part of the 
standard course curriculum. Upon examining the homework assignments for students’ use of the target 
words that were assessed, we did not find significant differences between conditions which may have 
explained the increased vocabulary scores. However, we did observe that students in the chat condition 
used or “modeled” target word vocabulary that their partners did not. Working with a partner allows for 
more opportunity to encounter a vocabulary word, as either the student or his partner may choose to use it 
in the activity; this type of modeling occurred in the chat interactions, whereas, it could not when students 
were completing the activities individually. For example, Excerpt 1 shows peer correction involving the 
target word насморк (runny nose): 
Excerpt 1. 
Student 1 какие симптомы для насморк 
 What are the symptoms of a runny nose 
Student 2 насморк это симптом 
 Runny nose is a symptom 
Student 1 простуда? 
 a cold? 
Student 2 ооу. да насморк и температура 
 oh. yes runny nose and temperature 
This type of peer-to-peer scaffolding (e.g., clarifying a definition) has been studied in various aspects of 
second language acquisition and has been found to improve language learning; researchers suggest that 
“peers can be concurrently experts and novices…[and] can support learning through, for example, 
questioning, proposing possible solutions, disagreeing, repeating, and managing activities and behaviors” 
(Swain, Brooks, & Tocalli-Beller, 2002, pp. 172–173). Whereas both homework conditions in our study 
provided the students with the same target language input (i.e., background information necessary to 
complete the activity, a vocabulary list, etc.), and both required student output, only the interactive 
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 220 
condition provided students with additional input from their peers. Consistent with the Interaction 
Hypothesis (Long, 1981, 1996) and other research on chat (Smith, 2004), the students in this study who 
had the opportunity to interact showed greater proficiency gains in vocabulary knowledge than students 
who completed their assignments independently. 
The same advantage was found for gains in oral production: students in the interactive condition produced 
more Russian in a speaking task after engaging in six weeks of text-chat activities than students who 
completed six weeks of independent writing activities. This finding was predicted given that text chat has 
properties similar to those of speaking, including real-time production, and the benefits of this type of 
interaction for speaking skills have been found in previous studies (Payne & Whitney, 2002). Students 
who participated in the text-chat activities had more practice with speech-like output, and showed a 
greater increase in oral production, which may also be related to their greater output in the homework 
assignments, than the students who did not participate in text-chat activities. However, students in our 
study did not show benefits on the global fluency measures as in Blake (2009).  
Interestingly, no differences in the ability to write a summary, measured by accuracy and lexical 
complexity, were found between the two conditions after the six weeks of either individual or interactive 
homework activities. Moreover, neither group showed any improvement in this ability even though both 
conditions involved writing in the target language. At least for the chat group, the lack of improvement in 
writing proficiency is consistent with other research (Kost, 2004). A possible explanation for the lack of 
improvement may be that writing ability takes more time to develop, and that six weeks was not a long 
enough period of time to demonstrate gains. However, the finding that participation in the interactive 
condition, which in many ways is more like speaking than writing, did not disadvantage these students 
compared to those in the individual condition underscores the fact that engaging in text-chat assignments 
instead of composition writing assignments did not negatively affect the development of writing ability. 
In sum, addressing the first research question, the results suggest that engaging in text-chat homework 
activities is more beneficial than independent writing activities for increasing vocabulary knowledge and 
oral production, but not improving writing ability; no other prior studies to our knowledge have used such 
comprehensive measures to determine which areas of second language are affected or not by text chat. 
Students who participated in the interactive condition also produced more target language (types and 
tokens) in their text-chat assignments than students in the individual condition did in their independent 
writing assignments. Although their production in the chat activities was less in Week 4 than in Week 1, 
it was still greater than the individual group’s writing assignments at both points in time. It may be that 
students who are engaged in interaction concomitantly produce more in the target language due to 
interest, motivation, or the nature of the cooperative task. These types of benefits have been found for 
collaborative pair work for language learning, including pooling of ideas and resources, feedback for 
language development, and affective support for sustaining task engagement and rapport (Nguyen, 2013). 
Furthermore, the students in the interactive group, who had a lower type:token ratio than the students in 
the individual condition in Week 1, increased their type:token ratio to the level of the students in the 
individual condition in Week 4. In other words, the students who participated in text-chat activities 
increased their lexical diversity, whereas students who completed independent writing activities did not 
show any change. It is possible that the nature of the chat homework assignments promoted an increase in 
lexical diversity. For example, as discussed above, students in the interactive condition were exposed to 
new vocabulary words through interactions with their peers. This is also demonstrated in Excerpt 2, in 
which students’ negotiation for meaning involves a vocabulary item:  
 
 
 
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 221 
Excerpt 2. 
Student 1 вокруг порядка форму? 
 number 1 is about the order of the uniform? 
Student 2 что? 
 what? 
Student 1 военную униформу? 
 military uniform? 
Student 2 ох да. как они решили поменять носки за наматыбанием 
 oh yes. how they decided to change socks for bandages  
In the above exchange, Student 2 appeared not to understand Student 1’s statement containing the word 
“uniform”. This prompted a request for clarification after which Student 1 revised his use of the 
vocabulary by adding a modifier and another word for “uniform”. Then, Student 2 appeared to understand 
and continued the conversation. In Excerpt 3, two participants reviewed vocabulary together to ensure 
they both knew the meanings of the words: 
Excerpt 3. 
Student 1 вы знаете "грипп"? 
 do you know “flu”? 
Student 2 Да, я знаю грипп 
 yes, I know flu 
Student 1 Какие слова вы не знаете? 
 which words do you not know? 
Student 2 Я не знаю "пищевое отравление"  
 I don’t know “food poisoning” 
Student 1 Это food poisoning, я думаю 
 this is food poisoning (code switch), I think 
Student 2 О, Я сейчас вижу. А что такое "миндалины"? 
 oh, I see now. And what is “tonsils”? 
Student 1 tonsils   
 tonsils (code switch) 
Student 2 О, я сейчас знаю все слова. 
 oh, now I know all the words 
In this situation, one partner helped the other by providing translations of the unknown lexical items. 
Again, the benefits of peer scaffolding and negotiation for meaning are evident. Students in the interactive 
condition demonstrated greater language production than did students in the individual condition; further, 
the opportunity to interact likely facilitated an increase in lexical diversity.  
The text-chat transcripts produced in this study provide evidence for the benefits of interactive homework 
assignments. Based on these results, we are also conducting follow-up analyses of the chat transcripts to 
identify elements of the interaction, such as negotiation for meaning and peer correction, which may have 
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 222 
supported learning. An informative next step would be to examine which of the chat activities resulted in 
more language production, and thus, interaction amongst the chat participants. Knowing what types of 
task-based activities generate more conversation would provide useful pedagogical guidance. 
Furthermore, expanding the duration of the study and including a delayed post-test would allow us to 
track language development over time, as well as to examine the durability of language gains in the two 
conditions. 
Two limitations of this study should be acknowledged. First, over the course of the eight weeks of the 
study, participation in the study declined, due to a variety of factors, e.g., students opted out of 
participating or dropped the class. The resulting small sample sizes limit the generalizability of the study. 
Second, the treatment groups were not randomly assigned; rather, the design of the study was quasi-
experimental in that intact groups were assigned to one of the two treatment conditions. While using 
intact groups is common in instructed second language acquisition research, a follow-up study randomly 
assigning participants to treatment and control groups would be ideal.  
On the whole, the gains made by the interactive group compared to the individual group support the 
benefits of interaction, in the form of text chat, compared to individual output. Communicating with other 
learners, specifically, the processes of peer collaboration and negotiation for meaning when completing 
task-based activities, plays a vital role in second language acquisition. Text-chat activities offer the 
opportunity for such communication outside of the classroom. In the current study, students of Russian 
who engaged in interactive, text-chat homework assignments over a period of six weeks demonstrated 
greater gains in vocabulary knowledge and language production than students who completed writing 
assignments individually. Furthermore, the interactions observed in the text-chat condition showed that 
students engaged in both modeling and peer correction during their collaborative communication in the 
target language, which is likely to contribute to students’ noticing of important lexical and grammatical 
features of the target language. The unique features of text chat—synchronous, interactive communication 
in a written medium—provide students with both target language input and output in a format that can be 
easily reviewed and monitored, thus facilitating acquisition, particularly for speaking and vocabulary.  
With increasing Internet access and current technology, including mobile applications, text chat can be 
easily implemented for out-of-class activities to enhance foreign language learning.  
 
APPENDIX: Target vocabulary and translations by category. 
Experimental Translation 
Аптека Pharmacy 
Безопасный Safe 
Бытовая техника  Appliances 
Взорваться Explode 
Влажно Humid 
Воспаление лёгких Pneumonia 
Заботиться To care 
Зонт Umbrella 
Мёд Honey 
Отделение Department 
Переезжать/переехать  To move 
Повернуть To turn 
Погоны Shoulder loops 
Портянки Foot wraps 
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 223 
Похмелье Hangover 
Режим работы Hours of operation 
Скоростная магистраль Speedway 
Украсть Steal 
  Course Translation 
Багажник Trunk 
Выздоравливать/выздороветь  To recover 
Защищать/защитить To defend 
Землетрясение  Earthquake 
Извещение Notice 
Лекарство Medicine 
Мебель Furniture 
Насморк Runny nose 
Посылка Parcel 
Почтовый ящик Mailbox 
Пригород  Suburb 
Природа Nature 
Пробка Traffic jam 
Прохладно Cool 
Ремонт Repair 
Рыбалка Fishing 
Сухопутные войска Ground forces 
Тошнить Be nauseous 
  Control Translation 
Бывший Former 
Велосипед Bicycle 
Выигрывать/выиграть To win 
Жениться To marry 
Закуска Snack 
Команда Team 
Мороженое Ice cream 
Осторожно Careful 
Песня Song 
Плавать To swim 
Победа Victory 
Праздник Holiday 
Приглашать/пригласить To invite 
Развод Divorce 
Свадьба Wedding 
Спортзал Gym 
Тарелка Plate 
Хозяин Host 
 
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 224 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to thank Sofia Kasmeridi, Ian Myre, Anita Bowles, Jeffrey Moulton, Rosa Ferris, 
Nanda Warren, Alina Goldman, and Kathryn Rhoad for their assistance with materials development, data 
collection, and data analysis. This material is based on work supported, in whole or in part, with funding 
from the United States Government. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations 
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
University of Maryland, College Park and/or any agency or entity of the United States Government. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Medha Tare is a research scientist at the University of Maryland Center for Advanced Study of Language. 
Her research interests include instructed second language acquisition, language learning aptitude, and 
bilingual acquisition. 
E-mail: mtare@casl.umd.edu 
Ewa M. Golonka is a research scientist at the University of Maryland Center for Advanced Study of 
Language. She has taught Russian, linguistics, and second language acquisition at various universities. 
Her research interests include instructed second and third language acquisition, technology for foreign 
language learning and teaching, vocabulary learning, and language immersion. 
E-mail: egolonka@casl.umd.edu 
Karen Vatz is a research scientist at the University of Maryland Center for Advanced Study of Language. 
Her research interests include bilingual lexical representation, critical period effects, language aptitude, 
and instructed second language acquisition. 
E-mail: karenvatz@gmail.com 
Carrie L. Bonilla is a research associate at the University of Maryland Center for Advanced Study of 
Language. Her primary research interest is instructed second language acquisition, especially the 
acquisition of syntax and morphology. She has taught a wide range of Spanish language courses at 
various high schools and universities. 
E-mail: bonilla1@umd.edu 
Carolyn Crooks is a research advisor at the University of Maryland Center for Advanced Study of 
Language. She has long experience with developing and teaching a wide range of courses in Russian and 
in language teaching methodology, with a special interest in reading and listening skills.   
E-mail: cs.crooks@hotmail.com 
Rachel Strong is a research assistant at the University of Maryland Center for Advanced Study of 
Language, specializing in Persian. She is a graduate of the Defense Language Institute's Persian Farsi 
Basic Course and is currently a student in the University of Maryland's Persian Studies department. 
E-mail: rstrong@casl.umd.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Beauvois, M.H. (1998). Conversations in slow motion: Computer-mediated communication in the foreign 
language classroom. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 54, 198–217.  
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 225 
Benjamini, Y. (2010), Discovering the false discovery rate. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series 
B (Statistical Methodology), 72, 405–416. 
Benjamini, Y., & Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful 
approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, B, 57, 289–300. 
Blake, C. (2009). Potential of text-based internet chats for improving oral fluency in a second language. 
The Modern Language Journal, 93(2), 227–-240.  
Boersma, P. & Weenink, D. (2012). Praat: doing phonetics by computer. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: 
Phonetic Sciences.  
Chun, D. M. (1994). Using computer networking to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence. 
System, 22(1), 17–31.  
Chung, Y. G. (2006). Korean-English internet chat in tandem for learning language and culture: A 
curricular innovation in an international languages program. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). 
University of Ottawa, Canada. 
Chung, Y. G., Graves, B., Wesche, M., & Barfurth, M. (2005). Computer-mediated communication in 
Korean-English chat rooms: Tandem learning in an international languages program. Canadian Modern 
Language Review/La Revue Canadienne des Langues Vivantes, 62(1), 49–86.  
Cohen, J. (1992). A power primer. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 155–159. 
Gass, S. M., & Varonis, E. M. (1985). Variation in native speaker speech modification to non-native 
Speakers. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 7, 37–58. 
Gass, S. M., & Varonis, E. M. (1994). Input, interaction, and second language production. Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 16, 283–302.  
Golonka, E. M., Bowles, A. R., Frank, V. M., Richardson, D. L., & Freynik, S. (2014). Technologies for 
foreign language learning: a review of technology types and their effectiveness. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 27, 70–105. 
González-Lloret, M. (2003). Designing task-based CALL to promote interaction: En busca de 
Esmeraldas. Language Learning & Technology, 7(1), 86–104. Retrieved from: 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num1/pdf/gonzalez.pdf 
Kawaguchi, S., & Ma, Y. (2012). Corrective feedback, negotiation of meaning and grammar 
development: Learner-learner and learner-native speaker interaction in ESL. Open Journal of Modern 
Linguistics, 2(2), 57–70.  
Kern, R. G. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity 
and characteristics of language production. The Modern Language Journal, 79(4), 457–476.  
Kitade, K. (2000). L2 learners' discourse and SLA theories in CMC: Collaborative interaction in Internet 
chat. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 13(2), 143–166.  
Kost, C. R. (2004). An investigation of the effects of synchronous computer-mediated communication 
(CMC) on interlanguage development in beginning learners of German: Accuracy, proficiency, and 
communication strategies. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). The University of Arizona, USA. 
Lin, W., Huang, H., & Liou, H. (2013). The effects of text-based SCMC on SLA: A meta-analysis. 
Language Learning & Technology, 17(2), 123–142. Retrieved from:  
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/linetal.pdf 
Long, M. H. (1981). Input, interaction, and second-language acquisition. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences, 379(1), 259–278.  
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 226 
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C. 
Ritchie & T. K. Bahtia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413-68). New York, NY: 
Academic Press.  
Mackey, A. (1999). Input, interaction, and second language development. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 21(4), 557–587.  
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES Project: Tools for analyzing talk. 3rd Edition. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Nation, I. S. P., & Webb, S. (2011). Researching and analyzing vocabulary. Boston, MA: Heinle, 
Cengage Learning. 
Nguyen, M. (2013). EFL students’ reflections on peer scaffolding in making a collaborative oral 
presentation. English Language Teaching, 6, 64–73. 
Ortega, L. (1997). Processes and outcomes in networked classroom interaction: Defining the research 
agenda for L2 computer-assisted classroom discussion. Language Learning & Technology, 1(1), 82–93. 
Retrieved from: http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/ortega/default.html 
Owen, T. (1993). Wired writing: The writers in electronic residence program. Computer conferencing: 
The last word, 125–147.  
Paribakht, T. S., & Wesche, M. (1997). Vocabulary enhancement activities and reading for meaning in 
second language vocabulary acquisition. In J. Coady & T. Huckin (Eds.), Second language vocabulary 
acquisition: A rationale for pedagogy (pp. 174-199). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Payne, J. S., & Whitney, P. J. (2002). Developing L2 oral proficiency through synchronous CMC: 
Output, working memory, and interlanguage development. CALICO Journal, 20(1), 7–32.  
Pica, T., Kanagy, R., & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communicative tasks for second language 
instruction. In G. Crookes & S. Gass (Eds.), Tasks and language learning: Integrating theory and 
practice (pp. 9–54). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Prabhu, N. S. (1987). Second language pedagogy. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.  
R Development Core Team (2012). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. Vienna, 
Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing. Retrieved from http://www.r-project.org 
Razagifard, P. (2013). The impact of text-based CMC on improving L2 oral fluency. Journal of Computer 
Assisted Learning, 29, 270–279. 
Satar, H., & Özdener, N. (2008). The effects of synchronous CMC on speaking proficiency and anxiety: 
Text versus voice chat. The Modern Language Journal, 92(4), 595–613.  
Schmidt, R. W. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 
11(2), 129–158.  
Shekary, M., & Tahririan, M. H. (2006). Negotiation of meaning and noticing in text-based online chat. 
The Modern Language Journal, 90(4), 557–573.  
Smith, B. (2004). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction and lexical acquisition. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 26, 365–398. 
Smith, B. (2008). Methodological hurdles in capturing CMC data: The case of the missing self-repair. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(1), 85–103.  Retrieved from: 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/pdf/smith.pdf 
 
Medha Tare, Ewa M. Golonka, Karen Vatz, Carrie L. Bonilla, Carolyn Crooks, & Rachel Strong Effects of Interactive Chat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 227 
Sullivan, N., & Pratt, E. (1996). A comparative study of two ESL writing environments: A computer-
assisted classroom and a traditional oral classroom. System, 24(4), 491–501.  
Swain, M. K. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and  
comprehensible output in its development. In S. M. Gass & C.G. Madden (Eds.), Input in second 
language acquisition (pp.236–244). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Swain, M., Brooks, L., & Tocalli-Beller, A. (2002). Peer-peer dialogue as a means of second language 
learning. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 22, 171–185. 
Tudini, V. (2010). Online second language acquisition: Conversation analysis of online chat. New York, 
NY: Continuum International. 
Vercellotti, M. (2012). Complexity, accuracy, and fluency as properties of language performance: The 
development of multiple subsystems over time and in relation to each other. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.  
Warschauer, M. (1996). Comparing face-to-face and electronic discussion in the second language 
classroom. CALICO Journal, 13(2/3), 7–26.  
Wesche, M., & Paribakht, T. S. (1996). Assessing second language vocabulary knowledge: Depth versus 
breadth. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 53(1), 13–40.  
