Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/review4.pdf 
October 2014, Volume 18, Number 3 
pp. 52–55 
 
Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1094-3501 52 
REVIEW OF SOCIAL NETWORKING FOR LANGUAGE EDUCATION 
Social Networking for Language Education 
Marie-Noëlle Lamy and Katerina Zourou (Eds.) 
2013 
ISBN: 9781137023377 
US $31.00 
256 pp. 
Palgrave Macmillan 
Location of Publication 
  
  
Review by Florence Le Baron-Earle, University of Limerick 
Research and publications about social media in relation to the learning and teaching of foreign languages 
is developing researcher and educator interest at a rapid pace. Indeed, the emergence and easy access of 
social networking sites (SNS) have dramatically changed the way we communicate and interact with each 
other. The plethora of tools available online (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Ning, Google Plus) offer promising 
opportunities for educators (Zourou, 2012), and these tools are now gaining significance among the 
CALL community. Despite the enthusiasm, the potential of online applications is underexploited in 
classrooms (Hung & Yuen, 2010), and as a consequence, the number of publications in education remains 
small. Social Networking for Language Education, edited by Marie-Noëlle Lamy and Katerina Zourou, is 
a welcome addition to this area which currently offers limited empirical data (Wang & Vasquèz, 2012).  
The book explores the concept of social web and language learning in post-secondary education, and 
more particularly, focuses on the concept of identity development, social construction, and online 
community building. As explained in the introduction, the terms ‘social web’ and ‘social media’ have 
been carefully selected in order to describe the Internet tools that enable the creation and exchange of 
user-generated content, and to differentiate them with the term web 2.0 (Musser et al., 2007), since the 
latter refers to the technological and ideological platform on which social media applications evolve 
(Lamy & Zourou, 2013; Zourou & Loiseau, 2013). This edited volume addresses two main issues: (1) the 
relationship between social media and language learning and teaching, and (2) the investigation of how 
socialization in networked spaces pertains to language education.  
The book combines theoretical frameworks and empirical studies and provides an insight into nine 
projects examining the benefits and limitations of SNS for educators and for using a variety of SNS 
within non-educational sites such as Facebook or tailor-made ones like Livemocha) into their curriculum. 
Results are depicted through a mix of qualitative and quantitative methods, though qualitative data 
methods are clearly dominant, and many of the chapter authors take participatory or observational stances 
in their inquiries. The contributors to the book are recognized researchers and practitioners in the field of 
Florence Le Baron-Earle                           Review of Social Networking for Language Education  
 
Language Learning & Technology  53 
applied linguistics, foreign language teaching, distance language learning, and language technologies.  
The book is composed of four parts, each addressing a specific area of the social web for language 
learning and teaching. Part I compiles three projects concentrating on the wider ecology of language 
learning with online tools. Part II is composed of three chapters examining the design of specific social 
networking sites and how they may affect teachers’ pedagogies. Part III brings together three chapters that 
depict the benefits and challenges of using social media for language learning, including the controversial 
issue of assessment. Part IV is a reflective summary of the nine preceding chapters. The online 
applications analysed in the book are Facebook, RenRen, Second Life, Livemocha, Google wave, Busuu, 
English Café, and Babbel. 
Chapter 1 examines the use of Facebook and RenRen as two possible means of second language 
socialization. It depicts a case study taking place between March 2009 and May 2011 of a female Chinese 
postgraduate studying and teaching in the United States. Using an ecological approach combining 
qualitative and quantitative analysis, Reinhardt and Chen examine the intercultural identity development 
of “Sue” through her online social networking practices. Chapter 2 thoroughly investigates how identity 
was constructed in Second Life used as part of a Content and Language Integrated Learning (CLIL) 
course. Wigham and Chanier look at how 17 students of architecture learning French or English as a 
foreign language developed online identities, and how these were influenced by the characteristics of their 
avatar and the use of non-verbal communication, including gestures. The analysis is twofold: firstly, the 
authors consider the extent to which the changes in avatar appearance impacted students’ verbal 
interaction (e.g. the way they addressed each other in Second Life); and secondly, they observe whether 
L2 participation increased through identity construction and non-verbal communication. Chapter 3 by 
Lima and Lamy explores the relationship between a worldwide Online Reading Group (ORG) for 
professionals in English Language Teaching (ELT) and historical reading groups with the aim of 
understanding how they relate to each other, as well as how they relate to ELT teachers’ professional 
development.  
Chapter 4 and 5 are both examinations of Livemocha, a free online language learning SNS launched in 
2007 that provides language lessons in 35 languages. In Chapter 4, Zourou and Loiseau scrutinize the 
Culture section of the website in order to provide conceptual and technical improvements and to suggest 
pedagogical recommendations. To do so, they analyse a corpus made of 105 Culture threads, and identify 
the design choices that affected language interaction. Chapter 5 is a follow-up of a publication made by 
Harrison and Thomas (2009); it revisits the analysis they had made of Livemocha in order to determine 
the process of mediation. To accomplish this, it summarizes results from previous publications on the 
online site and also reveals new data that show how user profiles affected language learning processes. 
Other issues raised in the chapter are the relationship between digital social behaviours and the 
development of language skills; the construction of identities through the user-centred, participative 
framework of social networks for language learning; and the role of peers (native and non-native 
speakers) in SNS. Chapter 6 explores the impact that instructional design of CALL applications has on 
learning.  Fuchs and Snyder emphasise the fact that the success of a course using SNS is not solely reliant 
on the technology: it needs to be supported by sound teaching methods that encourage student 
engagement and teacher collaboration (Chapelle, 2003). Based on this theory, Chapter 6 investigates the 
extent to which 30 pre-service language teachers in the United States and Taiwan used Google Wave 
beyond the pedagogical tasks set by their teachers, and it discusses the instructional design implications of 
this analysis. 
Chapter 7 depicts both the benefits and limitations offered by three online language learning 
communities: Busuu, Livemocha, and English Café. It investigates how 21 university students from 11 
countries attending an intensive English as a Second Language (ESL) programme in a US institution used 
the aforementioned sites for language learning. It also analyses their perceptions of the overall experience. 
Participants were asked to complete a series of tasks, and their feedback pertaining to their use and 
Florence Le Baron-Earle                           Review of Social Networking for Language Education  
 
Language Learning & Technology  54 
perception of each site were collected in a survey. The authors provide answers to three main research 
questions: (1) When are SNS for language learning used as a tool for classroom and off-site language 
practice? (2) What do university ESL students think of them and how do they use them? and (3) What 
features of these sites do students find most useful in helping them develop language skills and why? The 
results provided indicate that the three sites offered a generally positive experience for participants; 
students valued the language practice opportunities, with a preference towards the use of text chats, and 
the grammar and vocabulary exercises. However, they showed conflicted responses to socializing with 
learners they did not know, and were generally uncomfortable to providing feedback to other users. 
Furthermore, Chapter 7 provides useful considerations for practitioners wishing to implement Busuu, 
Livemocha and English Café in their classroom. For instance, it was noted that the proficiency levels of 
participants had a direct impact on their appreciation of communication modes (e.g., text, audio or video 
chats.). 
Chapter 8 provides rich insight into a year-long telecollaborative project between university students in 
France and Taiwan coordinated by Liaw and English. A website was created by the authors to enable their 
respective students to learn English via a series of intercultural learning tasks. As the project took place, 
and interaction between students intensified, they noted that, on their own accord, students created an 
“unofficial” site on Facebook to interact. The chapter analyses the students’ interaction and production in 
both sites by looking at turn-taking, the use of first names, speech function, and choices of pronouns that 
indicate closeness, solidarity, and degrees of politeness or distance between participants. Results indicate 
that the official site did not foster intercultural dialogue, but the unofficial site enabled students to build 
interpersonal relationship that demonstrated the skills of discovery and interaction advocated by Byram’s 
model of intercultural communicative competence (Byram, 1997, 2000). 
Chapter 9 focuses on formative assessment within SNS that promotes language learning using immediate 
formative feedback. The authors offer an auto-ethnographic perspective of their experiences as language 
learners of beginning Spanish, Korean and Japanese on three SNS sites: Busuu, Livemocha and Babbel. 
They explore the mechanisms and processes related to placement, as well as their own progress and 
interaction. Chapter 9 provides guidelines for future designs; it may also help educators to consider how 
these sites may be blended into existing curricular options. Finally, Chapter 10 is an overview of all 
chapters and raises a number of issues pertaining to future research into online networking and language 
education, including data collection, learning tasks, and forms of interaction. The perspective offered in 
this final chapter is threefold: for researchers, for designers and practitioners (or design and pedagogy), 
and for learners in formal and informal learning settings.   
To conclude, Lamy and Zourou’s collection of chapters compiled in Social Networking for Language 
Education is an accessible read which delivers a good balance of theoretical perspectives and informative 
case studies. Each chapter can be read individually. Similar to recent publications (Guth & Helm, 2010; 
Meskill, 2012; Thomas, 2011), it is a useful resource for language teachers, practitioners, researchers, and 
education professionals at university level interested in honing their understanding of the social web for 
teaching and learning purposes. Though the book is not directed towards SNS and CALL neophytes, it 
may well develop readers’ knowledge of Internet technologies for language learning and teaching with 
the literature reviews, and in addition can provide language teachers with practical insights with the series 
of richly documented case studies.  
 
 
 
 
Florence Le Baron-Earle                           Review of Social Networking for Language Education  
 
Language Learning & Technology  55 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Florence Le Baron-Earle is a teaching assistant of French at the University of Limerick, Ireland. Her 
recently awarded PhD investigated the role of social media in enhancing the intercultural communicative 
competence of learners of French. Her main publications are on computer-assisted language learning and 
teaching. 
E-mail: florence.lebaron-earle@ul.ie 
 
REFERENCES 
Byram, M. (1997). Teaching and assessing intercultural communicative competence. Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters. 
Byram, M. (2000). Assessing intercultural communicative competence in language teaching. Sprogforum, 
18(6), 8–13. 
Chapelle, C. A. (2003). English language learning and technology: Lectures on applied linguistics in the 
age of information and communication technology. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins.  
Guth, S., & Helm, F. (Eds.). (2010). Telecollaboration 2.0: Language, literacies, and intercultural 
learning in the 21st century. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Harrison, R., & Thomas, M. (2009). Identities in online communities: Social networking sites and 
language learning. International Journal of Emerging Technologies and Societies, 7(2), 109–124. 
Hung, H. T., & Yuen, S. (2010). Educational use of social networking technology in higher education. 
Teaching in Higher Education, 15(6), 703–714. 
Lamy, M.-N., & Zourou, K. (2013). Social networking for language education. Basingstoke, UK: 
Palgrave Macmillan.  
Meskill, C. (2012). Online teaching and learning: Socio-cultural dimensions. New York, NY: Continuum 
Books. 
Musser, J., O’Reilly, T., & the O’Reilly Radar Team. (2007). Web 2.0 principles and best practices. 
Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly. 
Thomas, M. (Ed.). (2011) Digital education: Opportunities for social collaboration. New York, NY: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
Wang, S., & Vasquéz, C. (2012). Web 2.0 and second language learning: What does the research tell us? 
CALICO Journal, 29(3), 412–429. 
Zourou, K. (2012). On the attractiveness of social media for language learning: A look at the state of the 
art. Alsic, 15(1). 
Zourou, K., & Loiseau, M. (2013). Bridging design and language interaction and reuse in Livemocha’s 
culture section. In M.-N. Lamy and K. Zourou (Eds.). Social networking for language education (pp.77–
99). Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
