Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2015/helm.pdf 
June 2015, Volume 19, Number 2 
pp. 197–217 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 197 
THE PRACTICES AND CHALLENGES OF TELECOLLABORATION IN 
HIGHER EDUCATION IN EUROPE 
Francesca Helm, University of Padova 
Telecollaboration is an area of CALL research and practice which has developed 
considerably in the last twenty years. Many research studies have been carried out and 
important findings have been made, but there has not yet been a large scale survey to try 
and ‘map’ the state of the art in telecollaboration practice. Most studies focus on single 
telecollaboration projects and look at the project design, learning outcomes and difficulties 
teachers and researchers have encountered in that particular project. This paper reports on 
a survey which sought to explore current practices and attitudes towards telecollaboration 
across European universities and to identify barriers that practitioners encounter. The 
survey was completed in full by a total of 210 university language teachers in 23 different 
European countries and 131 students. The picture we found presents a broad spectrum of 
practices. Despite an overwhelmingly positive attitude towards telecollaboration, findings 
also provide large-scale confirmation of some of the problems identified in small-scale 
studies, such as organizational difficulties, lack of time, limited technical support and great 
uncertainty regarding issues students should address in their exchanges. The paper 
concludes with some recommendations as to how to meet these challenges and how 
telecollaboration practice could become mainstreamed in higher education.   
Language(s) Learned in Current Study: English 
Keywords: Computer-mediated Communication, Computer-Assisted Language Learning, 
Collaborative Learning, Telecollaboration. 
APA Citation: Helm, F. (2015). The practices and challenges of telecollaboration in 
higher education in Europe. Language Learning & Technology, 19(2), 197–217. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2015/helm.pdf 
Received: December 22, 2013; Accepted: September 19, 2014; Published: June 1, 2015 
Copyright: © Francesca Helm 
INTRODUCTION 
Telecollaboration is the practice of engaging classes of geographically dispersed learners in online 
intercultural exchange using Internet communication tools for the development of language and/or 
intercultural competence. It has also been called Online Intercultural Exchange (OIE) (O'Dowd, 2007) 
and Internet-mediated Intercultural Foreign Language Education (ICFLE). Telecollaboration offers 
opportunities for universities to support their internationalization strategies by ‘globalizing their 
curriculum’ and engaging learners in dialogue with peers in distant parts of the world. However this 
potential has yet to materialize as telecollaboration has not been mainstreamed into higher education. 
Student mobility, that is periods of study abroad, on the other hand, has a much stronger place in 
universities’ internationalization policies (and budgets) despite the fact that only a small percentage of the 
student population actually benefit from this (currently 1% in the US, and about 5% in Europe). In 
primary and secondary education, on the other hand, where study abroad is not so feasible, projects such 
as the European Commission’s eTwinning actively promote and support collaboration between schools 
through ICT. A portal has been developed for eTwinning to help schools find partners and to facilitate 
communication and collaboration between staff and pupils of partner schools as they develop and engage 
in joint educational projects. There are currently over 230,000 members registered and the project has the 
support of a network of education ministries across Europe, European Schoolnet.  
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  198 
Despite its short history, telecollaboration has established itself as a rich sub-field of CALL and 
Computer-Mediated Communication, with hundreds of journal articles on the theme, dedicated volumes 
(Belz & Thorne, 2006; Dooly, 2008; Guth & Helm, 2010; O'Dowd, 2007) journal special editions (Belz, 
2003; Lewis, Chanier, & Youngs, 2011) and a book series, Telecollaboration in Education, edited by 
O’Dowd and Dooly. Telecollaboration research has progressed from collections of classroom practice and 
anecdotal research to in-depth studies of online interaction and exchange (Dooly & O'Dowd, 2012). 
Research studies have reported on the many outcomes of different telecollaborative projects, mainly in 
higher education contexts, such as increased motivation and linguistic output, gains in language 
development, accuracy and fluency, intercultural communicative competence, pragmatic competence, 
learner autonomy, online literacies, and multimodal communicative competence. The research has also 
documented failures and difficulties. The literature, however, largely consists of in-depth studies of 
individual projects and contexts, focusing on pedagogic design, the technology used, analysis of the 
interaction, linguistic and/or intercultural learning outcomes, difficulties, and barriers. Few studies offer a 
bigger picture of telecollaboration in terms of its implementation in higher education, other than a 
preliminary study carried out by O’Dowd (2011) which revealed that it is very much a peripheral add-on 
activity that is not being fully integrated into foreign language programmes.  
The aim of the present survey study, which was financed by the European Commission, was to explore 
current practices and attitudes towards telecollaboration across European universities and to identify 
barriers that foreign language teachers and telecollaboration practitioners encounter. The survey was 
completed in full by a total of 210 university language teachers in 23 different European countries (see 
Appendix) and 131 students (see Guth, Helm & O’Dowd, 2012, for full report). The picture we found 
presents a broad spectrum of practices that have been developed in different university contexts, some of 
which will be outlined in this paper. The paper also reports on what are seen to be the main barriers to the 
mainstreaming of telecollaboration in foreign language education in higher education contexts and 
provides large-scale confirmation of the multiple issues reported in the many individual studies we find in 
the literature. The paper closes with recommendations on how practitioners could be supported in 
mainstreaming online intercultural exchange in foreign language education (FLE) in tertiary education 
and finally offers suggestions for further research to be carried out in this field. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The telecollaboration literature is quite vast and has focused on many different aspects. This literature 
review is organized around the main issues which the survey study sought to address, namely: (a) the 
models and language configurations adopted in telecollaboration, (b) the mediating role of technologies, 
(c) tasks and assessment, and finally, (d) the challenges of telecollaboration. 
Telecollaboration Models and Language Uses 
The most well-established models of telecollaboration are the bicultural and bilingual eTandem and 
Cultura, which have formed the basis of many exchanges and have been adapted to different languages 
and contexts. eTandem is a form of institutionalized online tandem learning (Kötter, 2003; O'Rourke, 
2005) in which individual students from different classes, with different native languages, are paired and 
communicate together with the aim of learning one another’s language. The focus tends to be on the 
development of linguistic competence, with learners encouraged to provide feedback on their partners’ 
foreign language performance, correct errors, and offer new formulations (Bower & Kawaguchi, 2011; 
Vinagre & Munoz, 2011). Research on this type of exchange, generally grounded in Interactionist 
theories of SLA, has found that this approach offers opportunities for negotiation of meaning and form, 
which in turn, fosters language acquisition (see for example Lee, 2006).  
The Cultura model, developed by Furstenberg and her colleagues at MIT (Furstenberg, Levet, English, & 
Maillet, 2001), is the basis of what O’Dowd has described as a “blended intercultural model” (O'Dowd, 
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  199 
2011). It has a strong intercultural component, with learners engaging in tasks designed by educators to 
elicit cultural differences and similarities. Research on projects adopting this model is generally based on 
sociocultural frameworks and looks at the role and development of intercultural competence as well as 
language development (Belz, 2003).  
Much of the literature on telecollaboration regards projects involving the most commonly taught 
languages, with English being one of the main exchange languages followed by French, German, Spanish 
and Italian. In 2003 Belz lamented that there was little research on partnerships involving the so-called 
less commonly taught languages (LCTL). In recent years, however, there seems to have been a rise in the 
number of publications describing telecollaboration projects involving what have been defined as LCTLs,  
particularly Chinese (Wang, Zou, Wang, & Xing, 2013) and Russian (Klimanova & Dembovskaya, 
2013). 
The bilingual models mentioned above are based on the assumption that the “native speaker” is the ideal 
interlocutor and can act as a cultural informant and/or language expert, providing error correction, 
feedback, and cultural information. One of the questions Train (2006) asks is the extent to which 
telecollaborative pedagogies participate in or work against powerful ideology. He argues that from this 
standpoint, telecollaboration can be seen as a risk in reproducing what he calls Native Standard Language 
(NSL): 
a complex constellation of hegemonic ideologies of language, (non)standardness, and 
(non)nativeness that have come to define the socio-historically and discursively constructed 
“realities” of language, culture, community, language use, and speaker identity inside and outside 
the classroom (p. 249).  
Recently, there has been some research on telecollaboration exchanges whereby participants use a foreign 
language common to all of them, a “lingua franca”, rather than communicating with native speakers, most 
commonly this language is English. It has been suggested that this move may be partly due to the increase 
in telecollaboration projects involving multiple partners (Lewis et al., 2011), though it may also reflect an 
acknowledgement, by English language teachers in particular, that their students are more likely to 
communicate with non-native than with native speakers. Research in this area of telecollaboration is just 
beginning, but an interesting finding is that learners report being less anxious when interacting with non-
native speakers, and that the use of a contact language can cement participants’ feelings of proximity and 
mutual support (Guarda, 2013).  
Teacher Education and Telecollaboration 
One of the implications of the growth in the practice of telecollaboration is its inclusion in teacher 
education programmes, particularly CMC teacher education approaches based on social constructivist 
views of teacher education (Dooly, 2010). Engaging teacher trainees in telecollaboration projects offers 
the opportunity for ‘exploratory’ teaching practice (Guichon & Hauck, 2011) and ‘experiential modelling’ 
(Guichon, 2009; Hampel, 2009). This kind of experience has been found to foster the development of 
multimodal communicative competence, multiliteracy, autonomy, and the teacher competences required 
for teaching with multimodal technologies (Fuchs, Hauck, & Müller-Hartmann, 2012).  
Mediation of Technology 
All telecollaborative interaction is mediated by technology: this has the potential to offer considerable 
benefits but also possible pitfalls.  However, it is clearly not the only factor that influences language and 
intercultural learning (Kern, 2014). Different tools and modes of communication have been found to offer 
particular affordances and constraints in diverse contexts.  Synchronous communication has generally 
been found to be motivating by participants, to promote increased participation and interaction amongst 
students, and to offer opportunities for negotiation of meaning, thus fostering language acquisition 
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  200 
(Blake, 2000; Lee, 2006; Tudini, 2003). The value of asynchronous communication for language learning, 
on the other hand, is that it gives learners time to reflect on their communication and to plan their 
interventions whether they are using email, discussion forums or more recent tools such as blogs and 
wikis (Guth & Thomas, 2010). The written form is more permanent than the spoken word and the study 
of transcripts of both synchronous and asynchronous communication has been found to support focus on 
form and the noticing of language features, which fosters language development (Dussias, 2006; Ware 
and O’Dowd, 2008). What has been considered a disadvantage of the written form is that it can lead to 
misunderstandings as the speakers are invisible, their interlocutors see only their words which, as Ware 
and Kramsch (2005) write bear “the full weight of their historical, ideological, social, and cultural 
density” (p. 201). 
Audio-video-conferencing has rapidly evolved from expensive group-to-group equipment to desktop and, 
more recently, mobile applications. Researchers have found that whilst video-conferencing can be highly 
motivating for students participating in telecollaboration, it also places demands on them as they need to 
be able to become competent in both switching linguistic and semiotic codes, as well as “become fluent in 
new codes such as online speech and writing and image” (Hampel & Hauck, 2006, p. 12).  
The mediational role of technology is important and has an impact on interaction as participants orient to 
and engage with the technical as well as the social layer of interaction (Liddicoat 2011 in Kern 2014). 
Social networking tools such as Twitter (Lomicka & Lord, 2012), Facebook (Chen, 2013) and others 
popular in different languages such as Vkontakte for Russian, and Mixi for Japanese (Pasfield-Neofitou, 
2011) have begun to be explored in telecollaboration studies. Several researchers have looked at the 
opportunities they offer for what has been described as ‘intercultural communication in the wild’ (Thorne, 
2010: 144), that is, not with language learners in partner classes but rather with members of online 
environments such as news discussion forums, or online gaming communities. Research reports on the 
motivational aspects of this form of telecollaboration and the extended periods of language use it can 
entail as learners negotiate new roles and identities, shifting from second language (L2) learners to L2 
users. Learners can overcome what may be seen as limitations of low proficiency by using the multiple 
affordances for meaning making in order to create and maintain genuine communication with distant 
peers (Thorne, Black & Sykes, 2009; Thorne, Cornillie & Piet, 2012).  
Tasks and Assessment 
Telecollaboration projects generally adopt a task-based approach and research has looked into types of 
tasks which foster negotiation of meaning and form (Blake, 2000), and also how tasks can and should 
integrate the development of language, intercultural competence, and online literacies (Helm & Guth, 
2010). O'Dowd and Ware (2009) identified three main categories of tasks that blended intercultural 
telecollaboration projects have used. First of all Information Exchange, whereby students provide 
information for one another. Comparison and Analysis tasks go a step further and require participants to 
make comparisons or critical analyses of cultural products (such as books, films, newspaper articles) from 
both cultures. Finally, Collaboration and Product Creation tasks, which are deemed the most demanding 
but the least often used tasks (Harris, 2002; Helm & Guth, 2010). Examples of these tasks are joint 
production of an essay, a presentation, a webpage, a translation or a cultural adaptation of a text. In 
O’Dowd and Ware’s (2009) study, the teachers who were new to telecollaboration selected the first two 
types of tasks which required lesser degrees of collaboration and organization.  
Assessment of learners’ telecollaborative activity and development is a complex, yet fundamental issue 
that has not been addressed much in the literature (Lamy & Hampel, 2007). O’Dowd (2010) identified 
some of the challenges educators face in assessing the multiple aims of telecollaboration. These include 
ethical issues of assessing the attitudinal component of intercultural competence, the calibration of 
intercultural skills and literacies into levels and the need to find testing procedures which take into 
account the new skills and the new contexts in which students are learning (Levy & Stockwell, 2006).  
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  201 
Challenges of Telecollaboration 
As Lamy and Goodfellow (2010) point out, telecollaboration researchers have been ready to identify 
difficulties, tension and failure in telecollaboration projects, which have been attributed to a wide range of 
factors. From a review of the telecollaboration literature, O’Dowd and Ritter (2006) identified four levels 
at which factors can contribute to ‘failed communication’: the individual, classroom, socio-institutional 
and interaction. They do argue, however, that it is usually a combination of interconnected factors that 
lead to failure. In their inventory, the individual level regards learners’ level of intercultural 
communicative competence, their knowledge, their motivations, and their expectations. Also included on 
this level are the stereotypes that participants may bring with them to an exchange. On a class level, there 
are other factors involved, such as the teacher-to-teacher relationship, the task design, the matching of 
learners, and the local group dynamics. According to O’Dowd and Ritter, the level that has received the 
most attention in the research is the socio-institutional level.  This includes the mediating technologies 
and their design, the general organization of the students’ courses of study including differences in 
timetables, contact hours, workload and assessment, or recognition of student participation in 
telecollaboration activity. However, it is not simply a question of whether students are assessed or not, but 
also as Belz (2001) reports, differences in the value placed on the languages studied by participants, as 
well as “culturally determined classroom scripts” (p. 213) such as working and interacting in order to be 
awarded grades.  
On an interactional level O’Dowd and Ritter identify cultural differences in communication styles and 
behaviours, such as different attitudes to directness, non-verbal communication, use of humour, and irony. 
Also on the interactional level is the cultures-of-use of particular tools which can lead to divergent 
communicative expectations and cause a breakdown in communication (Thorne, 2003). Perhaps the 
greatest challenge on an interactional level though is getting students to engage in deeper levels of 
interaction (Belz 2001, 2003; Kramsch & Thorne, 2002; O'Dowd, 2003; Ware & Kramsch, 2005; Helm, 
2013) where they move beyond the ‘assumption of similarity’ and manage to take an intercultural stance 
(Ware 2005; Ware & Kramsch, 2005). As Ware (2005) reports in her study, to avert miscommunication, 
students can often avoid deep engagement which, as she reports “while potentially helpful for saving face, 
can lead to "missed" communication, or missed opportunities for approximating the kind of rich, 
meaningful intercultural learning that instructors often intend with telecollaborative projects” (p. 66). 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
The aim of this study was to provide a picture of the current “state of the art” in telecollaboration at 
European universities and to explore teacher and student attitudes towards the practice. The research 
questions we seek to answer in this paper are: 
1. What kind of educators engage in telecollaboration? 
2. What types of telecollaborative practices are European university educators undertaking? 
3. What are the views of educators and students regarding the value and learning outcomes of 
telecollaboration? 
4. What barriers do practitioners encounter or envisage in setting up online intercultural exchanges? 
METHODOLOGY 
Three different questionnaires were developed. The first was aimed at university educators in European 
institutions who had carried out telecollaboration projects in order to find out about their experience and 
opinions regarding online exchange. As we were interested in exploring what these European educators 
perceived to be the barriers to their undertaking of a telecollaboration project the second survey addressed 
those who had not yet carried out telecollaboration though were aware of and interested in the activity. 
The third was designed mainly to identify student attitudes toward telecollaboration. All three surveys, 
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  202 
which were translated from English into three languages—French, German, and Italian—were developed 
through a process of pre-piloting and piloting. Initial drafts of the different surveys were drawn up by 
three project members: the author of this paper, Sarah Guth from the University of Padova, and Robert 
O’Dowd, from the University of Leόn in Spain and co-ordinator of the INTENT project (Integrating 
Telecollaborative NeTworks in University Foreign Language Education). These survey drafts were 
reviewed by the rest of the INTENT team, online versions were created, piloted, and then further 
reviewed.  
This paper is based mainly on the quantitative data using descriptive statistics, in addition to a small 
amount of qualitative data. The answers to the open-ended questions regarding the barriers to 
telecollaboration were imported into NVivo (QSRInternational, 2013) and coded for recurring themes and 
patterns. The researchers carefully read each response and assigned it to one or more codes (see Table 8). 
In the few instances where answers were not clear, interpretation was resolved through discussion with 
the project team.  
Respondents 
A total of 286 university educators from 142 institutions responded to the survey but only 210 
respondents were taken into consideration for this report, since 60 questionnaires were incomplete and 16 
came from outside the European Union (EU). Of these, 102 were teachers with experience of online 
intercultural exchange (OIE) and 108 were teachers with no direct experience of OIE. 131 students 
responded to the survey in full. 
Responses were received from educators in 23 different European countries, which indicates a broad 
geographic distribution of respondents. The most represented countries were France, Germany, Italy, 
Spain, Poland, the UK, and Cyprus. One quarter of these educators were male, and three quarters were 
female. Most respondents were foreign language educators, and the majority taught English, followed by 
French, German, Spanish, Italian, and Chinese. Many respondents taught students from more than one 
domain of study. Over half taught students majoring in foreign languages, however many respondents 
taught students in Social Sciences, Humanities, and to a lesser extent, students majoring in Science & 
Technology or clinical and para-clinical subjects. About a quarter of respondents taught students who 
were training to become foreign language teachers.  
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION 
A Profile of the Telecollaborative Teacher 
Most of the survey respondents with experience of telecollaboration were teachers of the most commonly 
taught languages in Europe (see Table 1) (European Commission, 2012) and/or trainers of future foreign 
language teachers. They generally attend conferences, read academic publications, and have a strong 
network of international contacts through which they find partners and support for their activity.  
Table 1. Survey Question: “What language (if any) do you teach?” 
 Experienced telecollaborators Not experienced 
English 42% 54% 
French 18% 17% 
German 11% 8% 
Spanish 7% 6% 
Italian 4% 5% 
Other  
(please specify) 
Catalan, Chinese (5), Dutch, 
Hungarian, Polish, Portuguese 
Catalan (2), Chinese, Czech, Dutch, Polish (3), 
Portuguese (3) 
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  203 
Note: Numbers indicated under ‘other’ are number of respondents.  
Telecollaboration was not generally a unique experience, but rather an activity they have engaged in 
repeatedly, possibly also during their education and/or training (see Table 2). It would thus appear that 
once educators have carried out a telecollaboration exchange they are likely to continue, since most of the 
survey respondents (72%) had carried out more than one telecollaboration exchange in the last five years.  
Table 2. Survey Question: “How many exchanges have you set up in the past 5 years?” 
1 28% 
2 21% 
3 15% 
4 8% 
5 or more 28% 
Having experienced telecollaboration themselves, was the most widely reported stimulus for them to 
engage students in this activity (cited by 30% of respondents), as can be seen in Table 3. This reflects the 
importance of including telecollaboration in teacher training programmes and also of supporting teachers 
in embarking on their first exchange. Other stimuli for embarking on telecollaboration were through 
colleagues’ recommending telecollaboration (27%), attending presentations/workshops (25%), or reading 
about it in academic publications (23%). Additional responses included involvement for research 
purposes, through involvement in an EU or other kind of project, through invitation to be an exchange 
partner, to meet a teaching need and, as one respondent remarked, “just because it made sense”.  
Table 3. Survey Question: “Please explain where you got the idea to do an online exchange” 
I read about it in academic publication. 23% 
I read about it in a website. 14% 
A colleague recommended it to me. 27% 
I attended a presentation or workshop about it. 25% 
I had done language exchange activities myself. 30% 
Other (please specify) research, part of EU project, invitation, meet teaching need, made 
sense 
 
Established and Emerging Practices  
The pedagogic aim of telecollaboration projects (see Table 4) indicated by most respondents was the 
development of students' intercultural awareness and communication skills (83%), followed by 
development of students' foreign language competence (73%), and then by students’ ability to 
communicate and collaborate with others online (70%). This may, in part, be due the opportunity it offers 
for intercultural contact and authentic communication that educators see as distinguishing Online 
Intercultural Exchange from “traditional” foreign language classroom practice.  
Table 4. Survey Question: “Please describe briefly what pedagogical aims you usually have when doing 
exchanges” 
Development of students' foreign language competence 73% 
Development of students' intercultural awareness and communication skills 83% 
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  204 
Development of students' ability to communicate and collaborate with others online 70% 
Learn more about their subject area in other countries 24% 
Other (please specify) Teaching competence, autonomy, work experience, multiple academic 
competences, diversity 
 
The most common type of exchange would seem to be a bilateral, bilingual, bicultural exchange lasting 
more or less one semester, thus corresponding to the more established models described in the literature 
review (see Figure 1). The most common exchange languages were English (63%), followed by French 
(35%), German (24%), Spanish (19%), Italian (13%), and Chinese (5%). Exchange partners were usually 
classes of students who were studying a foreign language, though not necessarily as a major, and both 
classes thus interacted mainly with native speakers of their target language. 
 
 
Figure 1. Type of exchange(s) in terms of language configuration 
Partners were not necessarily in European countries; indeed often they were outside Europe. The US, 
proved to be the most common exchange partner country (indicated by one third of respondents, whilst 
the UK was indicated by about one fifth), but respondents also indicated many other countries outside 
Europe (see Figure 2). There are certain geographic regions, however, where no respondents had partners, 
for example most African countries and also a lot of Asian countries. This is probably due to both issues 
of language and accessibility in these areas.  
 
Figure 2. Map of OIE partner countries based on respondents’ answers. 
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  205 
The survey also provided widespread evidence of the emerging models that were reported in the literature 
review. Twenty-five per cent of experienced educators reported that their students were training to 
become foreign language teachers, thus exchanges are increasingly part of teacher training programmes. 
Many of these were monolingual exchanges, and partly account for the considerable number of 
monolingual exchanges reported in the survey (33%). It would appear that a need has been recognized to 
help teacher trainees “‘connect-the-dots’ between theory and practice by gradually immersing them in 
more and more complex online learning interactions by promoting both ‘doing’ and ‘reflecting on doing’” 
(Dooly & Sadler, 2013, p. 7).  
Findings also confirm the emergence of lingua franca exchanges (20%), and to a lesser extent 
multilingual exchanges (10%). There is some overlap in the answers as respondents could indicate more 
than one option, and they could also provide additional information. Two respondents indicated that their 
English as a lingua franca (ELF) exchanges also included other languages on an ad hoc basis. Nearly one 
third of the lingua franca exchanges reported involved more than 2 partners, confirming a connection 
between the use of a lingua franca and multilateral projects, as suggested by Lewis et al. (2011) and also 
perhaps a response to the growing interest in ELF—a rejection of the native speaker of English as the 
unattainable, ideal standard (Jenkins, 2007)—and/or a recognition of the “privilege of the nonnative 
speaker” (Kramsch, 1997, p. 359).  
A number of exchanges reported involved less commonly taught languages (LCTLs) such as Chinese, 
Polish, Hungarian, Portuguese, Greek, Turkish, and Dutch. Apart from the opportunities offered by 
telecollaboration for authentic communication and development of intercultural knowledge and 
understanding, telecollaboration can be particularly useful for LCTLs for which there are much fewer 
teaching materials and resources than for English or the more commonly taught languages (Godwin-
Jones, 2013). 
A further interesting result was the considerable number of multilateral projects (see Table 5). Whilst 
bilateral exchanges were the majority, the number of respondents who reported having more than one 
partner is perhaps surprising, particularly if we consider the complex organization that a multilateral 
exchange requires. Fifteen per cent of respondents reported having two university partners and 14% had 
three. Six per cent reported usually having four partners while 5% indicated five or more. Responses to 
open-ended questions and the follow up case studies carried out indicate emerging models and broader 
networks, such as the Transatlantic translation project and the Soliya Connect Programme (Helm, Guth, 
& Farrah, 2012). 
Table 5. Survey Question: “Apart from your own university, how many other universities or other groups 
are usually involved in your exchanges?” 
1  58% 
2 15% 
3 14% 
4   6% 
5 or more   5% 
Technologies 
Respondents had the possibility of indicating more than one option in response to the question regarding 
tools, and Figure 3 clearly reflects the fact that most respondents reported using more than one tool. 
Asynchronous communication tools such as email, discussion forums, and virtual learning environments, 
which were among the first tools to be used in telecollaboration, are still the most commonly used tools 
despite the fact that many other means of online communication have appeared on the horizon since the 
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  206 
emergence of telecollaboration (see Figure 3). Asynchronous Web 2.0 tools such as wikis and blogs have 
also been adopted quite widely. The student responses were very similar to those of the educators. 
 
Figure 3. Tools that educators and students reported using in their exchanges ‘several times’.  
Audio/video conferencing was the most popular synchronous tool reported and seems to have been 
embraced in telecollaboration. This may be surprising if we consider the challenges and cognitive 
demands that meaning making in multimodal environments has been found to place on learners (Hampel 
& Hauck, 2006). Certainly these tools offer opportunities for developing oral skills, which, until such 
technological developments, could only be addressed through group-to-group video conferencing.  
Social networks, on the other hand, were indicated by only one quarter of experienced telecollaborators. 
This is the one tool in which students reported considerably higher use than educators. It was not clear 
from the survey, however, whether they had used social networks for telecollaboration “in the wild” or for 
communication between closed groups of learners. The slower uptake of social networks by teachers may 
indicate some reticence amongst educators for adopting social networks in their exchanges. For both 
learners and educators the relationship between formal and informal learning is complex: factors at 
individual, socio-institutional, as well as on an ideological level are at play (Lamy & Goodfellow, 2010). 
The use of social networks for telecollaboration is no doubt an important direction for future research. 
Tasks and Assessment 
As displayed in Figure 4, the tasks most educators reported they have their learners engage in were: 
discussion of topics or texts (76%), comparison of cultural products and customs (67%), and personal 
presentations (65%). Collaboration in the creation of products, such as web pages or documents, is a 
slightly less common activity (48%), reflecting, to some extent, what was found in the literature review, 
that tasks which require collaboration in product creation are less commonly used than those requiring 
only information exchange and/or cultural comparison. This is likely because of the greater time required 
for the coordination of collaborative activities, though these are the ones which Harris (2002) argues, 
facilitate higher-level thinking and interaction, and which offer participants the many benefits from 
having to understand and incorporate procedures and perspectives which are different from their own. 
There is thus a need to support educators in establishing the conditions which facilitate them in 
integrating collaboration in their online tasks. Correction of partners’ errors was an activity that 44%—
less than half of respondents—engaged in, perhaps reflecting the predominantly intercultural rather than 
linguistic focus in their exchanges.  
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  207 
 
Figure 4.  What types of tasks or activities do your students usually carry out during their online 
exchanges? 
As regards evaluation of student learning, 64% of respondents indicated that they assessed their students’ 
activities in online exchange in some way. Of those who did, more respondents said they assessed their 
students’ intercultural communicative competence and ability to communicate online than their foreign 
language fluency or linguistic correctness, reflecting the multiple objectives these same educators 
reported for their exchanges (see Table 6).  
Table 6: Survey Question: “Please indicate what aspects of student learning you usually assess in your 
exchanges” 
Linguistic correctness (grammar, vocabulary etc.) 25% 
Foreign language fluency 29% 
Aspects of Intercultural communicative competence 40% 
Ability to communicate online 33% 
Other (please specify)  
The main methods used for assessment (see Table 7) were essays or reflections on exchanges and the 
content of students’ interactions (44% and 43% respectively). Only 22% reported using student portfolios. 
Several respondents reported assessing products developed through the exchange, such as translations, 
webpages, learning journals, self-assessments, and structured reports, but this is a minority and 
corroborates the finding that fewer educators engage students in tasks involving collaboration in product 
creation. Overall, it appears that progress is gradually being made towards assessment, recognition, and 
integration of telecollaboration in university foreign language courses.  
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  208 
Table 7: Survey Question: “Please indicate how you usually assess student learning in your exchanges.” 
Evaluating students' portfolios 22% 
Evaluating the content of students’ online interaction 43% 
Evaluating students' essays or presentations reflecting on their exchanges 44% 
Other (please specify)  
Student and Educator Beliefs about Value and Outcomes of Telecollaboration 
Ninety-three per cent of educators surveyed, both with and without telecollaboration experience 
expressed overwhelmingly positive attitudes towards telecollaboration. Many educators with experience 
(72%) indicated that they believe their students find it relevant and important for their learning, they 
believe students develop their foreign language skills (54%), their ability to communicate effectively 
online (63%) and above all their intercultural awareness (75%). It is interesting to compare these beliefs 
with what students reported. They too find it a generally positive experience (86%) and enjoy using ICT 
to learn a foreign language (see Figure 5). More students had positive beliefs about improving their 
intercultural communication skills, foreign language and online communication skills than educators with 
experience of telecollaboration. Only 50% of students, however, reported they had developed skills which 
would make them employable. This is surprising if we consider that the oft-cited 21st century skills are 
seen to include communication, collaboration, and information literacy (see for instance Zhao, 2009). 
 
Figure 5. Student beliefs about value and outcomes of telecollaboration. 
Though no survey respondents reported actually carrying out pre-mobility exchanges, ninety-one per cent 
of experienced educators believe that online exchanges can support physical mobility while the number of 
inexperienced educators reporting the same was 2% greater: 93%,. As to whether telecollaboration was 
considered a valid alternative to physical mobility, there was less agreement. Clearly, a virtual exchange 
is quite different from a study period abroad, yet many proponents would argue that it has the potential of 
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  209 
offering students a powerful intercultural experience with students in different parts of the world 
(Exchange 2.0). Educators with experience (63%) were more inclined to see virtual exchange as a valid 
alternative to physical mobility than those without experience (46%), and also to more likely to believe 
that a true intercultural experience does not necessarily require face-to-face contact (48% versus 36%), 
though there is less certainty about this. Students were not asked the same questions about physical 
mobility, but one important finding is that students believed that their experiences with telecollaboration 
made them more interested in visiting another country. Over 70% of students thought online exchanges 
should be compulsory for all foreign language students. This figure is much higher than for teachers, with 
only 57% of experienced telecollaborators agreeing that it should be compulsory and 54% of those 
without experience. 
Challenges and Issues 
The survey results also revealed several challenges and issues in the practice of telecollaboration. The 
main challenges educators could choose from had been identified in the literature and covered issues at all 
4 levels identified by O’Dowd and Ritter (2006): individual, class, socio-institutional, and interactional. 
 
Figure 6. Survey Question: “What types of problems (if any) have you had when organizing or running 
your online exchanges?” 
Organizational issues on the class and socio-institutional levels were the most common options (see 
Figure 6), with “very different institutional timetables” being the most commonly indicated problem 
(63%), and to a lesser extent “very different levels of language proficiency between the groups” (35%) 
and also differences in teachers’ aims and approaches to the exchange (28%). These responses are 
corroborated by the levels of agreement given to statements regarding their experience of OIE on some of 
these same issues (see Table 8) where over half of respondents agreed with the statements that “OIEs 
have been difficult to organize” (56%) and that “collaborating with partner-teachers is challenging”. Lack 
of support from their institution was a problem reported by 23% of respondents. These results provide 
large-scale confirmation of what the many single studies in the literature have found.  
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  210 
On the individual teacher level, 84% of respondents agreed with the statement that “OIEs have been time 
consuming”, but lack of time to dedicate to the project was only reported to be a problem by 27% of 
respondents. This perhaps reflects that though time is a major issue, most respondents managed to find 
time to dedicate to this activity. Sixty-nine per cent of students also reported that the online exchange took 
a lot of time, though it was overall a positive experience. Twenty-six per cent of educators perceived that 
lack of student motivation presented a problem in running their exchange, and in the open responses, 
some also indicated that they believed students had different expectations. Technical support was seen as 
an issue, particularly for educators who did not have experience of telecollaboration.  
Table 8. Survey Question: “The following are statements about your experience of Online Intercultural 
Exchange. Choose from 1 (fully agree) to 5 (fully disagree) to indicate your level of agreement with them    
In my experience... ” 
 Agree Neither agree 
nor disagree 
Disagree 
OIEs have been difficult to organise. 56% 26% 18% 
OIEs have been time-consuming. 84% 9% 7% 
collaborating with partner-teachers is challenging. 56% 26% 18% 
my OIE projects have been superficial and have not led to 
significant learning outcomes. 
6% 21% 73% 
my OIEs have led to the reinforcement of stereotypes. 5% 26% 69% 
I have encouraged students to discuss 'sensitive' topics  
(eg. religion, racism, terrorism...). 
47% 25% 28% 
I have chosen topics for discussion that help to avoid any sort 
of disagreement or conflict of opinion. 
24% 15% 61% 
On an interactional level, we found that ‘culture clashes and misunderstandings’ were indicated as a 
problem only by 24% of respondents. Most educators disagreed with the statement that their exchanges 
had led to the reinforcement of stereotypes (69%), though a quarter were undecided, and they also 
disagreed with the statement that their projects had been superficial and had not led to significant learning 
outcomes (73%). The survey did not specifically ask what kind of topics were discussed, but it did 
explore whether teachers chose topics which would avoid disagreement or conflict of opinion and also 
whether they encouraged students to discuss ‘sensitive’ topics, such as racism, religion, and terrorism. 
These survey items were written in an attempt to explore whether educators sought to avoid the risk of 
their students’ entering in conflicts and thus kept them on ‘safe’ topics. The responses to these items were 
more varied than for most other items in the survey. Almost a quarter of educators chose topics that 
would help to avoid disagreement, and 15% were undecided on this issue. As for encouraging students to 
discuss sensitive topics, only 47% of educators agreed with this and 25% neither agreed nor disagreed. 
Scholars (Kramsch & Ware, 2005; Phipps & Levine, 2010; Schneider & von der Emde, 2006) have 
recently recognized that if more in-depth intercultural understanding is to be achieved in educational 
contexts, then a more dialogic approach needs to be adopted. This would allow potentially sensitive issues 
to be addressed and tensions to be recognized as an inevitable part of intercultural dialogue. In their 
views, tensions can be seen as transformative agents, rather than as something to be avoided but this 
cannot be done by avoiding uncomfortable issues nor by ignoring power inequalities. This recalls Train’s 
question regarding the extent to which telecollaborative pedagogies participate in or work against 
powerful ideology (2006). 
 
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  211 
Open-ended Questions 
Responses to the open question regarding perceived barriers to the integration of telecollaboration in 
European universities confirmed the responses to some of the closed questions on similar issues both for 
those with experience of telecollaboration and those without (see Table 9). The greatest barrier perceived 
by experienced telecollaborators was time, whereas for those without experience, technology issues 
appeared to be the greatest concern. The other principle barriers considered by those with experience were 
a lack of recognition, technical as well as organizational issues. 
Table 9. Categories of Responses to Open Questions Regarding Perceived Barriers to Telecollaboration  
E NE Codes for Barriers Example responses 
39 20 Time issues Finding the appropriate amount of time to dedicate to an 
exchange 
21 17 Lack of institutional interest, 
recognition and/or funding 
Funding and support from my management. No one sees the 
value  
24 44 Tech issues including access, 
teacher eliteracies  
l'acces à l'internet serait plus lent et difficile 
Because of lack of computer expertise 
16 10 Organization, size of student 
groups 
Can be difficult to set up and maintain. 
size of student groups can be challenging to manage and 
connect with relevant partners 
16 5 Too much of a novelty and/or 
need for pedagogic training  
Because it is new, scary. 
Besoin de formation des enseignants dans la 
télécollaboration 
12 4 Requires dedicated staff Second, the idea sounds interesting, but the teachers 
involved need to dedicate much time and energy to the 
exchange, so finally they won't do it. 
6 0 Assessment and awarding of 
credits difficult  
Do not lead to the kind of conventional learning that is 
easily measurable at university level. 
5 13 Difficult to find partners Obtaining a partner group for the exchange 
4 4 Relationship with partner It can be really time consuming and sometimes maintaining 
relationships can be difficult. 
3 22 Lack of student time, 
motivation and/or language 
competence 
The main problem would be the initial motivation to get 
learners involved, particularly as classroom time is tight and 
much of what they might do would be done out of hours. 
0 10 Institutional constraints Fitting into the content module specifications 
Note: Responses from experienced telecollaboration practitioners (E) and from teachers without experience of telecollaboration 
(NE) 
It is interesting that several respondents reported that telecollaboration is something new and unknown, 
and that it requires dedicated staff keen to promote this activity. These were not such a concern for those 
without experience. Assessment and the awarding of credits are issues mentioned only by experienced 
telecollaborators, whilst lack of student motivation, institutional constraints, and students’ language level 
are issues mentioned only by teachers with no experience. There are, thus, some divergences in the 
perceptions of these two groups, yet all need to be addressed if telecollaboration is to become 
mainstreamed. 
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  212 
LIMITATIONS 
The study presents several limitations. First of all, there were issues in terms of representativeness, as it 
was not possible to address every foreign language educator in the European higher education area. The 
geographic scope of respondents was beyond our expectations, but though, we had respondents from most 
European countries, these were not balanced. Clearly, the project members’ geographic locations and 
their networks led to greater responses from some countries in particular.  In regards to the survey tools 
themselves, though they were piloted and reviewed, the wording of some of the survey questions left 
them open for interpretation and may have revealed the assumptions of the authors, as some of the 
responses indicated. Also, the different wording of questions and statements in the different versions, 
though necessary, may also have contributed to differing interpretations of the issues. The translation of 
the questionnaires may also have led to slight differences between the versions. Finally, this is a survey 
study; hence it does not address any of the issues in depth. The aim was rather to provide a broad 
overview, which we felt was missing from the field of telecollaboration. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This survey study has attempted to contribute to a broader understanding of telecollaboration practices in 
higher education in Europe in terms of the types of activities engaged in, the emergence of new models 
and practices, the perceived value and learning outcomes as well as shared challenges. This kind of 
understanding is important in allowing us to define common strategies to support educators in the practice 
of telecollaboration and to achieve greater integration within university curricula. It also allows us to 
suggest avenues for future research. 
We need further work to be carried out that measures the impact of telecollaboration beyond individual, 
in-depth studies and outside of educator and student beliefs, yet the field of virtual exchange needs tools 
to measure impact to evaluate the effectiveness of projects. This need has been recognized in the 
eTwinning impact study (Education for change, 2013) and also in the US with the work of the Exchange 
2.0 coalition, who are collaborating with the Saxelab at MIT to develop tools which will seek to do this. 
Being able to measure the impact of online intercultural exchange will no doubt contribute to improving 
the quality of exchanges, and to making it easier to harness political and financial support for the field.  
The increase in ‘lingua franca’ exchanges marks an interesting move away from the native speaker 
ideology, which has been criticized by many researchers in the fields of language learning, English as a 
Lingua Franca (ELF) and sociolinguistics (i.e. Canagarajah, 2007; Jenkins, 2006, 2007; Kramsch, 1997; 
Pennycook, 2007; Rampton, 1990; Widdowson 1994). However, given that most of the lingua franca 
exchanges reported involved the English language, does this represent a challenge to Train’s NSL or does 
this move represent a move away from the promotion of plurilingualism and diversity towards even 
greater hegemony of English? This is an important avenue for future research. Other rich areas for future 
research are tensions in telecollaboration interaction, how they are or could be addressed to transform 
learning and take it to deeper levels. Another important issue is the way participants interact both with 
and through the mediating technologies (Kern, 2014) and how technology mediates language use, 
communication, cultural expression, and social meanings on a variety of levels. 
At an individual teacher level, the greatest barriers appear to be time, institutional constraints (which can 
mean different timetables), assessment requirements as well as a need for training and support. The 
emergence of telecollaboration within teacher training programmes is beginning to address the latter, 
which will likely contribute significantly to greater adoption of OIE. It is also hoped that the 
UNICollaboration platform and the tools it offers will provide support for educators both in the setting up 
of exchanges (as well as through its database of tasks) and task sequences for exchange projects in 
different languages, assessment tools, and training activities.  
Finally, it appears that we are spending a lot of time ‘reinventing the wheel’ as it were, designing 
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  213 
exchange projects for specific classes, and negotiating objectives, tasks, and processes for each new 
project. Whilst there will always be educators who need and want to build exchanges according to 
specific needs and interests, participants and contexts, there is also scope for more ‘pre-packaged’ 
telecollaboration projects with a more or less fixed curriculum, duration, assessment tools, and even 
facilitators for specific target groups and contexts. These projects could be designed and implemented by 
consortia of educational institutions across geographic borders, as in the Trans-Atlantic & Pacific 
Translations project or could be designed and run by external virtual exchange providers, who would 
collaborate with universities in designing and running a virtual exchange model at tertiary level, as does, 
for instance, Soliya or the Sharing Perspectives Foundation. Having a well-established syllabus and 
project is one way of relieving educators of some of the time burden that the organization of 
telecollaboration projects imposes, and would also facilitate integration into curricula and recognition 
with credits. Research needs to be carried out on the development, piloting, and evaluation of sustainable 
models of telecollaboration which will allow more students and educators to engage in this practice. 
 
APPENDIX. Countries where survey respondents reported they were working 
Country Number of respondents 
Austria 2 
Belgium 2 
Switzerland 3 
Cyprus 16 
Czech Republic 1 
Germany 32 
Spain 20 
Finland 2 
France 43 
Greece 2 
Hungary 3 
Ireland 5 
Italy 24 
Lithuania 8 
Latvia 1 
Netherlands 3 
Norway 1 
Poland 17 
Portugal 6 
Romania 1 
Sweden 2 
Slovenia 1 
United Kingdom 15 
 
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  214 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The survey study was part of the INTENT (Integrating Telecollaborative Networks into Foreign 
Language Higher Education) project. The INTENT project and the UNICollaboration platform were co-
funded by the European Commission’s Lifelong Learning Programme. However, the views reflected in 
this article are the author’s alone and the Commission cannot be held responsible for any use which may 
be made of the information contained therein.  
The survey was developed and analyzed together with Sarah Guth and Robert O’Dowd. The whole 
project team was involved in piloting and dissemination. A full report of the survey study is available here 
(http://intent-project.eu/sites/default/files/Telecollaboration_report_Final_Oct2012.pdf). Along with the 
project team, the author would like to thank the LLT reviewers for their insightful comments on previous 
versions of this paper.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Francesca Helm is an English language teacher and researcher at the University of Padova in Italy. Her 
research interests lie in computer-mediated collaboration, telecollaboration, intercultural dialogue, critical 
approaches to technology and learning, as well as ‘internationalization’ in higher education. 
E-mail: francesca.helm@unipd.it 
 
REFERENCES 
Belz, J. A. (2001). Institutional and individual dimensions of transatlantic group work in network-based 
language teaching. ReCALL, 13(2), 213–231.  
Belz, J. A. (2003). From the special editor. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 2–5. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/pdf/speced.pdf 
Belz, J. A., & Thorne, S. L. (2006). Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language education. Boston 
MA: Thomson Heinle. 
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language 
Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120–136. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/blake/default.html 
Bower, J., & Kawaguchi, S. (2011). Negotiation of meaning and corrective feedback in Japanese/English 
eTandem. Language Learning & Technology, 15(1), 41–71. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/bowerkawaguchi.pdf 
Canagarajah, A. S. (2007). Lingua Franca English, multilingual communities and language acquisition. 
The Modern Language Journal 91(S1), 923–939. 
Chen, H. I. (2013). Identity practices of multilingual writers in social networking spaces. Language 
Learning & Technology, 17(2), 143–170. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/chen.pdf 
Council of Europe (2008). White paper on intercultural dialogue. Retrieved from  
http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/intercultural/source/white%20paper_final_revised_en.pdf 
Dooly, M. (2008). Telecollaborative language learning. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Dooly, M. (2010). Teacher 2.0. In F. Helm, & S. Guth (Eds.), Telecollaboration 2.0: Language, literacies 
and intercultural learning in the 21st century (pp. 277–304). Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Dooly, M., & O'Dowd, R. (Eds.). (2012). Researching online foreign language interaction and exchange: 
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  215 
Theories, methods and challenges. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Dooly, M., & Sadler, R. (2013). Filling in the gaps: Linking theory and practice through telecollaboration 
in teacher education. ReCALL, 25(1), 4–29.  
Education for Change (2013). Study of the impact of eTwinning on participating pupils, teachers and 
schools. Luxembourg, Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union.  
European Commission (2012). Key data on teaching languages at school in Europe – 2012. Brussels: 
Eurydice. Retrieved from http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/3217494/5775673/EC-XA-12-001-
EN.PDF/917d3746-886e-456a-8b01-1971013d1cef?version=1.0  
Fuchs, C., Hauck, M., & Müller-Hartmann, A. (2012). Promoting learner autonomy through multiliteracy 
skills development in cross-institutional exchanges. Language Learning & Technology, 16(3), 82–102. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2012/fuchsetal.pdf 
Furstenberg, G., Levet, S., English, K., & Maillet, K. (2001). Giving a voice to the silent culture of 
language: The CULTURA project. Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 55–102. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num1/furstenberg/default.pdf 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2013). The technological imperative in teaching and learning less commonly taught 
Languages. Language Learning & Technology, 17(1), 7–19. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2013/emerging.pdf 
Guarda, M. (2013). Negotiating a transcultural place in an English as a lingua franca telecollaboration 
exchange. Unpublished PhD thesis. Retrieved from 
http://paduaresearch.cab.unipd.it/5337/1/guarda_marta_tesi.pdf 
Guichon, N. (2009). Training future language teachers to develop online tutors' competence through 
reflective analysis. ReCALL, 21(2), 166–185.  
Guichon, N., & Hauck, M. (2011). Editorial: Teacher education research in CALL and CMC: More in 
demand than ever. ReCALL, 23(Special Issue 3), 187–199.  
Guth, S., & Helm, F. (Eds.). (2010). Telecollaboration 2.0. Language, literacies and intercultural 
learning in the 21st century. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Guth, S., & Thomas, M. (2010). Telecollaboration with web 2.0 tools. In S. Guth, & F. Helm (Eds.), 
Telecollaboration 2.0  (pp. 39–68). Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Hampel, R. (2009). Training teachers for the multimedia age: Developing teacher expertise to enhance 
online learner interaction and collaboration. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 3(1), 35–50.  
Hampel, R., & Hauck, M. (2006). Computer-mediated language learning: Making meaning in multimodal 
virtual learning spaces. The JALT CALL Journal, 2, 3–18.  
Harris, J. (2002). Wherefore art thou, telecollaboration? Learning and Leading with Technology, 29(6), 
55–59. 
Helm, F. (2013). A dialogic model for telecollaboration. Bellaterra Journal of Teaching & Learning 
Language & Literature, 6(2), 28–48. Retrieved from http://revistes.uab.cat/jtl3/article/view/522/571 
Helm, F., & Guth, S. (2010). The multifarious goals of telecollaboration 2.0: Theoretical and practical 
implications. In S. Guth & F. Helm (Eds.), Telecollaboration 2.0: Languages, literacies and intercultural 
learning in the 21st century (pp. 69–106). Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Helm, F., Guth, S., & Farrah, M. (2012). Promoting dialogue or hegemonic practice? Power issues in 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 16(2), 103–127. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2012/helmguthfarrah.pdf 
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  216 
Jenkins, J. (2006). Points of view and blind spots: ELF and SLA. International Journal of Applied 
Linguistics 16(2), 137–162. 
Jenkins, J. (2007). English as a Lingua Franca: Attitude and identity. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press. 
Kern, R. (2014). Technology as pharmakon: The promise and perils of the internet for foreign language 
education. The Modern Language Journal, 98(1), 340–357.  
Klimanova, L., & Dembovskaya, S. (2013). L2 identity, discourse and social networking in Russian. 
Language Learning & Technology, 17(1), 69–88. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2013/klimanovadembovskaya.pdf 
Kötter, M. (2003). Negotiation of meaning and codeswitching in online tandems. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 145–172. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/pdf/kotter.pdf 
Kramsch, C. (1997). Guest column: The privilege of the nonnative speaker. Publications of the Modern 
Language Association of America, 112(3), 359–369.  
Kramsch, C., & Thorne, S. (2002). Foreign language learning as global communicative practice. In D. 
Block & D. Cameron (Eds.) Globalization and language teaching (pp. 83–100). London, UK: Routledge.  
Lamy, M., & Goodfellow, R. (2010). Telecollaboration and learning 2.0. In S. Guth, & F. Helm (Eds.), 
Telecollaboration 2.0: Languages, literacies and intercultural learning in the 21st century (pp. 107–138). 
Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Lee, L. (2006). A study of native and nonnative speakers' feedback and responses in Spanish-American 
networked collaborative interaction. In J. A. Belz, & S. L. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural 
foreign language education (pp. 147–176). Boston, MA: Thomson Heinle. 
Levy, M., & Stockwell, G. (2006). CALL Dimensions: Options and issues in computer-assisted language 
learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Lewis, T., Chanier, T., & Youngs, B. (2011). Special issue commentary: Multilateral online exchanges 
for language and culture learning. Language Learning & Technology, 15(1), 3–9. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/commentary.pdf 
Lomicka, L. & Lord, G. (2012). A tale of tweets: Analyzing microblogging among language learners. 
System 40(1), 48–63. 
O'Dowd, R. (2007). Online intercultural exchange. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
O'Dowd, R. (2010). Issues in the assessment of online interaction and exchange. In S. Guth, & F. Helm 
(Eds.), Telecollaboration 2.0 (pp. 337–360). Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
O'Dowd, R. (2011). Online foreign language interaction: Moving from the periphery to the core of 
foreign language education? Language Teaching, 44(3), 368–380.  
O’Dowd, R. & Ritter, M. (2006) Understanding and working with ‘failed communication’ in 
telecollaborative exchanges. CALICO Journal, 61(2) 623–642. 
O'Dowd, R., & Ware, P. (2009). Critical issues in telecollaborative task design. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 22(2), 173–188.  
O'Rourke, B. (2005). Form-focused interaction in online tandem learning. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 433–
466.  
Pasfield-Neofitou, S. (2011). Online domains of language use: Second language learners' experience of 
virtual experiences of virtual community and foreignness. Language Learning & Technology, 15(2), 92–
Francesca Helm The Practices and Challenges of Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology  217 
108. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/pasfieldneofitou.pdf 
Pennycook, A. (2007). Global Englishes and transcultural flows. London, UK: Routledge. 
Phipps, A., & Levine, G.S. (2010). What is language pedagogy for? In G. Levine & A. Phipps (Eds.), 
Critical and intercultural theory and language pedagogy (pp.1-14). Boston, MA: Cengage Learning.  
Rampton, M. B. H (1990). Displacing the ‘native speaker’: Expertise, affiliation and inheritance. ELT 
Journal 44(2), 97–101. 
Schneider, J., & von der Emde, S. (2006). Conflicts in cyberspace: From communication breakdown to 
intercultural dialogue in online collaborations. In J. A. Belz & S. L. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated 
intercultural foreign language education (pp. 178–206). Boston, MA: Thomson Heinle. 
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38–67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/pdf/thorne.pdf 
Thorne, S., L. (2010). The 'intercultural turn' and language leaning in the crucible of new media. In S. 
Guth, & F. Helm (Eds.), Telecollaboration 2.0: Languages, literacies and intercultural learning in the 
21st century (pp. 139–164). Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Thorne, S. L., Black, R. W., & Sykes, J. M. (2009). Second language use, socialization, and learning in 
internet interest communities and online gaming. The Modern Language Journal, 93, 802–821.  
Thorne, S. L., Cornillie, F., & Piet, D. (2012). ReCALL special issue: Digital games for language 
learning: Challenges and opportunities. ReCALL Journal, 24(3), 243–256 . 
Train, R. (2006). A critical look at technologies and ideologies in internet-mediated intercultural foreign 
language education. In J. A. Belz, & S. L. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural foreign 
language education (pp. 247–284). Boston, MA: Thomson Heinle. 
Tudini, E. (2003). Using native speakers in chat. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 141–159. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/pdf/tudini.pdf 
Vinagre, M., & Munoz, B. (2011). Computer-mediated corrective feedback and language accuracy in 
telecollaborative exchanges. Language Learning & Technology, 15(1), 72–103. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/vinagremunoz.pdf 
Wang, J., Zou, B., Wang, D., & Xing, M. (2013). Students' perception of a wiki platform and the impact 
of wiki engagement on intercultural communication. System, 41(2), 245–256.  
Ware, P. D. (2005).  “Missed” communication in online communication:  Tensions in a German-
American telecollaboration.  Language Learning & Technology, 9(2), 64–89. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num2/pdf/ware.pdf 
Ware, P. D., & Kramsch, C. (2005). Toward an intercultural stance: Teaching German and English 
through telecollaboration. Modern Language Journal, 89(2), 190–205. 
Ware, P., & O'Dowd, R. (2008). Peer feedback on language form in telecollaboration. Language Learning 
& Technology, 12(1), 43–63. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/pdf/wareodowd.pdf  
Widdowson, H. G. (1994). The ownership of English. TESOL Quarterly 28(2), 377–389. 
Zhao, Y. (2009). Catching up or leading the way. Alexandria, VA: ASCD. 
