Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2015/emerging.pdf 
October 2015, Volume 19, Number 3 
pp. 8–20 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 8 
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES 
CONTRIBUTING, CREATING, CURATING: DIGITAL LITERACIES FOR 
LANGUAGE LEARNERS 
 
Robert Godwin-Jones, Virginia Commonwealth University 
APA Citation: Godwin-Jones, R. (2015). Contributing, Creating, Curating: Digital 
Literacies for Language Learners. Language Learning & Technology 19(3), 8–20. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2015/emerging.pdf 
Copyright: © Robert Godwin-Jones 
INTRODUCTION 
In today's globalized, connected world, fixed and stable identities are increasingly uncommon. The means 
and modes of online communication and engagement, themselves powerful contributors to identity 
formation, are likewise in a constant state of flux. Participating in emerging online communities may 
require users to develop new skills, acquire specific software or hardware, and/or learn particular 
conventions and behavior norms. In this column we will be looking at what that dynamic entails and what 
impact the ongoing need for new literacies and competencies has on language learning, both in formal 
instruction and in out-of-school environments. We will be looking at ways in which learners achieve 
language and literacy gains through participation in online communal spaces and how such activities 
relate to formal language instruction. Engaging with Internet-based communities is likely to involve the 
ability to interact with and to create or remix materials and resources in a variety of media and from a 
variety of sources. In addition to focused or incidental language learning through roles played in 
participatory Internet communities we will also look at the need for language learners to develop 
competence in searching out, evaluating, and collecting online materials, tools, and services. This 
includes the guiding role language teachers can play in the process. As language teachers, our ultimate 
goal is to enable and encourage our students to gain the knowledge, skills, and motivation to become 
autonomous language learners and culturally responsible participants in local and online communities. 
Capability in a full range of digital literacies is key to that process and vital today in education, personal 
life, and work environments:  
The growing importance of online technologies for the ways in which we work and learn in 
global networks has meant that today, instead of using technology simply to learn FLs, learners 
need to learn how to combine both FL skills and "e-skills" or "new literacies" to be able to work 
and collaborate in new contexts where the borders between the visual and the real and between 
the distant and the proximate are increasingly blurred (Dooly & O'Dowd, 2012, p. 15). 
That blurring of boundaries among literacies, genres, and modes of representation is what makes this 
topic intriguing and challenging. 
PARTICIPATING IN ONLINE COMMUNITIES 
Language learners have access today to a wealth of authentic materials online, an invaluable resource for 
language learning. Even more valuable is the access to authentic people online—that is, the ability to 
connect to and communicate with others who speak or are learning the target language. Numerous articles 
in recent years have provided examples of students' language and culture gains through engaging in 
online activities such as discussion forums (Schuetze, 2008), synchronous chat (Hauck & Youngs, 2008), 
blogging (Jimenez-Caicedo, Lozano, & Gomez, 2014), and skyping (Mullen, Appel, & Shanklin, 2009).  
Robert Godwin-Jones Contributing, Creating, Curating 
 
Language Learning & Technology 9 
Many of the activities referenced in these articles occur in a formal instructional setting, often in the 
context of class-to-class exchanges. There have been a good number of studies that explore the 
affordances and challenges of organized telecollaboration for both language learning and intercultural 
communication competence (Belz & Thorne, 2006; Lamy & Hampel, 2007; O'Dowd (2007); Guth & 
Helm, 2010; Dooly & O'Dowd, 2012). 
Increasingly, language learners are independently seeking out opportunities for contact with others online. 
They are also taking advantage on their own of the variety of texts and media available in multiple 
languages. The opportunities for language learning through Internet resources are a major reason for the 
recent upsurge in the interest in learner autonomy in language learning (see Luzón, Ruiz-Madrid, & 
Villanueva, 2010; Benson, 2013; Benson & Voller, 2014; Murray, 2014). A recent collection of essays on 
Language Learning Beyond the Classroom (Nunan & Richards, 2015) provides examples of learners 
using a wide variety of tools and services for language learning: extensive reading with MoodleReader; 
listening logs with Voice of America or TED talks; BBC's mywordbook for vocabulary learning; popular 
songs and lyrics for listening comprehension; using massively multiplayer online role-playing gains for 
vocabulary practice; Facebook utilized in a variety of ways; and using varied resources, such as the 
language learning service Duolingo, language exchange websites, tandem learning, online TV, the 
VoiceThread collaborative tool, YouTube video creation, and many others.  
Case studies have illustrated non-traditional, mashup style involvement in online spaces, including 
creating websites dedicated to popular genres of writing such as manga (Lam, 2000) or writing fanfiction 
(extending popular movie or book storylines) in the L2 (Black, 2006). In recent years, there has also been 
a good number of studies pointing to language gains through participation in online gaming communities 
(Godwin-Jones, 2014b). These activities are chosen by the students themselves, and are not done as 
school assignments. This leads to a degree of personal engagement unlikely for school-related activities. 
In most cases, the individual motivation leads participants to acquire, on their own, the skills and 
knowledge to be able to participate in the online communities. For those using an L2 in these contexts, 
such experiences provide a very real, task-based need for just-in-time language input that may range from 
vocabulary queries to issues of language pragmatics (such as asking for or volunteering to give help). The 
real world need makes uptake more likely. These online activities represent real language use, not the 
simulated reality and practice environment of the classroom.  
The global reach of the internet means that these experiences typically occur in multilingual and 
multicultural contexts, leading to opportunities for both linguistic and cultural learning. In formal 
instructional settings, the extent to which teachers value the skills and knowledge gained can vary 
tremendously, depending on the student, teacher, and instructional context. In some cases, L2 teachers 
may see literacy practices such as writing fanfiction as irrelevant, or even as a waste of time. That is even 
more likely if the out-of-school experience is connected to online gaming (Thorne, 2010). One of the 
factors that may lead to an ambiguous or negative teacher view is the different kind of language likely to 
be used in informal online spaces, which make heavy use of code switching, hybridized forms, slang, 
specialized vocabulary, and formulaic speech. One would hope that teachers would recognize the value of 
adding this kind of alternative language register to the students' repertoire, but that is likely to depend on 
the individual teacher as well as on the educational, social, and political environment. In settings where 
high-stakes testing or other factors impose a tightly controlled focus on standardized language and a 
specified syllabus of vocabulary and grammar, there's like to be less interest in encouraging students to 
pursue informal online language learning opportunities. 
In some studies, student performance in instructed language learning was seen to have improved through 
independent participation in online communities (Black, 2006). In other cases, students have felt alienated 
in language classes (Lam, 2000). In either situation, these extracurricular activities can contribute 
substantially to young people's identity positions—ones that in some cases they may feel are of greater 
importance than their roles as school or university students. One of the dynamics at work in participating 
Robert Godwin-Jones Contributing, Creating, Curating 
 
Language Learning & Technology 10 
in online communities is the possibility of trying out different roles and identities. Students can perform 
them through a new language, without the risk of the embarrassment that might be entailed in face-to-face 
situations or in the classroom. L2 students participating in online collaborative spaces have the 
opportunity of experiencing different language registers and learning about formal and informal rules and 
conventions for participation. In some cases, cultural appropriateness of speech may be more important 
than linguistic accuracy. In a study by Hanna and de Nooy (2009), students learning French participated 
in a public discussion forum for the French daily Le Monde and found that social skills and adherence to 
the forum guidelines were considerably more important than the accuracy of their French. This is the kind 
of hard-won, real-world knowledge students are less likely to gain from in-class language learning. The 
experience provides as well a degree of personal agency that is an uncommon byproduct of classroom 
instruction. 
Curricular integration 
One of the difficulties for many teachers who encourage students' out-of-class online activities is 
curricular integration. As the L2 usage in these contexts is unforeseeable and unstructured, the type of 
language learning taking place is difficult to align with pre-programmed grammar, vocabulary, or other 
specific learning content. It may be helpful to think of the language learning experience represented by 
globalized online spaces in a similar vein as how study abroad has been viewed. No one expects the 
experience studying abroad to duplicate learning on campus. Instead, we anticipate that study abroad will 
complement in-class instruction, by providing opportunities for improving fluency and deepening culture 
learning. As is the case for study abroad, the approach to integrating and assessing language gains from 
participation in collaborative online activities may best be programmatic, rather than viewed from the 
course level. Learning can be documented through learner journals or portfolios in the context of fulfilling 
a language requirement or as part of the curriculum for a major concentration. The use of "bridging 
activities" (Thorne & Reinhardt, 2008) supplies a strategy for incorporating out-of-class online 
participation into a course, as well as to provide a means for students themselves to take a leading role in 
finding and evaluating resources of interest. 
A likely stated goal of many language programs today is "digital literacy". Here, too, evidence of 
knowledge may best be assessed through student submissions documenting representative activities, 
rather than through checklists, formal assessments, or required short courses. One of the impediments to 
having students demonstrate the ability to use a variety of online tools and services is the widespread use 
of learning management systems (LMS). The arguments in favor of using such systems, namely the 
convenience for teachers as well as the utility of the built-in management tools (Orsini-Jones, 2010) are 
easily trumped by the restrictive and proprietary environment: 
[LMS] uniformity and predictability, however, has its disadvantages. The spoon-fed content 
delivery and closed environment of the LMS is far removed from the vibrant, ever-changing 
online world in which our students are fully engaged. Many of today’s students are likely heavy 
users of social networking sites, multi-player gaming, and media mashups. The static and 
controlled environment of an LMS is unlikely to either attract or stimulate such students. For 
those students less experienced in online activities, an LMS contributes little to the kind of 
technology literacy they will need for their personal and work lives. (Godwin-Jones, 2012, p. 6) 
Building a course around a website set up in Blackboard Learn, or another such proprietary system 
contextualizes online activities as course assignments and discourages students from seeing possible 
sources for language learning outside that system, such as through common—and likely familiar—tools 
and services like Twitter, Facebook, or Flickr. If we are helping students become lifelong learners, 
integrating language learning into everyday online practices is essential. As Guy Merchant comments, use 
of an LMS may restrict teachers' likelihood to experiment in using online services: "The creative 
Robert Godwin-Jones Contributing, Creating, Curating 
 
Language Learning & Technology 11 
imaginings of innovative teachers could well be locked down, and the potential to develop the new kinds 
of learning and literacy that are associated with Web 2.0 participation may be limited" (Merchant, 2009, 
pp. 109-110). Another issue in the exclusive use of an LMS is the fact that such closed systems preclude 
student work from becoming part of the shareable web. Studies have shown that having student products 
publicly visible makes a great deal of difference in the commitment of students to do their best work 
(Oskoz & Elola, 2014). 
One of the quandaries for language teachers who wish to move beyond use of an LMS, is the likelihood 
that there will be institutional support for LMS use, but not for other software or online services. 
Training, if offered, may not keep up-to-date with emerging tools and software. There's also the reality 
that adding a course component such as class-to-class telecollaboration takes considerable time and 
effort—and may come with scant professional rewards. The teacher will need to seek out a possible 
partner (maybe using a service such as Mixxer or MyLanguageExchange) who seems likely to be reliable, 
make contact, and have extensive conversations to work out the exchange logistics. If local help is 
available, it is likely to be of a technical nature, and not address the practical and pedagogical information 
teachers need most. One of the alternatives is to point students towards use of a third-party service such as 
italki. A successful model, run independently of schools and universities, is Soliya, which offers a well-
organized structure incorporating group intermediaries. 
Creating and sharing across modes and genres 
Much of the activity in globalized online spaces is within genres that are exclusively or primarily text-
based. That includes blog posts, media reviews, chat, commentaries, status updates, or other forms of 
online written communication. The different modes and purposes in online reading carry with them 
different kinds of reading skills and processes, such as reading for gist, scroll reading, page display 
adjusting, or hypertext literacy. For L2 reading, one could add, using dual language dictionaries, assessing 
text readability, using a service such as the Readability Test Tool, or incorporating on-the-fly glossing, 
with tools such as Readlang or Globefish instant translator. Increasingly, online communication enhances 
text through incorporation of visual or aural media. It has become commonplace in text messaging to 
include photos, audio snippets, or short video clips, largely driven by the capabilities of mobile phones to 
take high-quality photos and capture video. This has led to the popularity of apps like Snapchat or Vine 
which enable ephemeral, personalized sharing of media. This trend has resulted in increased user 
familiarity with image manipulation and video editing. The wide use of visual media and sound creates 
multimodal representations, which have become the norm for webpages today. 
The major photo and video sharing services are global in scope, and this offers opportunities for language 
and cultural exchange and learning. Benson and Chik (2010) discuss the example of a "mini English 
lesson", provided by an exchange on the photo sharing site Flickr. As described in an article by Davies 
(2007), a Norwegian woman asked about the meaning of an English word used in describing a 
photograph. Benson and Chik (2010) comment:  
In a relatively simple way, this interaction illustrates three apparently characteristic features of 
translingual interaction in online spaces. First, it involves adaptation of a familiar kind of 
interaction to an essentially unfamiliar textual context: a FL learning question, here, appears in a 
space "intended for" comments on a photograph. Second, the interaction takes place around a 
"third" object, in this case, a photograph, through which it becomes situated. Lastly, it is 
essentially a casual, friendly and mutually supportive interaction: one that does not apparently 
involve a great deal of commitment on either side, but nevertheless generates positive feelings for 
both participants (p. 73).  
This example points to the way in which online collaborative spaces can lead to interactions which foster 
Robert Godwin-Jones Contributing, Creating, Curating 
 
Language Learning & Technology 12 
sharing and learning as "situated FL literacy practices" (p. 73). These practices are creating new ad hoc 
text-types and multimodal genres that can incorporate language learning in different ways; examples are 
fanfiction writing, fansubbing (unofficial subtitling by users), game modding (modifying a computer 
game), and machinima animations (creating animated films based on games). 
Student activities of this kind are most likely to come from their own initiative in exploring and 
experimenting. In the process, students are likely to become familiar with the use of tools for editing 
images, sound, and video. They may be using the basic editing tools now available on smartphones. 
Alternatively, they may be using a variety of free or inexpensive tools available online or on desktop 
computers, such as Gimp or PhotoScape for images, Audacity for sound editing, or video editors such as 
VideoPad, Windows Movie Maker, or iMovie. Cloud-based services like WeVideo, pics.io, or 
SoundCloud have gained prominence in recent years. The popularity of Chromebooks in education has 
led to a great deal of interest in such server-based tools, as those devices do not support local software or 
include file storage. 
The Modern Language Association (MLA) has recently released a preview of a curated set of resources 
for Digital Pedagogies in the Humanities. The curated sites offer examples from a variety of humanities 
disciplines illustrating the integration of digital tools and services into teaching. They provide concrete 
examples of using tools for creating multimodal online materials and projects, which combine different 
kinds of media. Many involve taking existing resources, such as literary texts or historical documents, and 
adding resources for explication or expansion. A number of recent tools and services make creation of 
such mashups much easier. Popcorn Maker offers a drag and drop interface for remixing web video, 
audio, and images, to create a popup-style video with the option of embedding text annotations. It is part 
of Mozilla's WebMaker project, which offers a variety of services for creating rich media content. With 
the Korakov System, users can create dynamic, browser-based documentaries that interact with non-linear 
(user choosable) narratives (in the form of short video clips). TourBuilder enables creation of virtual tours 
based on Google Earth, which combine photos, text, and video. Aurasma is a service for using existing 
photos or objects to create augmented reality "auras" which can be triggered when a viewer points a 
phone camera at a real-world image. "Explorable explanations" combines media with alternative text 
views to create highly interactive and media-rich webpages. A JavaScript library, Tangle, enables adding 
this functionality to webpages. Working with such tools creates in students an awareness of the ways in 
which content can be modified and manipulated. It imparts the message that software does not offer a 
transparent way of representing reality or making meaning of events, people, or objects. The reality that 
the choice of media or tool is not neutral has been widely discussed in the context of telecollaborative 
tools (Thorne, 2003) and is all the more relevant for mashups and augmented reality, which explicitly 
seek to modify existing materials. 
Some media create the illusion of transparency, giving the impression that reality is being presented 
without any mediation or filtering—for example, webcams in videoconferencing, particularly in one-on-
one exchanges. Kern (2014) shares specific examples of how far this is from being the case. The use of 
webcams leads videoconferencers to compensate for the camera's limited visual field by heightening their 
facial expressiveness as they speak. Real eye contact between the interlocutors is not possible—users look 
at the screen, not at the camera. Gestures used when speaking are often not seen, as they are outside the 
camera angle. In sum, the experience is very different from face-to-face conversations. Kern suggests 
having students view recordings of videoconferencing, so as to be aware of the visual dynamics. He 
concludes that, "videoconferencing, like any other technologically mediated form of communication, is 
not an innate ability or natural act, but is a skill that develops over time" (p. 347). 
Although multimodal texts and digital storytelling have been widely used in L1 contexts, they offer 
opportunities for language learners that are just as compelling. Hafner and Miller (2011) discuss the 
benefits of using digital stories in an English for science course. Students created multimodal scientific 
documentaries in English, working in teams to build their projects, which were shared publicly online. 
Robert Godwin-Jones Contributing, Creating, Curating 
 
Language Learning & Technology 13 
The project represents a blending of genres, combining linguistic and rhetorical features typical of formal 
scientific presentations with those more typical of popular science. Another blending of genres is 
represented by projects using the ARIS platform to create mobile games featuring augmented reality. 
Chrono-Ops, a game with an ecological theme, was created at Portland State University. As part of the 
game process, users write texts, record audio, and shoot video, all of which can become assets for future 
players.  
Creating games with ARIS simplifies the authoring process compared to creating such projects from 
scratch. In fact, template-based or simplified drag-and-drop interfaces for producing multimodal materials 
are on the increase. The ProgrammableWeb collects and curates emerging APIs (application 
programming interface) and mashup options. At the same time, there has recently been a good deal of 
interest in encouraging students to learn computer programming. A number of initiatives, such as the 
Scratch project from MIT, have been created to encourage young people to learn to code. This degree of 
hands-on digital literacy is a benefit to teachers as well (Godwin-Jones, 2015). 
Core information literacies: Searching and curating 
If learning to code, or even understanding a basic scripting language such as HTML, is fundamental to 
understanding how information technology works, learning effective internet searching is fundamental to 
using online resources. It's likely that students researching topics will use Google exclusively to locate 
resources. It's also likely that the majority of them will never use the advanced search options for fine-
tuning. As shown in a recent study (Mutta, Pelttari, Salmi, Chevalier, & Johansson, 2014), these and other 
basic kinds of information literacy may take a backseat to quickly finding resources that seem to fit a 
need. In the process, more appropriate resources go untapped, and research results may suffer from 
superficiality and single source consulting (most likely from Wikipedia). Students are also likely to be 
unaware of the "filter bubble" endemic to the web today, which guides search results based on user 
profiles. The algorithms used by Google and others tend to send users to resources related to previous 
searches, products purchased, geographical location, and personal information gleaned, such as age, 
profession, or marital status. As Kern (2014) comments, this leads to a distorted view of ourselves and 
others: 
The result is that the World Wide Web may be becoming less and less of a window onto the 
world and more and more of a window onto ourselves. With each exploratory click we make on a 
Web site, we may be influencing what our future clicks will produce, and the more we use the 
Internet, the more narrow and personalized our Internet can ultimately become. In the end, the 
risk that is that we are led to believe that the foreign is really not so foreign, but very much like 
ourselves, since that’s what the Internet returns to us (p. 352).  
This provides a challenge for teachers and students to explore and discuss ways to break out of this 
experience of navel-gazing. Given the central importance of information literacy in social and 
professional life today, language instructors might consider including hands-on demonstrations and 
discussions of finding and using core tools and services. That includes tips on becoming an informed 
Google searcher as well as on using a social network search tool such as Topsy. The study by Mutta et al. 
(2014) recounts that learner training in search techniques resulted in fewer uses of Wikipedia as the sole 
source of information. Another useful area to discuss is the use of a service such as Diigo to collect 
bookmarks and discover curated resources. One of the popular tools for collecting and sharing linked 
information is Pinterest. With its emphasis on visualizations, Pinterest would be a useful tool for having 
students create a collage of their imagined future selves—finding images, videos, and texts that anticipate 
their life incorporating the L2 and target culture. The collages could be then shared through the "social 
boards" Pinterest makes available. Of considerable importance in a language class is a discussion of 
online language tools such as dual language dictionaries, online thesauri, and spell/grammar checkers. 
Robert Godwin-Jones Contributing, Creating, Curating 
 
Language Learning & Technology 14 
Here too, students tend to take the path of least resistance, choosing the first listed online dictionary. 
Demonstrating look-up with a tool such as linguee demonstrates the utility of language corpora, their 
potential use, and the help they can provide in working with collocations. Chun (2011) has shown that 
there is a disconnect between what language learners choose to use for assistance and what research 
shows actually works the most effectively. In-class or online discussions about student experiences using 
various tools and services can be a valuable learning experience. 
Another area that can benefit students through in-class or online demonstrations and discussions is the use 
of machine translation. Students are likely familiar with Google Translate, but may not have a sense of 
what it does well (short phrases) and where it's likely to be less reliable (idiomatic speech).  Its accuracy 
also depends on the specific language pair, as the dual language corpora it relies on can vary in size and, 
thus, in reliability. Providing this kind of training to students is no different, or any less valuable, than the 
habit many language teachers already have, of instructing students in the efficient use of print dictionaries 
(i.e. which to use, how to understand symbols, the utility of back translating, etc.). One possibility is to 
show students a sample sentence translated using different machine translations. Figure 1 shows German 
versions of an English sentence, "I am going to the store today to buy my father a tie" (generated by the 
imTranslate comparison tool), with none of the suggested versions being acceptable, as all have multiple 
grammar and/or vocabulary errors. All the translations keep the syntax of the original English sentence, 
rather than, as is often the case in German, beginning the sentence with the time expression. 
 
Figure 1. Sample machine translations from English into German 
Discussing how machine translations work, i.e. rule-based systems versus those that rely primarily on pre-
translated parallel texts, gives students insights into how languages differ. For many monolingual US 
students, language difference is perceived as largely semantic. A basic discussion of translating 
difficulties can illuminate the nature of language per se as well as pointing to specific contrasts between 
the students' L1 and the target L2. 
The need for learner training 
In many areas of technology use, students are likely to have gained proficiency on their own, such as in 
the use of social networking sites or the use of online media. However, when it comes to areas such as 
multimodal production or effective application of online services to language learning, Hubbard (2004) 
makes the case that students are likely to need guidance (see also Williams, Abraham, & Bostelmann, 
2014; Peters & Frankoff, 2014).  Kurek and Hauck (2014) advocate the use of a three-tiered framework 
for training students to enable them to "move along a continuum from informed reception of technology-
mediated input through thoughtful participation in opinion-generating activities and up to creative 
contribution of multimodal output" (p. 120). The process parallels that of language development from 
observation through imitation to full participation. Along the way, they cite the need for instructional 
scaffolding so that students be able to adapt skills to an educational environment:  
Robert Godwin-Jones Contributing, Creating, Curating 
 
Language Learning & Technology 15 
Many young learners have embraced what has been termed online “participatory cultures” 
(Jenkins, Clinton, Purushotma, Robison, & Weigel, 2006) and know how to build their online 
presence through social networking sites, avatars, audio/video casts, mash-ups, and/or by taking 
part in online gaming. Yet, harnessing the full potential of digital offerings requires strategic 
action guided by a personally unique blend of competences on a technical, cognitive, social, 
communicative, and even personality level. Therefore, it seems highly unlikely that multiliteracy 
skills for more formal educational purposes such as language acquisition can be obtained by 
learners through informal and uninformed technology practices (p. 123). 
Studies have shown that even with specific guidelines from teachers, students tend to find their own ways 
to use provided tools and services. In a study of using blogs for elementary Spanish, Jiménez-Caicedo et 
al. (2014) found that students had a mixed reception to their use:  
They made their own choices regarding how to use and appropriate this sociocultural tool for 
negotiating meaning and for improving their command of Spanish. Thus, students exerted their 
individual agency based on their own attitudes, beliefs, and motivations when completing the 
language learning tasks proposed for the blog project. An interesting finding was the discovery 
that students chose to align with, resist, or ignore the initial expected outcomes that would result 
from the implementation of a blog project and web 2.0 technologies in the curriculum (p. 107).  
In some cases, students may find the use of familiar online tools and services unacceptable in the context 
of formal language learning instruction. The following is the experience Reinhardt, Warner, and Lange 
(2014) recount in relation to incorporating a two-week gaming unit in a 5th semester German class:  
Writing about a fun activity, like digital gaming, in a foreign language is a challenging task, and 
for some students, doing so negatively impacted the actual gaming experience. For this reason, 
the gaming unit was—at least for some students—both too educational (and consequently, not 
enough fun) and not educational enough because the object was perceived as nonserious and 
distinct from the other forms of less vernacular, “higher” cultural production (primarily literary 
texts and films) which constituted most of the remainder of the curriculum (p. 170). 
In situations such as this, the teacher may need to explain explicitly to students (with examples) how 
familiar online activities can provide language learning benefits. Providing such guidance can be helpful 
in leading students to become empowered language learners, who possess the skills and knowledge to 
continue language study beyond the classroom and through activities of personal interest to them. It also 
helps equip them for the eventuality of learning other languages in the future, along with the tools and 
resources that are likely to be helpful in that endeavor. Given the goal of helping students to be life-long 
language learners, it would be useful for students to gain some knowledge of the nature and potential of 
commercial language learning software such as Rosetta Stone or online services such as LiveMocha. 
Many of these products and services offer free trials. Trying out and reporting back on one or more of 
these products can be a useful individual or partner project for students. In addition to personal 
experience, teachers can point to studies of such products in recent years (i.e. Nielson, 2011 on Rosetta 
Stone or Jee & Park, 2009 on LiveMocha). 
An approach that is proving to be valuable in making students reflect on the process of language learning 
is to have them maintain learner diaries or logs. Dam (1995) has shown how useful this can be and how 
much it contributes to making students autonomous language learners. Another option is to have students 
maintain portfolios of their language learning experiences, including appropriate artifacts, such as sample 
writing, academic achievements, digital projects, self-evaluations, annotated links, and so forth. Such 
portfolios also provide students with the opportunity to include out-of-school language learning 
Robert Godwin-Jones Contributing, Creating, Curating 
 
Language Learning & Technology 16 
experiences. The European Language Portfolio has been shown to be an effective example of this kind. 
There is also the option for students to create their own personal web site, including acquiring their own 
Internet domain name. Doing so provides a potentially long-term platform for documenting and sharing 
learning experiences as well as representing a significant step forward in becoming digitally literate. In 
the discussion around digital literacy, the need to move "beyond mere technical skills and abilities" 
(Hafner, 2013, p. 830) is sometimes mentioned. I agree that this should not be the end goal for students—
digital engagement through social, linguistic, and cultural competencies is paramount—but there is 
something to be said for the benefits of being technically literate enough to be able to maintain a web site 
of one's own. A project at Mary Washington University encourages and enables students to do so through 
a domain of their own. 
A portfolio or a personal web site can also document evidence of intercultural learning—a specific goal of 
the Autobiography of Intercultural Encounters. Intercultural communication competence is something 
that can emerge from student activities in collaborative online spaces. However, it is not something that 
happens automatically. In fact, studies have shown that differences in communication styles in 
telecollaborative experiences can lead to misunderstandings and even enforcement of existing stereotypes 
(Hanna & de Nooy, 2009; Kern, 2014; Chun, 2015) Teacher intervention and reflective journals can make 
a difference. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
As new online tools and services become available, new opportunities emerge for language and culture 
interactivity, with concomitant possibilities for learning and growth. At the same time, the trends outlined 
by the New London Group (1996) continue today. One is the continuing blurring of lines between reading 
and writing, something which Allen (2003) labels "wreading". The kind of interactive reading implied by 
this term characterizes the experience of hypertext systems such as the web, as well as the reality of the 
multitasking typically occurring when reading online. Blyth (2014) points out that in online reading there 
is also a blurring "between private interpretation and public discussion" (p. 201). He discusses the 
practice of "digital social reading" in which readers share comments and annotations, highlighting the use 
of the collaborative service eComma for enabling that functionality. There are a number of web services 
which provide similar functionality including Goodreads, Ponder, and LibraryThing. If reading can no 
longer be viewed as static, the same is true of watching video. HTML 5 allows toggling of subtitles and 
transcriptions on-the-fly (Godwin-Jones, 2014a). Online videos can now also include interactive 
elements, such as asking viewers to respond to questions embedded directly in the video, a technique 
widely used in MOOCs. 
The New London Group (1996) called for a new "pedagogy of multiliteracies" to account for the 
emergence of new genres and new ways of experiencing texts and media. This is echoed in Kern's (2014) 
call for a "relational pedagogy", in order to develop among students "a disposition for paying critical 
attention to relations among forms, contexts, meanings, and ideologies" (p. 353): 
It [a relational pedagogy] focuses attention on subtle interactions between medium, genre, 
register, and culture so that students can be prevented from jumping to facile conclusions about 
the way others think, feel, or express themselves that are based on surface language forms alone. 
It thus exposes students to a much broader scope of inquiry than something like electronic 
literacy. It connects students to past as well as present practices, giving them perspectives that 
will prepare them not only to engage critically with today’s media but also to help shape the 
language and literacy practices that will develop with new technologies of the future. (p. 353).  
A relational view stresses the importance of context. To fully understand and interact with online texts, 
it's important to have information such as the target audience, the purpose in writing the text, and the 
Robert Godwin-Jones Contributing, Creating, Curating 
 
Language Learning & Technology 17 
nature of the language used (and why one and not another style or register was used). This is the kind of 
"symbolic competence" advocated by Kramsch (2011). It also involves, in looking at texts, a 
consideration of time frames, the social and political positioning of the text creator, and an awareness of 
the variety of texts, discourses, and resources on which the creator drew (intertextuality). Bloomaert 
(2008) points to the importance of recognizing how texts are rooted culturally: 
[Literacy practices] gain complexity as soon as we move these issues into the field of 
globalization, when literacy products – texts and documents – move from one society into another 
in an ever-intensifying flow. What is correct in one society becomes an error in another society; 
what is perfectly appropriate writing in one place becomes a meaningless sign in another. Texts 
may travel easily, but the system of use, value and function in which they were produced usually 
does not travel with them (p. 6) 
Kramsch (2011) points out how global communication and global markets have created the illusion of 
sameness and equality in interacting with products and texts—we see the same brands and logos across 
the globe. But what they mean, as Bloomaert points out, can be radically different, depending on the local 
context. 
It seems to me that the critical awareness and cultural sensitivity advocated here needs to be 
supplemented by an awareness of ethical issues raised in the collaborative online environment. Remix and 
mashup capabilities, for example, raise not only questions of cultural authenticity, but also of ethical 
responsibility. Peters and Frankoff (2014) point out that copyright issues are rarely taught and that 
students are instructed not to plagiarize, but often not helped in how to avoid plagiarism. Many students 
are likely to be unaware of conventions and best practices for attribution and crediting of online materials, 
including, for example, the meaning and use of Creative Commons licenses. Such issues play a role not 
only in copy and paste, but also in other common online practices. YouTube, for example, has become a 
frequently used resource in education, but the proliferation of ads (in this and other online services) 
makes viewing frustrating, to a degree that it borders on being useable. Is it ethical for teachers to discuss 
the availability of ad blockers, or to point to the many tools for downloading YouTube videos, even 
though that violates the terms of use? These are examples among many others, and it seems likely that the 
situation will become more complex in the future. 
While mores, attitudes, and regulations affecting the use of online resources are a moving target, the same 
holds true for online tools and services, which will inevitably continue to evolve. New products are sure 
to emerge, bringing new capabilities and conventions of use, requiring re-tooled literacies. At the same 
time, the popularity of specific forms of online communication and social communities will inexorably 
wax and wane. Just as email has lost favor with the younger generation in recent years, the same seems to 
be occurring today with Facebook. At the same time, printed books appear to be on the rebound. Recent 
critics of online reading and the experience of reading on devices such as Amazon's Kindle have pointed 
to some of the disadvantages of that medium, including the unavailability of serendipity and the 
discouragement of deep reading. Similarly, the quality of contributions to online collaborative spaces has 
been subject to some scrutiny as well. Kurek and Hauck (2014) point to the fact that many of the 
contributions to social networking sites can be categorized as "social grooming", with writing that is 
shallow and inconsequential. In fact, the critical scrutiny we expect from our students we should use 
ourselves in considering the utility of online spaces for language learning. The potential is enormous, but 
learning gains are by no means automatic, or necessarily substantial enough in many cases to qualify as 
meaningful. 
 
 
Robert Godwin-Jones Contributing, Creating, Curating 
 
Language Learning & Technology 18 
REFERENCES 
Allen, M. (2003). This Is Not a Hypertext, But...:A Set of Lexias on Textuality. Ctheory.net. Retrieved 
from http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=389 
Belz, J., & Thorne, S. (Eds.).  (2006). Internet-Mediated Intercultural Foreign Language Education, 
Annual Volume of the American Association of University Supervisors and Coordinators. Boston, MA: 
Heinle & Heinle. 
Benson, P. (2013). Teaching and researching: Autonomy in language learning. London: Routledge. 
Benson, P., & Voller, P. (2014). Autonomy and independence in language learning. London: Routledge. 
Benson, P., & Chik, A. (2010). New literacies and autonomy in foreign language learning. In M. Luzon, 
M. Ruiz-Madrid, & M. Villanueva (Eds.), Digital genres, new literacies and autonomy in language 
learning (pp. 63–80). Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars. 
Black, R. W. (2006). Language, culture, and identity in online fanfiction. E-learning and Digital Media, 
3(2), 170-184. 
Bloomaert, J. (2008). Grassroots Literacy: Writing, identity, and voice in Central Africa. London: 
Routledge. 
Blyth, C. (2014). Exploring the Affordances of Digital Social 201 Reading for L2 Literacy: The Case of 
eComma. In Guikema, J. & Williams, L. (Eds.), Digital Literacies in Foreign and Second Language 
Education (pp. 201–226). San Marcos, TX: Calico. 
Chun, D. M. (2011). Developing intercultural communicative competence through online exchanges. 
CALICO Journal, 28(2), 392–419. 
Chun, D. M. (2015). Language and culture learning in higher education via telecollaboration. Pedagogies: 
An International Journal, 10(1), 5–21. 
Davies, J. (2007). Display, Identity and the Everyday: Self-presentation through online image sharing. 
Discourse: studies in the cultural politics of education, 28(4), 549–564. 
Dam, L. (1995). Learner Autonomy 3: From Theory to Classroom Practice. Dublin: Authentik. 
Dooly, M., & O'Dowd, R. (Eds.). (2012). Researching Online Foreign Language Interaction and 
Exchange: Theories, Methods and Challenges. Bern: Peter Lang. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2012). Challenging Hegemonies in Online Learning. Language Learning & 
Technology, 16(2), 4–13. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2012/emerging.pdf 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2014a). Towards Transparent Computing:  C ontent A uthoring U sing  
Standards. Language Learning & Technology, 18(1), 1–10. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/emerging.pdf 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2014b). Games in Language Learning: Opportunities and Challenges . Language 
Learning & Technology, 18(2), 9–19. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/emerging.pdf 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2015). The Evolving Roles of Language Teachers: Trained Coders, Local 
Researchers, Global Citizens. Language Learning & Technology, 19(1), 10–22. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/emerging.pdf 
Guth, S., & Helm, F. (Eds.). (2010). Telecollaboration 2.0: Language, literacy and intercultural learning 
in the 21st century. Bern: Peter Lang. 
Hafner, C. A. (2013). Digital Composition in a Second or Foreign Language. TESOL Quarterly, 47(4), 
830–834. 
Robert Godwin-Jones Contributing, Creating, Curating 
 
Language Learning & Technology 19 
Hafner, C. A., & Miller, L. (2011). Fostering Learner Autonomy in English for Science: A Collaborative 
Digital Video Project in a Technological Learning Environment. Language Learning and Technology, 
15(3), 68–86. 
Hanna, B. E., & De Nooy, J. (2009). Learning language and culture via public internet discussion 
forums. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Hauck, M., & Youngs, B. (2008). Telecollaboration in multimodal environments: the impact on task 
design and learner interaction. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(2), 87–124. 
Hubbard, P. (2004). Learner training for effective use of CALL. In S. Fotos & C. Browne (Eds.), New 
perspectives on CALL for second language classrooms (pp. 45–68). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 
Jee, M. J., & Park, M. J. (2009). Livemocha as an online learning community. Calico Journal, 26(2), 
448–456. 
Jenkins, H., Clinton, K., Purushotma, R., Robison, A. J., & Weigel, M. (2006). Confronting the 
challenges of participatory culture: Media education for the 21st century. Chicago: MacArthur 
Foundation. 
Jimenez-Caicedo, J., Lozano, M., & Gomez, R. (2014). Agency and Web 2.0 in Language Learning: A 
Systematic Analysis of Elementary Spanish Learners’ Attitudes, Beliefs, and Motivations about the Use 
of Blogs for the Development of L2 Literacy and Language Ability. In J. Guikema & L. Williams (Eds.), 
Digital Literacies in Foreign and Second Language Education (pp. 87-118). San Marcos, TX: Calico. 
Kern, R. (2014). Technology as Pharmakon: The Promise and Perils of the Internet for Foreign Language 
Education. Modern Language Journal, 98(1), 340–357. 
Kramsch, C. (2011). The symbolic dimensions of the intercultural. Language Teaching, 44(3), 354–367. 
Kurek, M., & Hauck, M. (2014). Closing the Digital Divide: A Framework for Multiliteracy Training. In 
J. Guikema & L. Williams (Eds.), Digital Literacies in Foreign and Second Language Education (pp. 
119–140). San Marcos, TX: Calico. 
Lam, W. (2000). Literacy and the design of the self: A case study of a teenager writing on the Internet. 
TESOL Quarterly 34, 457–482.  
Lamy, M. N., & Hampel, R. (2007). Online communication in language teaching and learning. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave McMillan. 
Luzón, M. J., Ruiz-Madrid, M. N., & Villanueva, M. L. (Eds.). (2010). Digital genres, new literacies and 
autonomy in language learning. Cambridge Scholars. 
Merchant, G. (2009). Web 2.0, new literacies, and the idea of learning through participation. English 
Teaching: Practice and Critique, 8(3), 8–20. 
Mullen, T., Appel, C., & Shanklin, T. (2009). Skype-based tandem language learning and web 2.0. In M. 
Thomas (Ed.), Handbook of research on web 2.0 and second language learning (pp. 101–119). Hershey: 
Information Science Reference. 
Murray, G. (2014). Social Dimensions of Autonomy in Language Learning. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Mutta, M., Pelttari, S., Salmi, L., Chevalier, A., & Johansson, M. (2014). Digital literacy in academic 
language learning contexts: Developing information-seeking competence. In J. Guikema & L. Williams 
(Eds.), Digital Literacies in Foreign and Second Language Education (pp. 227–244). San Marcos, TX: 
Calico. 
Robert Godwin-Jones Contributing, Creating, Curating 
 
Language Learning & Technology 20 
New London Group (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures. Harvard 
Educational Review, 66(1), 60–92. 
Nielson, K. (2011). Self-Study with Language Learning Software in the Workplace: What Happens? 
Language Learning & Technology, 15(3), 110–129. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/nielson.pdf 
Nunan, D., & Richards, J. (Eds.). (2015). Language Learning Beyond the Classroom. London: Routledge. 
O’Dowd, R. (2007). Foreign language education and the rise of online communication: A review of 
promises and realities. In R. O’Dowd (Ed.), Online intercultural exchange: An introduction for foreign 
language teachers (pp. 17–37). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. 
Orsini-Jones, M. (2010). Task-Based Development of Languages Students’ Critical Digital Multiliteracies 
and Cybergenre Awareness. In M. Luzón, M. Ruiz-Madrid, & M. Villanueva (Eds.), Digital Genres, New 
Literacies and Autonomy in Language Learning (pp. 197–224). Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars. 
Oskoz, A., & Elola, I. (2014). Integrating Digital Stories in the Writing Class: Toward a 21st-Century 
Literacy. In J. Guikema & L. Williams (Eds.), Digital Literacies in Foreign and Second Language 
Education (pp. 179–200). San Marcos, TX: Calico. 
Peters, M., & Frankhoff, M. (2014). New Literacy Practices and Plagiarism: A Study of Strategies for 
Digital Scrapbooking. In J. Guikema & L. Williams (Eds.), Digital Literacies in Foreign and Second 
Language Education (pp. 245–264). San Marcos, TX: Calico. 
Reinhardt, J., Warner, C., & Lange, K. (2014). Digital Games as Practices and Texts: New Literacies and 
Genres in an L2 German Classroom. In J. Guikema & L. Williams (Eds.), Digital Literacies in Foreign 
and Second Language Education (pp. 159-178). San Marcos, TX: Calico. 
Schuetze, U. (2008). Exchanging Second Language Messages Online: Developing an Intercultural 
Communicative Competence?. Foreign Language Annals, 41(4), 660–673. 
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language, Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38-67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/pdf/thorne.pdf 
Thorne, S. L. (2010). The ‘Intercultural Turn’ and Language Learning in the Crucible of New Media. In 
F. Helm & S. Guth (Eds.), Telecollaboration 2.0 for Language and Intercultural Learning (pp. 139–164). 
Bern: Peter Lang. 
Thorne, S. L., & Reinhardt, J. (2008). “Bridging activities,” new media literacies, and advanced foreign 
language proficiency. CALICO Journal, 25(3), 558–572. 
Williams, L., Abraham, L., & Bostelmann, E. (2014). A Survey-Driven Study of the Use of Digital Tools 
for Language Learning and Teaching. In J. Guikema & L. Williams (Eds.), Digital Literacies in Foreign 
and Second Language Education (pp. 17–68). San Marcos, TX: Calico. 
