Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/tai.pdf 
February 2015, Volume 19, Number 1 
pp. 139–164 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 139 
FROM TPACK-IN-ACTION WORKSHOPS TO CLASSROOMS:  
CALL COMPETENCY DEVELOPED AND INTEGRATED 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai, Iowa State University 
This study investigated the impact of a CALL teacher education workshop guided by the 
TPACK-in-Action model (Tai, 2013). This model is framed within Technological 
Pedagogical Content Knowledge (TPACK, Mishra & Koehler, 2006) and advocates a 
learning-by-doing approach (Chapelle & Hegelheimer, 2004) to understand how English 
teachers develop CALL competency and adopt the competency in their teaching. 
Participants were 24 elementary English teachers in Taiwan. The study used a mixed 
methods design (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2007), collecting and analyzing qualitative and 
quantitative data concurrently but separately before they were triangulated. Findings show 
that the TPACK-in-Action workshops had a positive impact on the 24 teachers. In addition 
to the development of CALL competency, it was also observed that participants 
demonstrated CALL competency in their teaching, such as selecting online materials and 
appropriate technology for content teaching, using cloud computing for student 
interaction, and matching the affordances of technology to meet their instructional goals 
and pedagogy. In sum, the study provides empirical evidence and a new perspective in the 
investigation of CALL teacher education. The theoretical and pedagogical implications for 
CALL teacher education research and practice are discussed. 
Keywords: CALL, TPACK-in-Action, TPACK, Observation, Teacher Education 
APA Citation: Tai, S.-J. D. (2015). From TPACK-in-action workshops to classrooms: 
CALL competency developed and integrated. Language Learning & Technology, 19(1), 
139–164. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/tai.pdf 
Received: November 18, 2014; Accepted: September 30, 2014; Published: February 1, 2015 
Copyright: © Shu-Ju Diana Tai 
INTRODUCTION 
The future of Computer Assisted Language Leaning (CALL) is closely tied to the future of language 
teacher education because teachers are pivotal players in language classrooms (Hubbard, 2008). As 
Hubbard noted, teachers “select the tools to support their teaching and determine what CALL applications 
language learners are exposed to and how learners use them” (p. 176). Studies have not only reported 
significant improvement in students’ achievement scores and motivation as an effect of learning with 
CALL (e.g., Al-Jarf, 2004; Almekhlafi, 2006) but also identified technology/CALL experience or 
competency as one crucial component that teachers need to be equipped with for real classrooms 
(Hubbard, 2008; Kessler, 2006).  
Some language teacher education (TE) programs are introducing future teachers to CALL in order to 
equip them with the appropriate CALL competency for their future classrooms. The literature suggests 
that technology education courses help teachers acquire positive attitudes toward CALL (Kamhi-Stein, 
2000; Redmond, Albion, & Maroulis, 2005; van Olphen, 2007 and gain confidence in incorporating 
technology in their classrooms (Hegelheimer, 2006; Hoven, 2007; Peters, 2006). However, there are still 
compelling issues related to TE in CALL that need further investigation, some of which are what CALL 
TE should entail to effectively help teachers integrate CALL and how CALL TE programs impact 
teachers’ development of CALL competency and integration. Moreover, an extensive literature review 
showed that findings of CALL research are mostly based on self-reported data, such as surveys and 
interviews. Though such data shed important light on the topic, CALL researchers called for adding more 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 140 
direct data sources, such as classroom observation since there might be potential for errors when recalling 
(Egbert, Paulus, & Nakamichi, 2002; Kilickaya, 2009). To bridge the gap between CALL TE and 
teachers’ CALL integration in classrooms, this study investigated how the CALL workshops, guided by 
TPACK-in-Action model (Tai, 2013), impacts English teachers’ development and adoption of CALL 
competency. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The present study seeks to examine the impact that the TPACK-in-Action CALL workshops have on the 
elementary English teachers in Taiwan. Therefore, the literature review focuses on relevant studies that 
emphasize TE in CALL and TPACK. First, empirical research on CALL and the impact of CALL TE 
programs is reviewed. Second, the theoretical framework, TPACK (Mishra & Koehler, 2006), is 
introduced to describe the framing of knowledge teachers needed to integrate CALL successfully, leading 
to the design of TPACK-in-Action model (Tai, 2013) to guide the CALL workshops. 
CALL & Teacher Education in CALL 
The literature in CALL research shows that teachers’ CALL integration in classrooms can have 
significant impact on students’ learning, which is reflected in their achievement scores and motivation 
and attitudes toward learning (e.g., Almekhlafi, 2006; Kozma, 2003). It is also reported that successful 
technology integration largely depends on teachers’ ability to apply CALL activities meaningfully, 
especially in language classroom where technology supports not only the delivery of content but also the 
building of skills (Reinders, 2009). It has become increasingly clear that the future of CALL is closely 
tied to language teacher education because teachers are the gatekeepers, determining whether or what 
technologies enter the classroom and how they are used (Hubbard, 2008). Moreover, teachers’ knowledge 
and perception of CALL may determine whether they integrate technology and the degree of success in 
CALL integration (e.g., Lam, 2000; Liu, Theodore, & Lavelle, 2004). In sum, how teachers learn to use 
technology plays a critical role in the process of integrating CALL activities.  
Impact of CALL Teacher Education 
The majority of studies examining the impact of CALL TE programs focused on how these courses 
influence teachers’ perceptions and attitudes toward CALL and their confidence in integrating CALL. 
The literature indicates that CALL education courses have helped second language (L2) teachers establish 
a positive attitude and gain confidence in integrating technology (Kamhi-Stein, 2000; Peters, 2006; van 
Olphen, 2007). As Hong (2010) noted, teachers’ confidence in incorporating CALL is the necessary first 
step toward expanding their knowledge of “how to harness the pedagogical potential of CALL 
technology” (p. 56).  
However, little has been done to examine how CALL TE courses prepare teachers to develop sufficient 
CALL competency to integrate CALL, or what teachers’ CALL integration looked like in their 
classrooms. Findings of the limited number of studies that focus on investigating the impact of CALL TE 
courses seem to indicate a favorable impact. For example, 20 teachers reported to have used at least one 
CALL activity in their classrooms and that the CALL course provided them with skills they did not have 
previously (Egbert et al., 2002). Peters (2006) also found a significant increase in participants’ post course 
computer competency in epistemological, social, technical, and informational competence. Moreover, 
half of the participants in Kilickaya’s (2009) study stated that they included CALL tools that they learned 
in the CALL course into their lesson plans and participants in Hegelheimer’s (2006) study reported that 
the required CALL course helped them integrate technology into their teaching in freshmen composition 
courses. 
While CALL education courses have been found to have a positive impact on teachers’ perceptions of and 
confidence in the integration of CALL, the results of most previous studies were based on data collected 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 141 
from primarily self-reported sources, such as surveys and interviews. Egbert et al. (2002) noted that the 
use of self-reported data was one of the major limitations of their study because with such data “there is 
always the potential for error in recall” (p. 121). In addition, they stated that their methodology did not 
permit them to capture teachers’ actual classroom practices. Therefore, they recommended that future 
research include additional data sources while exploring teachers’ adoption of CALL knowledge and 
skills into classroom practice. Along the same line, Kilickaya (2009) suggested that further research 
investigating the effect of the CALL course should involve some observation of teachers’ classroom 
practices in order to affirm or negate the impact they claimed a program might have on their teaching. As 
Wong and Benson (2006) noted, through observations, they identified a discrepancy between one 
participating teacher’s report and the researchers’ observation where participant’s use of technology was 
observed to be not as successful as she reported. In sum, research reported positive impact of CALL TE 
programs on teachers’ perception of and their integration of CALL. However, CALL researchers have 
called for adding observation as one data source to complement self-reported data in investigating the 
impact of CALL teacher education.  
The TPACK Framework 
With regards to CALL teacher education, researchers reported that well-organized and well-prepared 
workshops/programs could help teachers integrate and adopt CALL (e.g., Desjardins & Peters, 2007; 
Hong, 2010; Hubbard, 2008). Not only should CALL teacher education play an important role in 
reinforcing positive experiences among English teachers’ CALL integration (Hernandez-Ramos, 2005; 
Jung 2001; Lee & Son, 2006;), the CALL intervention should also aim at situating teachers in an 
authentic context as they learn to integrate technology (Chapelle & Hegelheimer, 2004; Hampel & 
Stickler, 2005; Slaouti & Motteram, 2006) and equipping them with more than just technology 
knowledge (Chisholm & Beckett, 2003; Kessler & Plakans, 2008; Levy & Stockwell, 2006; Nobles, 
Dredger, & Gerheart, 2012; Shoffner, 2007). Thus, in order to help teachers develop the knowledge they 
need to integrate CALL effectively, the TPACK framework (Mishra & Koehler, 2006) was introduced to 
guide the investigation in the present study.  
Building upon Shulman’s studies (1986) that introduced the construct of Pedagogical Content Knowledge 
(PCK) applicable to the teaching of specific content, Mishra and Koehler (2006) proposed inserting 
technology knowledge as one of the foundational knowledge components that teachers of 21st century 
classrooms should be equipped with and proposed, Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge 
(TPCK), as a theoretical framework for understanding the specialized and multi-faceted forms of 
knowledge required for teachers to integrate technology effectively. Not long after TPCK was introduced, 
Thompson and Mishra (2008) proposed a change in the acronym for easier pronunciation and “to form an 
integrated whole, a Total PACKage” (p. 38) among the three fundamental knowledge domains; therefore, 
TPCK became TPACK (see Figure 1). 
The TPACK framework advocates the incorporation of the three fundamental knowledge domains among 
teachers: a) content knowledge (CK), b) pedagogical knowledge (PK), and c) technological knowledge 
(TK) and emphasizes the importance of the complexities of interactions among all three. As Cox and 
Graham (2009) stated, the basic premise of TPACK is that “a teacher’s knowledge regarding technology 
is multifaceted and that the optimal mix for the classroom is a balanced combination of technology, 
pedagogy, and content” (p. 4042). In other words, the TPACK framework gives “a holistic perspective of 
the knowledge associated with effectively integrating technology into learning environments, accounting 
for what teachers know and what teachers do” (Polly & Brantley Dias, 2009, p. 46). The framework is 
thus used to guide the investigation of teachers’ decisions and actions on their technology integration and 
the understanding of the underlying factors that can foster and hinder their technology integration. 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 142 
 
Figure 1. The TPACK framework (Mishra & Koehler, 2006). 
The TPACK-In-Action Model 
Researchers have devoted studies to identify approaches for TE workshops to effectively help teachers 
integrate technology in their teaching, such as learning to integrate CALL through first-hand experiences 
(Chapelle, 2003), consistent modeling of effective use and practice of technology (Hoven, 2006, 2007; 
Hughes, 2005), and in an authentic teaching context (Chapelle & Hegelheimer, 2004; Hampel & Stickler, 
2005; Slaouti & Motteram, 2006). In response to this notion, the TPACK-in-Action model (Tai, 2013) 
was developed to guide the design and plan of the CALL workshop, advocating two themes: a) the 
learning-by-doing approach as research has called for; and b) teachers’ understanding of TPACK, which 
is what teachers need to be able to meaningfully integrate technology into teaching (Mishra & Koehler, 
2006). Thus, the TPACK-in-Action model proposes that a workshop follows these five steps: a) 
Modeling; b) Analyzing; c) Demonstrating; d) Application; and e) Reflection to achieve the intended goal 
of helping English teachers develop the competency needed to integrate CALL into their classroom 
teaching. Both the instructor and the participants play an equally important role in a TPACK-in-Action 
workshop. In other words, the model involves equal participation and contribution from both parties (see 
Figure 2). 
Research Questions 
Literature review indicates a need to examine the impact of CALL TE intervention from the aspect of 
classroom practice beyond self-reported data. Thus, the present study investigated the impact that the 
TPACK-in-Action CALL workshops had on elementary English teachers in Taiwan and sought to answer 
the following two research questions:  
1. What was the impact of the TPACK-in-Action CALL workshops on the development of 
participants’ CALL competency? What were the CALL competency/ies participants developed? 
2. How did participants adopt what they learned in the workshops into teaching in their classrooms? 
 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 143 
 
Figure 2. The TPACK-in-Action model. 
METHODOLOGY 
The study used a mixed methods design, following the Triangulation Design: Convergence Model 
(Creswell & Plano Clark, 2007), which allows different but complementary data to be collected and 
analyzed. The researcher collected and analyzed quantitative and qualitative data separately and then 
triangulated both sets of data to understand the impact of the TPACK-in-Action workshops. The different 
results of the qualitative and quantitative analysis were compared and contrasted. Quantitative data were 
collected through survey questionnaires before and after the CALL workshops. The qualitative data 
emerged from reflections, observations, interviews, and document analyses during and after the 
workshops. Findings from qualitative and quantitative data analyses were then compared, contrasted, and 
conclusions about convergence were drawn during interpretation.  
Participants 
Participants were 24 full-time elementary English teachers from six different elementary schools in 
Taiwan. The 24 teachers agreed to participate in the workshops voluntarily and underwent 15 hours of 
TPACK-in-Action CALL workshops. The majority of the participants were female (88%), aged between 
30 and 40 (58%). Half of the participants held a Masters degree in English and education and the other 
half held a Bachelors degree. More than two thirds of the participants were experienced elementary 
teachers, with six to 16 years of teaching experience (70%). Two participants were novice teachers who 
only had two years of English teaching experience. 
Participants were asked to indicate their background knowledge and experience in technology use for 
English teaching prior to the workshops. They were asked to identify from a list of 40 technologies, 
including iPad apps, web-based tools, and software-based tools, if they knew about the technology and 
also if they had used the technology in their teaching. Participants reported that they knew 17 (out of 40), 
including PowerPoint (21), Facebook (15), Google Sites (11), and Google Earth (10) which were the top 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 144 
four tools identified by 10 or more participants. However, the participants had only used seven of the 17 
tools in their teaching: PowerPoint (14), interactive whiteboard (7), Google Earth (4), Movie Maker (4), 
Blogger (3), Audacity (2), and Facebook (1). 
The TPACK-in-Action CALL Workshops 
A three-hour workshop each week was conducted over a period of five weeks. Two sets of the 15-hour 
TPACK-in-Action CALL workshops were conducted for 24 participants in two cities (nine and 15 
participants in each set). The purpose of the TPACK-in-Action workshops was to help teachers develop 
the necessary knowledge to incorporate specific types of technologies, including software-based and web-
based tools and iPad apps in pedagogically sound ways. A typical CALL workshop followed the five 
steps proposed in the TPACK-in-Action model (Tai, 2013): (1) Modeling; (2) Analyzing 3) 
Demonstrating; (4) Application; and (5) Reflection (see Figure 2), each of which took different amounts 
of time to complete, ranging from 25 to 60 minutes. The five workshops covered a variety of content, 
including vocabulary, writing, reading, speaking, pronunciation, and integrated skills, which was based on 
the set of English textbooks that teachers used to teach in their schools (see Appendix A). For each 
workshop, a particular CALL lesson, was developed with technology selected based on its affordances 
and integrated with appropriate pedagogical decisions. All lessons were built on Google Sites, which 
served as the online learning community where participants could retrieve all the resources between 
workshops and share thoughts with peer teachers. 
The TPACK-in-Action workshop started with modeling the CALL lesson, in which technology was 
selected and incorporated with a specific content goal and a sound pedagogical decision. Upon 
completing the lesson, participants were taken through the analyzing step to understand the rationale 
behind the design of the lesson. In the first two steps, the instructor took the initiative role modeling the 
lesson and analyzing why the lesson was put together the way it was, while the English teachers 
participated in the lesson as students. Moving into the demonstrating step, the instructor demonstrated the 
features and affordance of the technology that was incorporated in the CALL lesson. After learning about 
the affordances of the technology, participants wrote a CALL lesson where they matched the technology 
with specific content and appropriate pedagogy and also peer taught their CALL lessons. After that, 
participants were given the opportunity to debrief and reflect on their learning. In the last two steps, 
participants played the center role constructing their own knowledge and making connections between 
knowledge and practice. 
Procedures  
The data collection process lasted five months. Before the first CALL workshop started, a CALL Teacher 
Education website was created as one course management tool and as a learning community for 
participants to share and collaborate. Second, all necessary teaching materials and lessons were developed 
based on the textbooks teachers were using and uploaded to the website. Before the workshops started, all 
participants were directed to the website to complete the pre-workshop survey. After that, participants 
underwent 15 hours of TPACK-in-Action workshops. Upon completing the last workshop, participants 
were asked to complete the post-workshop survey and then schedule classroom observations. 
Observations started after the third workshop upon participants’ request because they had started 
integrating what they had learned in the first two workshops. After all observations were completed, two 
focus group interviews were conducted among the 13 participants. All observations and interviews were 
recorded and transcribed for data analysis. In order to ensure that participants’ voices are truly 
represented, the quotes included in the study were translated by the researcher and then checked and 
verified by another native speaker of Chinese with a native-like proficiency level of English. Pseudonyms 
are used to address participants. 
 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 145 
Materials 
Surveys 
Adapted from Chuang and Huang’s (2012) measure of TPACK competency as a holistic, integrated, and 
transformative form of knowledge, 14 survey items were used to collect data on participant’s self-
perceived CALL competency. The Chuang and Huang’s (2012) survey contains 24 items, which were 
factored into 4 dimensions. Two of the four dimensions were identified to have aligned well with the 
objectives of the TPACK-in-Action workshops, thus, the 14 items from Dimension I: Use technology 
tools and the internet for teaching and Dimension II: Use cloud computing for student interactions and 
discussion were included in the measurement of participants’ CALL competency. CALL competency 
refers to teachers’ ability to select technology based on its affordance with sound pedagogical strategies to 
achieve the language teaching objectives, such as integrate different modes of media to help students 
understand the subject content more easily and utilize appropriate technologies that meet individual 
student’s needs. The surveys were administered before and after the workshops in order to examine 
participants’ development of CALL competency. 
Observations 
Non-participant observations were conducted in participants’ English classes. The purpose of the 
classroom observations was to capture participants’ actions of technology integration in classrooms and to 
identify how CALL activities were integrated with appropriate pedagogy. In order to capture such data, 
an observation instrument, framed within TPACK, was developed to facilitate the observation process 
and to produce richer and thicker field notes (see Appendix B). The observation instrument contained 
three sections: (1) Background information to help situate the observers into the content and context; (2) 
CALL Competency containing TPACK codes to guide the observations; and (3) Post Observation to list 
the questions that emerge from the observations and need to be addressed in the after-class interview. 
Thirteen of the 24 participants gave consent to allow access to their classrooms for observation. A total of 
26 classes were observed among the 13 participants.  
Interviews 
There were two types of interviews conducted: individual post-observation and post-observation focus 
group interviews. The former occurred right after each observation, with a focus on clarifying issues and 
questions that emerged from the observation and also allowing participants the opportunity to voice 
themselves and further elaborate their lessons; the latter were conducted after all observations were 
completed with 13 participants (eight for interview I and five for interview II). In addition to pre-
determined questions that addressed participants’ perceptions about CALL integration and the workshops, 
questionable survey responses were confirmed and verified; questions and issues that emerged from 
observations were also summarized; and member checks were performed.  
Reflections 
The fourth data source was reflections, which were collected during the reflection step in the workshops. 
There were two different types of reflections, individual and group reflections, through which participants 
had the opportunity to reflect on their learning and learn from each other by reading and commenting on 
peers’ reflections in the online learning community. The individual reflections were implemented online 
where participants were asked to indicate how each of the five steps contributed to their learning of 
integrating technology into their teaching on a five-point Likert scale and elaborate further and make 
connection of their learning to their teaching. During group reflections, prompts and questions were 
provided to guide participants to compose and share their reflections in the learning community. 
 
 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 146 
Analysis 
Quantitative Data Scoring 
Before the first workshop and after the fifth workshop, participants were asked to rate their CALL 
competency on a five-point Likert scale, with 1 as “Strongly Disagree” and 5 as “Strongly Agree.” The 
scoring for responses to the survey items was straightforward: 1 point for “1 Strongly Disagree” 
indicating the lowest CALL competency level and 5 points for “5 Strongly Agree” indicating the highest 
level of CALL competency. A response of 3 indicated a medium-level competency. All survey responses 
were recorded and scored for statistical analysis, including descriptive statistics and the Wilcoxon signed-
rank test. The Wilcoxon test, a nonparametric equivalent of paired-samples t-test, was performed to 
identify if any differences in participants’ responses of the pre- and post-workshop surveys were 
significantly different (Dörnyei, 2007). The decision to select the Wilcoxon test was because of the small 
sample size and a concern for the data being normally distributed. 
Qualitative Data Coding 
Qualitative data were collected from observations, interviews, and reflections. Before the analysis, 
observation field notes and individual post-observation interviews were sorted into units of analysis 
(UoMs) based on Mohan’s (2007) concept of social practice1 (see Figure 3 for examples of UoMs). The 
UoMs were coded based on the exiting codes in the Tai, Schmidt, and Wang (2014) codebook, which was 
developed based on observations of 4 exemplary technology using elementary teachers. It contains 11 
themes with 53 codes representing teachers’ actions of technology integration cross all seven TPACK 
knowledge domains (see Appendix C for sample TPACK codes). To ensure the reliability of the coding 
results, a second coder was invited to code 20 percent of the data. The inter-coder reliability was 78% 
agreement, which was considered “good” based on Mackey and Gass (2005) standards.  
The qualitative data collected from observations, interviews, and reflection were compared and contrasted 
with the survey—quantitative data—to help interpret participants’ CALL competency. 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 147 
 
Figure 3. Sample UoMs for coding and analysis. 
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION 
Based on the analysis of survey data, it was found that the TPACK-in-Action CALL workshops had a 
positive impact on elementary English teachers in Taiwan in the development of their CALL competency. 
The development of participants’ CALL competency was confirmed through the analysis of observation 
and interview data where participants demonstrated what they learned in their teaching and CALL 
competency was observed in their classrooms. 
Development of CALL Competency  
As noted earlier, CALL competency in this study is considered as a holistic, integrated, and 
transformative form of knowledge where teachers demonstrate the ability to select technology based on 
its affordance with sound pedagogical strategies to achieve language teaching objectives, namely 
TPACK. Before the workshops, the average mean score for all 14 items was 3.41 (SD=0.57) showing that 
participants started at an above medium-level competency. The post-workshop mean score increased to 
4.13 (SD=0.37), which is high-level competency, indicating that participants perceived themselves to 
have developed CALL competency after the workshops (as shown in Table 1). The results of the 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 148 
Wilcoxon test confirmed that the differences between the two means were statistically significant 
(Z=4.29, p<0.001).  
Table 1. Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test: Pre- and Post-Workshop CALL Competency 
Dimension of CALL competency Pre Post     
M  SD M  SD Z dt p 
14 items 3.41  0.57 4.13  0.37 4.29* 23 < .001 
Use of technology tools and the Internet for 
teaching (10 items) 
3.66  0.60 4.31  0.37 4.02* 23 < .001 
Use of cloud computing for student 
interactions and discussion (4 items) 
2.79  0.81 3.67  0.57 3.84* 23 < .001 
Note: * difference between means is at 0.001 level (p < .001). 
Looking at items of the two dimensions separately, the pre- and post-workshop mean scores showed that 
participants perceived their competency at a higher level for competency in Dimension I: Use technology 
tools and the Internet for teaching (M=4.31, SD=0.37) than in Dimension II: Use cloud computing for 
interaction and discussion (M=3.67, SD=0.57). Moreover, the Wilcoxon results indicated that 
participants’ development of CALL competency was statistically significant and not due to chance 
(Z=4.02 and Z=3.84, p<0.001).  
As seen in Table 2, participants showed high-level CALL competency (mean score≥4.00) for nine items 
(out of 10) in Dimension I: Use of technology tools and the Internet for teaching, indicating that teachers 
felt that they had developed the competency in using technology and the Internet for their teaching after 
the workshops. Participants’ top five self-perceived CALL competency items (mean score≥4.50) were 
found in Dimension I, particularly related to integrating online materials and video clips as well as 
selection of appropriate technology for teaching content. Among the five items, item 2: I can integrate 
different modes of media to help students understand the subject content more easily and item10: I can 
use appropriate technologies to teach specific subject matters were the top two increased means. Among 
all 14 items, the biggest increase occurred in item 7: I can utilize appropriate technologies to meet 
individual students’ needs. All three items were related to teachers’ attention on students’ learning in 
content when integrating technology, indicating that participants perceived themselves developed the  
CALL competency to look beyond technology itself. In addition, the standard deviations (SDs) of 
participants’ responses also confirmed the positive impact of the workshops. As the SDs for most items in 
the post-workshop survey decreased while the means increased, it indicated that the variation among 
participants’ responses was smaller with regards to their development of the CALL competency, 
especially for item 4: I can use multimedia interaction to help students understand the subject content 
more easily and item 7. 
Participants’ responses indicated that after the workshops teachers were able to look beyond the teacher-
centered context aiming to engage students in their learning process and to match the affordances of 
appropriate technology to their instructional goals and pedagogy for their target audience, which was 
exactly what the TPACK-in-Action workshops intended to help teachers develop. Shelly’s explanation of 
her decisions trying out iPad apps supported this finding: 
After learning about these iPad apps in your workshops, I feel that they would be good for lower 
grade students practicing letters, phonics, and vocabulary. …As you said, some apps have simple 
and specific features that can help me achieve specific teaching goals. …After trying them in 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 149 
teaching, I also realized that it took a few things to go together for it to work [content, pedagogy, 
technology]. (Focus Group Interview I) 
Table 2. Development of CALL Competency 
Dimension CALL Competency Items  Pre Post 
M SD M SD 
 14 items 
 
3.41  0.57 4.13 * 0.37 
Dimension I 
Use 
technology 
tools and the 
Internet for 
teaching 
10 items 3.66  0.53 4.31* 0.49 
1. I can use video clips (e.g., from YouTube) to teach 
specific abstract concepts. 
4.21  0.88 4.54 0.51 
2. I can integrate different modes of media to help students 
understand the subject content more easily. 
3.58  0.97 4.42** 0.58 
3. I can use technologies for different representations in 
teaching to help students understand the subject content 
3.46  0.98 4.42** 0.58 
4. I can use multimedia interaction to help students 
understand the subject content more easily. 
3.83  1.01 4.42** 0.50 
5. I can use video clips (e.g., from YouTube) to help 
students understand the subject content more easily. 
4.29  0.55 4.54 0.72 
6. I can use technologies, such as virtual lab, museums, or 
digital archives that allow students to explore concepts of 
the subject matter. 
2.63 1.01 2.96 0.81 
7. I can utilize appropriate technologies that meet individual 
student’s needs. 
2.96  1.08 4.17* 0.56 
8. I can select appropriate technologies to teach specific 
subject matter. 
3.92  0.83 4.54** 0.51 
9. I can integrate online materials into teaching the subject 
matter. 
3.96  0.69 4.63* 0.49 
10. I can use appropriate technologies for teaching specific 
subject matter. 
 
3.75  0.79 4.50* 0.51 
Dimension II 
Use cloud 
computing for 
student 
interactions 
and discussion 
4 items 2.79  0.12 3.67* 0.46 
11. I can use appropriate technologies (e.g., social media, 
online forums, and blogs) that provide students with 
opportunities to express opinions and interact with others. 
2.83  1.13 4.04* 0.55 
12. I can use appropriate technologies (e.g., social media, 
online forums, and blogs) to help students clarify 
misconceptions in the subject matter easily. 
2.63  0.92 3.29* 0.86 
13. I can use appropriate technologies (e.g., online forums, 
blogs, and teaching websites) to respond to students’ 
questions. 
2.79  0.88 3.25*** 0.85 
14. I can use technologies to let students present their 
learning outcomes. 
2.92  1.14 4.08* 0.58 
Note: * difference between means is at 0.001 level (p < .00); **  p < .01; *** p < .05 
While participants indicated their development of CALL competency, the only exception was with item 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 150 
6: I can use technologies, such as virtual labs, museums, or digital archives that allow students to explore 
concepts of the subject matter. The mean score showed that participants started at a low level and did not 
develop much after the workshop, which could be because virtual labs, museum, or digital archives were 
not the targets of the workshops and thus were not addressed. During the focus group interview, 
participants explained that they felt that virtual labs and museums might be appropriate for science 
teaching, which indicated that teachers had content in mind when they selected technology for teaching. 
This finding aligns with the results of the Chuang and Huang’s (2012) study, in which English teachers 
were also found to have lower mean scores than mathematics and science teachers on items related to 
these particular technology items, indicating that the selection of technology could be content specific. 
That is, English teachers need to look into what technology can afford when selecting technology for the 
teaching of English to facilitate the teaching process and enhance students’ language learning. 
For items in Dimension II: Use of cloud computing for student interactions and discussion, participants 
perceived themselves at high-level competency for 2 items (11 &14) with decreased SDs but at medium-
level for the other two (12 &13) with SDs remaining at similar level. The big increases in means with 
decreased SDs were related to participants’ competencies in selecting technology to accommodate 
students’ needs and to promote participation and interactions among students, indicating that the CALL 
workshops helped participants draw their attention to students’ actions and interactions in learning when 
selecting technology. This illustration is Florence’s description of her integration of QuickVoice for 
students to practice oral production:  
They were all very much engaged. It had given them the opportunity to hear themselves. No 
matter how they were doing, they all said that they had a sense of achievement and it was 
interesting to hear their own voice. They need to hear themselves indeed. They were very 
interested, in fact, and eager to record more. It’s like a force that motivates them to do better. 
(Focus Group Interview I) 
Along the same line, Stella incorporated iPad video recording with a sound pedagogical decision, which 
provided another alternative for students to practice their speech: 
I used the recording feature on iPads for my students to practice their speech production. Students 
were able to not only hear but also see themselves because a speech is more than just narration. I 
assigned them in pairs so that they can help each other. …They all were very engaged working 
together. I also heard students offering suggestions for their classmates to do better. (Focus Group 
Interview I) 
As to the two items showing at low-level competency, participants explained in the interviews that they 
could see the use of online forums and blogs to promote students’ language production and interactions as 
we practiced on Google Sites in the modeled lessons. However, it was going to take time to get used to in 
terms of responding to students’ questions online since most of the feedback and grading had been 
provided on paper. This suggests that participants were fully aware that knowing and doing were two 
completely different things and it would take some time and effort for them to apply their knowledge 
fully.  
Technology Integration for Content Teaching 
Eighteen different tools were incorporated and modeled in the CALL lessons in the TPACK-in-Action 
workshops, 12 of which were observed in participants’ classrooms to meet a variety of teaching 
objectives (see Figure 4). For example, three participants used Google Sites as a course management tool 
where the course materials were uploaded for teaching and links to vocabulary and speech practices were 
uploaded for students to practice beyond classrooms. In addition, Spelling City was observed in 10 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 151 
participants’ classrooms. A variety of activities were created and implemented in different ways to 
achieve different teaching goals, such as teaching target vocabulary in a whole class format, helping 
students practice spelling and pronunciation of target vocabulary individually, and assessing students’ 
learning. Furthermore, Text to Speech, PowerPoint, and iPads to practice integrated skill assignments. As 
seen in Stella’s classroom, she adopted Text to Speech learned in the workshops and combined its use 
with Google Sites to make it possible for her students to practice and prepare for their mid-term oral 
speech. As it was modeled in the TPACK-in-Action workshops, the sample speech created using Text to 
Speech was uploaded to the website, which allowed students’ access even outside the classroom. Stella’s 
goal was to allow students the opportunity to hear and practice the speech without her presence, which 
extended students’ learning beyond the classroom walls. 
 
Figure 4. Analysis of participants’ CALL integration observed 
1 ePortfolio is an activity that helped participants build an online portfolio on Google Sites, which allows multiple modes to 
present themselves. 2 Monkey is a customized course management system using the QR codes that allows teachers to connect to 
iPads for instant assessment on students’ responses. 
It was also observed that some participants integrated technology that was not introduced in the 
workshops, including web-based resources, such as Animoto and Starfall, eBook, and Monkey. After 
seeing a variety of technology in action in the workshops, Alice explored and combined the use of Starfall 
and eBook to more effectively help her students practice vocabulary. With Animoto embedded in Google 
Sites for the digital storytelling project, Gina found that students were more engaged in the learning 
process and demonstrated their productivity through multiple modes. She stated that students were more 
passionate and willing to push themselves further, which drove her to continue exploring further despite 
challenges and limitations occurred. Last but not least, Stella integrated Monkey, a customized course 
management tool that was developed to be incorporated with iPads. She stated that she volunteered to 
answer the call from her principal for a teacher to try Monkey. She felt that she was ready to take on the 
challenge after completing the CALL workshops. She said: 
 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 152 
After going through your workshops, I have learned a lot. I am not only more confident but also 
inspired. I feel that I should take on this challenge and give it a try. So I said yes to the principal’s 
calling an English teacher to go on board. I have spent quite some time learning and playing with 
it. But it’s worth it. (Focus Group Interview I) 
The six tools introduced in workshops but not observed in classrooms were Schoology, Google Voice 
Search, Doodle Buddy, Paint & Story House, VoiceThread, and TitanPad. When asked why some 
technologies introduced in the workshops were not integrated in their teaching, participants reported that 
it had to do with their access to and the affordances of technology and the target curriculum objectives. 
For example, Google Sites and Dragon Dictation functioned similar to the first two tools as a course 
management tool and for pronunciation practice respectively. Participants also mentioned that they had 
easier access to PowerPoint, which affords similar features with Doodle Buddy and Paint & Story House 
especially after they learned about its recording feature in the workshops. Moreover, participants 
acknowledged TitanPad and VoiceThread as useful tools for writing and integrated skills; however, they 
explained that composing a passage or a paragraph were beyond the curriculum objectives since students 
were still at the level of learning vocabulary and writing sentences.  
It showed that participants were actively exploring other tools for their English teaching and had more 
confidence in integrating CALL in their classrooms indicating that the TPACK-in-Action workshops 
helped teachers gain the confidence to go beyond their comfort zone and start exploring other 
possibilities. Moreover, participants not only looked at the affordances of technology when selecting what 
to incorporate in their teaching but also make connection of the use of technology to curriculum 
objectives, which matched the objectives of the TPACK-in-Action workshops. 
Observed CALL Competency  
While survey data showed that participants developed CALL competency after the TPACK-in-Action 
CALL workshops, a variety of CALL competencies were also observed in their classrooms. As shown in 
Table 3, all 13 participants were observed to have demonstrated three CALL competencies in their 
classrooms, including 700. Scaffold_Content, 705. Resources_Content, and 707. Engage. First, 
participants used resources that they learned in the CALL workshops and selected appropriate tools to 
scaffold content teaching and engage students in content learning. As mentioned in the previous section, 
two thirds (12/18) of the technology introduced in the workshops were observed in participants’ teaching 
with pedagogy in mind. For example, all participants integrated Spelling City to teach vocabulary, 
allowing students to practice spelling and pronunciation and assessing students’ learning in vocabulary as 
modeled in the workshops. PowerPoint was integrated as an instructional tool for teachers as well as a 
productivity tool for students as in one of the modeled lesson. Based on the observations, students were 
all very much engaged and on task while CALL activities were carried out in classrooms. The changes in 
Alice illustrated these CALL competencies well. She expressed that she would not have time to integrate 
CALL during the workshops and thus would like to withdraw from being observed. After the workshops, 
she decided to give it a try and incorporated Spelling City into her teaching of vocabulary. She said: “I 
tried using Spelling City as well and it worked wonders. … My students were all very motivated and 
engaged in vocabulary practice. … I have decided to make it part of my teaching routine.” (Focus Group 
Interview I). Alice identified with what technology could do if integrated appropriately into teaching 
through her action in the classroom, which led to her intention and continuous efforts to explore new tools 
and integrate CALL into her teaching. 
In addition, nine participants were observed to have incorporated technology to assess students’ learning 
formatively as demonstrated in the workshops, specifically Spelling City and Google Forms, namely the 
CALL Competency of 702. Assess Learning. They mentioned that these two tools helped them shorten 
the preparation time, especially for Julia, Jasmine, and Shelly, who taught multiple classes from the same 
grade. Most importantly, the integration of the tools afforded the opportunity for teachers and students to  
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 153 
Table 3. Participants’ Development and Integration of CALL Competency 
Development of 
CALL 
Competency 
CALL Competency Dimension Pre Post    
M SD M SD Z dt p 
I & II (14 items) 3.41  0.57 4.13  0.37 4.29* 23 < .001 
I. Use of technology tools and the 
Internet for teaching  (10 items) 
3.66  0.60 4.31  0.37 4.02* 23 < .001 
II. Use of cloud computing for student 
interactions and discussion (4 items) 
2.79  0.81 3.67  0.57 3.84* 23 < .001 
 
Integration of 
CALL 
Competency 
Participant Integration Observed 
CALL Competency Definitions 
Alice  700, 705, 707 700. Scaffolding_Content. Teacher uses and 
models different scaffolding techniques, i.e., 
providing support to promote learning, in a class 
or across over classes to facilitate student 
learning in a content area(s) with technology. 
702. Assess Learning. Teacher uses technology 
and strategies to assess students’ content learning 
in classroom 
705. Resources_Content. Teacher uses resources 
(e.g., content & technology) that are collected 
over time, including professional development, 
workshops, conference, self-learning, etc. to 
teach the planned lesson in classroom. 
707. Engage. Teacher uses technology to engage 
(e.g. students show motivation or strong focus for 
the activity) students in learning about a specific 
content area. 
709. Match Affordance. Teacher selects 
technology based on his/her knowledge of what 
the technology can do (affordances) and can not 
do (limitations) in relationship to teaching 
strategies used to teach content.  
710. Reflect. Teacher reflects on teaching 
episode (rethinking the lesson plan and how 
technology is used) and making connections to 
previous teaching episodes. The interplay 
between technology, content and pedagogy are 
addressed. 
711. Collaborate. Teacher collaborates with 
others such as tech coordinator or tech coach to 
plan or teach a technology-enhanced lesson. 
712. Learner Centered.  Teacher allows students 
to take control on their learning in content. 
713. Connect Learning. Using technology to 
connect students to others outside the classroom, 
e.g. students in different classes, schools, 
districts, states or countries or content experts in 
different locations, for purpose of learning 
content. 
Darcy 700, 702, 705, 707, 
709, 710, 713 
Faye 700, 702, 705,  
707, 709 
Florence 700, 702, 705,  
707, 709, 710, 711 
Gina 700, 702, 705,  
707, 709 
Heather 700, 702, 705,  
707, 709 
Jasmine 700, 702, 705, 
 707, 713 
Julia 700, 702, 705,  
707, 709 
Sabrina 700, 705, 707 
Sarah 700, 702, 705, 
 707, 709 
Shelly 700, 705, 707,  
709, 712 
Stella 700, 702, 705,  
707, 709, 712, 713 
Zelda 700, 705, 707 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 154 
receive instant test results and feedback. Florence used Spelling City to create the midterm vocabulary 
exam and stated that the use of the tool helped her students do better in the midterm exam. 
Moreover, eight participants demonstrated the competency of 709. Match Affordance, indicating that they 
developed overall knowledge of the affordance of technology when selecting technology for teaching. 
Participants were also observed to have demonstrated the CALL competencies of 712. Learner Centered 
promoting learner-centered learning environments and 713. Connect Learning extending students 
learning to beyond the classroom. With the use of iPads and apps, Shelly and Stella demonstrated the 
CALL competency of allowing students to take control of their own learning in the practice of 
speech/presentation and phonics/pronunciation in pair or small group learning environments, namely. 
Jasmine created the Jeopardy activity on PowerPoint for reviewing grammar, vocabulary, and sentence 
patterns and implemented it as a competition among all six 6th-grade classes she taught, which motivated 
students greatly in content learning. Jasmine’s CALL integration connected students to peers outside of 
their own classrooms to promote content learning.  
Through the use of Google Sites, Stella and Darcy made it possible for learning to occur outside the 
classroom (see Figure 5 & 6). Along with using Text-to-Speech, Stella’s students were able to practice for 
their mid-term oral examination at their own pace to meet their own needs. Combining Google Sites, 
Docs, Forms, and TitanPad, Darcy created a whole lesson, which allowed students to practice and 
complete assignments at their own pace. Darcy explained the rationale behind the creation of this lesson 
in the focus group interview,  
I learned to use Google Sites and Spelling City. … I created vocabulary activities, uploaded them 
to the class website, demonstrated how to access the pages and activities, and provided specific 
instructions. So they now have an alternative resource to practice target vocabulary outside 
classroom. (Focus Group Interview II) 
 
Figure 5. Stella’s CALL integration-Google Sites and Text-to-Speech 
 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 155 
 
Figure 6. Darcy’s CALL integration-Google Sites for collaboration 
Among all CALL competencies, 710. Reflect and 711. Collaborate were observed in very few 
participants’ classrooms. These two competencies shared a similar nature, that is, it required data from 
multiple sources to determine and verify. For example, 710. Reflect was observed in Stella and Darcy’s 
classrooms where the observations took place in two back-to-back classes. Both teachers noticed one 
thing that did not go well in the first class and decided to modify the second class in order to facilitate the 
content teaching. Stella decided to make an adjustment in the sequence of her teaching in target words 
and sentence patterns in a second 4th-grade class, which was observed to run more smoothly. In Darcy’s 
classroom, one PowerPoint slide was added to facilitate his instruction in explaining the content related 
assignment, which was observed to help students’ comprehension. Based on what was observed, it was 
brought up during the post-observation interviews with both participants to confirm and verify their 
rationale behind the changes made in classes. 
As to 711. Collaborate, teacher collaboration was identified during the observation in Florence’s 
classroom. It was observed that her lesson planning was very similar to Julia’s. It was confirmed in the 
post-observation interview that she worked together with Julia to plan the lesson. When asked, Julia 
stated, “ We think working together will help us prepare for the class since we teach the same grade. Two 
people working together and sharing the resources saves time” (Focus Group Interview I). Gina agreed 
and further illustrated: 
I agree [with Julia]. If we can all work together, teachers teaching the same grade. We can share 
the workload and plan for the curriculum for the whole semester. It will make the preparation 
easier and more effective. We’ll be very happy to integrate CALL. (Focus Group Interview I) 
While the above three CALL competencies were observed in participants’ classrooms, it was necessary to 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 156 
clarify with participants in the post-observations interviews in order to verify if teachers’ intentions and 
rationale matched the researchers’ observations. Moreover, participants’ competency in reflection would 
not have been identified had it not been for the back-to-back observations scheduled.  
CONCLUSION 
Participants reported that the TPACK-in-Action CALL workshops helped them develop CALL 
competency to incorporate certain software-based tools, web-based tools, and iPad apps into their 
teaching. In addition, they developed the confidence to push themselves beyond their comfort zone and 
take their CALL integration to a new level. Moreover, participants were observed to have demonstrated 
CALL competencies in their teaching, which indicated that the TPACK-in-Action workshops served the 
purpose of preparing them to transform the knowledge learned into actions. Through comparing and 
contrasting quantitative and qualitative data, participants’ development of CALL competency was clearly 
identified and they appeared to align to the objectives of the workshops where technology should be 
integrated with content and pedagogy in mind and brought into actions. In all, the study yields evidence 
that the TPACK-in-Action CALL workshops specifically designed to help teachers integrate CALL into 
teaching through doing CALL within the TPACK framework holds a great promise for teachers’ 
development and adoption of CALL competency into their teaching actions.  
LIMITATIONS 
However, as with any study, there are limitations that need to be addressed. First, observation was not 
included in the pre-workshop data collection. Collecting baseline information through direct sources at 
the pre-workshop stage will help the researcher understand the participating teachers’ teaching styles and 
actions better. Second, the multiple roles the researcher played, as the instructor, the researcher, and the 
observer, could have influenced the data collected. Though the researcher played no role in the formal 
evaluation system of the participating teachers, they may still have felt that they were being assessed 
during the observations, which might have affected teachers’ participation and performance.  
IMPLICATIONS 
Despite the limitations, the findings of the study have theoretical and pedagogical implications. First, the 
study provides a new perspective on investigating the impact of CALL TE courses through observation. 
Responding to CALL researchers’ call (Egbert et al., 2002; Kessler, 2007; Kilickaya, 2009) to add 
observation as one data source to complement survey and interview data has been found to be a beneficial 
measure in the investigation process, which has shed some important light on the methodology for 
research in CALL teacher education. Triangulating observation data with the self-report data contributes 
to preventing potential discrepancies such as occurred in the Wong and Benson study (2006). Moreover, 
observations can also be used to identify and visualize teachers’ CALL competency and effective CALL 
integration.  
Second, findings also contribute to addressing and conceptualizing CALL competency. Using the 
TPACK framework (Mishra & Koehler, 2006) to guide the design of the workshops suggests that 
effective CALL integration rests on the interaction among the three fundamental types of knowledge: 
content (language), pedagogy, and technology. The workshops helped teachers realize CALL integration 
beyond the traditional technocentric approach. Conceptualizing CALL competency within the TPACK 
framework helps teachers look beyond technology for its own sake and examine the relations between a 
technology, what has to be taught (content), and how it ought to be taught (pedagogy). 
Third, the study proposes that the TPACK-in-Action model be used to guide the design for CALL TE 
courses. The literature on CALL teacher education indicates that there is a need for training models that 
facilitate more successful integration of CALL in the classroom (e.g., Healey et al., 2011). Findings of 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 157 
this study contribute to filling that gap by providing evidence on how the TPACK-in-Action CALL 
workshops helped English teachers in Taiwan developed CALL competency and integrate CALL 
successfully. The TPACK-in-Action CALL workshops provide a useful model that informs the planning 
and design of CALL TE programs and courses. 
 
APPENDIX A: Schedules & Contents Of The TPACK-In-Action Workshops  
 
 
 
*iPad apps 
 
Workshop Content/Language Skills Technology integrated 
1 Course Management, ePortfolio Google Sites  
Google Drive: Docs & 
Forms 
Google Voice Search 
Schoology 
PowerPoint 
2 Vocabulary, Pronunciation 
Listening 
Google Sites  
Spelling City 
YouTube  
Google Drive: Docs & 
Forms 
PowerPoint 
*Dragon Dictation 
*Quick Voice 
Text to Speech 
3 Integrated Skills, Reading & 
Writing 
Google Sites  
Bubbl.us  
PowerPoint 
TitanPad 
Google Drive: Docs & 
Forms 
4 Integrated Skills, Reading, 
Writing, & Oral Communication 
Google Sites  
PowerPoint 
TitanPad 
VoiceThread 
Text to Speech 
iPads 
5 Integrated Skills, Vocabulary, 
Pronunciation, Reading, 
Listening, Writing, 
Google Sites 
PowerPoint 
Google Drive: Docs & 
Forms 
*Dragon Dictation 
*ABC Pocket Phonics 
*QuickVoice 
*Doodle Buddy 
*VoiceThread 
*Paint & Story House 
*iBook 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 158 
APPENDIX B: TPACK-In-Action Observation Instruments 
Date: __________________ 
Start-End Time: __________________ 
Observer(s): ___________________________________________ 
Background Information 
Teacher Name  
Class/Topic 
 
 
Student Level 
 
 
 Number of Students 
 
 
Brief Description of Classroom/Instructional Context: Is it a traditional classroom? Or a lab? 
Describe the settings of the classroom. Are there computers? Projector? Others?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Description of Lesson Procedure (Step by step):  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 159 
During Observation:  
Identify role of technology and TPACK codes 
 
Role of Technologies Incorporated 
Teacher 
Preparation 
 
Teachers use technology to prepare for 
teaching, e.g., produce, store, organize, and 
retrieve teaching and learning materials 
electronically, find instructional materials 
online.  
 
 
 
Teacher 
Productivity 
Teachers use technology to facilitate the 
instruction, e.g., deliver presentations with 
graphics, visuals, and sounds. 
 
Student 
Productivity  
 
Teachers use technology to facilitate 
students’ production in learning activities, 
e.g., facilitate group discussion and lesion, 
lead students in brainstorming and sharing 
ideas. 
 
 
Student-
Centered 
Learning 
Environment  
Teachers use technology to actively engage 
students in individual & collaborative 
learning activities, e.g., engage students in 
collaborative project-based learning,  
 
 
TPACK Codes:  
Observe teacher’s actions and categorize them based on the TPACK codes 
 
TPACK Competency 
700. TPACK_ Scaffolding-
Content 
 
701. TPACK_ Learning_ 
needs 
 
702. TPACK_Assess 
 
 
705. TPACK_ Resources_ 
content 
 
706.TPACK_ Connect_ 
others_ learn_ content 
 
707. TPACK_ Engagement  
708. TPACK_Teacher-
Needs 
 
709. TPACK_Affordance-
Teaching 
 
710. TPACK_Reflect 
 
 
 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 160 
Post Observation 
Questions to be addressed for clarification and further elaboration during interviews 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX C. Sample Codes from the Tai, Crawford, and Wang (2014) codebook. 
 
Code Full Code Definition 
700. TPACK_Use Using technology and 
instructional strategies to 
teach content. 
Teacher uses technology and instructional strategies (i.e., 
inquiry-based learning, Writer’s Workshop) to teach content 
area curriculum (i.e. literacy, math, science, social studies) 
701. 
TPACK_Match 
Affordance 
Selecting technology with 
pedagogy in mind to teach 
content 
Teacher selects technology based on his/her knowledge of 
what the technology can do (affordances) and can not do 
(limitations) in relationship to teaching strategies used while 
teaching content.  
703. 
TPACK_Prepare 
Preparing instructional and 
content-related materials 
with technology. 
Teacher creates instructional and content-related materials 
with technology to use for teaching. Examples include 
setting up technology platform (e.g., wiki, web page, blog), 
supplemental materials (e.g., worksheets, tutorials, locate 
instructional videos), or reading materials (e.g. subtext, 
Google Drive). (Note: This code has nothing to do with 
students/learning.) 
705. 
TPACK_Assess_Le
arning 
Using technology and 
strategies to assess 
students’ content learning 
Teacher uses technology and strategies to assess students’ 
content learning in classroom. 
 
707. TPACK_ 
Engage 
Using technology to 
engage students in 
learning. 
Teacher uses technology to engage (e.g. students show 
motivation or strong focus for the activity) students in 
learning about a specific content area. 
 
 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 161 
NOTES 
1. According to Mohan (2007), a social practice is a combination of knowledge and action, meaning that 
teachers participating in a social practice are required to know (knowledge/reflection) something and 
to do (action) something. Moreover, discourse of reflection could be further divided into specific 
reflection, where participants talked specifically about what happened, i.e., the action, and general 
reflection where participants addressed their thoughts in more general terms that lend insight to 
knowledge of why something was happening. For example, “verb (specifically past tense)” could mark 
discourse of specific reflections while “if/then” could mark discourse of general reflections. 
Identifying specific reflections and general reflections helped determine the unit of meaning (UoM) for 
analysis and sort the interview and observation data into UoMs for coding and analysis (see Figure 3 
for examples of UoMs). 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai is a Postdoctoral Research Associate in Center for Technology in Learning and 
Teaching (CTLT) at Iowa State University in the US. Her main research focuses on CALL, TPACK, and 
CALL teacher education. She is also teaching undergraduate and graduate courses in English and School 
of Education. 
E-mail: shujutai@gmail.com 
 
REFERENCES 
Al-Jarf, R. S. (2004). The effects of web-based learning on struggling EFL college writers. Foreign 
Language Annals, 37(1), 49–57. 
Almekhlafi, A. G. (2006). The effect of computer assisted language learning (CALL) on United Arab 
Emirates English as a foreign language (EFL) school students’ achievement and attitude. Journal of 
Interactive Learning Research, 17(2), 121–142. Chesapeake, VA: AACE. Retrieved from 
http://www.editlib.org/p/6218 
Chapelle, C. A. (2003). English language learning and technology. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins. 
Chapelle, C. & Hegelheimer, V. (2004). The English language teacher in the 21st century.  In S. Fotos & 
C. Browne (Eds.), New Perspectives on CALL for Second Language Classrooms (pp. 299–316). Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Chisholm, I. M. & Beckett, E. C. (2003). Teacher preparation for equitable access through the integration 
of TESOL standards, multiple intelligences and technology.  Technology, Pedagogy and Education, 
12(2), 249–275. 
Chuang, H.-H. & Huang, F.-C. (2012). Exploring primary and secondary school teachers’percevied 
technological pedagogical content Knowledge (TPACK) in Taiwan. Paper presented at 2012 Taiwan 
Education Research Conference at Natioanl Sun Yat-sen University. Dec 19-22, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. 
Cox, S. & Graham, C. (2009). An elaborated model of the TPACK framework. In I. Gibson et al. (Eds.), 
Proceedings of Society for Information Technology & Teacher Education International Conference 2009 
(pp. 4042–4049). Chesapeake, VA: AACE. 
Creswell, J. W. and Plano Clark, V. L. (2007). Designing and Conducting Mixed Methods Research. 
California: Sage Publications, Inc. 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 162 
Desjardins, F. & Peters, M. (2007). Single-course approach versus a program approach to develop 
technological competence in preservice language teachers. .  In M. Kassen, R. Lavine, K., Murphy-Judy, 
& M. Peters, (Eds.), Preparing and Developing Technology-Proficient L2 Teachers (pp. 265–294).  San 
Marcos, TX: Calico. 
Dörnyei, Z. (2007). Research Methods in Applied Linguistics. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.  
Egbert, J., Paulus, T., & Nakamichi, Y. (2002).  The impact of CALL instruction on classroom computer 
use: A foundation for rethinking technology in teacher education.  Language Learning & Technology, 
6(3), 108–126. 
Hampel, R.,  & Stickler, U. (2005).  New skills for new classrooms: Training tutors to teach languages 
online.  Computer Assisted Language Learning, 18(4), 311–326. 
Healey, D., Hanson-Smith, E., Hubbard, P., Ioannou-Georgiou, S., Kessler, G., & Ware, P. (2011). 
TESOL Technology Standards: Description, Implementation, Integration. Alexandria, VA: Teachers of 
English to Speakers of Other Languages. 
Hegelheimer, V. (2006). When the technology course is required. In P. Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), 
Teacher Education in CALL (pp. 117–133).  Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins. 
Hernandez-Ramos, P. (2005). If not here, where? Understanding teachers’ use of technology in Silicon 
Valley schools.  Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 38(1), 39–64. 
Hong, K. H. (2010). CALL teacher education as an impetus for L2 teachers in integrating technology. 
ReCALL, 22, 53–69. 
Hoven, D. (2007). The affordances of technology for student teachers to shape their teacher education 
experience. In M. A. Kassen, R. Z. Lavine, K. Murphy-Judy & M. Peters (Eds.), Preparing and 
Developing Technology-Proficient L2 Teachers (pp. 133–163). San Marcos, TX: CALICO.  
Hoven, D. (2006). Designing for disruption: Remodelling a blended course in technology in (language) 
teacher education. In Proceedings of the 23rd Annual ascilite Conference: Who’s learning? Whose 
technology? (pp. 339–349), The University of Sydney. 
Hubbard, P. (2008).  CALL and the future of language teacher education.  Calico Journal, 25(2), 175–
188. 
Hughes, J. (2005).  The role of teacher knowledge and learning experiences in forming technology-
integrated pedagogy.  Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 13(2), 277–302. 
Jung, Y. S. (2001). Toward an effective EFL teacher development program focusing on multimedia and 
the Internet. English Teaching, 55(1), 47–91. 
Kamhi-Stein, L. D. (2000).  Looking to the future of TESOL teacher education: Web-based bulletin board 
discussions in a methods course.  TESOL Quarterly, 34(3), 423–455. 
Kessler, G. (2007).  Formal and informal CALL preparation and teacher attitude toward technology.  
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 20(2), 173–188. 
Kessler, G. (2006). Accessing CALL teacher training: What are we doing and what could we do better? In 
P. Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher Education in CALL (pp. 23–42).  Philadelphia, PA: John 
Benjamins. 
Kessler, G. & Plakans, L. (2008).  Does teachers’ confidence with CALL equal innovative and integrated 
use? Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(3), 269–282. 
Kilickaya, F. (2009). The effect of a computer-assisted language learning course on pre-service English 
teachers’ practice teaching. Educational Studies, 35(4), 437–448. 
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 163 
Kozma, R. B. (2003). Technology and classroom practices: An international study. Journal of Research 
on Technology in Education, 36(1), 1–14. 
Lam, Y. (2000).  Technophilia vs. Technophobia: A preliminary look at why second-language teachers do 
not use technology in their classrooms. Canadian Modern Language Review, 56(3), 390–420. 
Lee, S., & Son, J. M. (2006). The use of ICT in Korean middle school English classrooms: Practices and 
challenges.  English Language Teaching, 18(1), 49–73. 
Levy, M., & Stockwell, G. (2006). CALL Dimensions: Options and Issues in Computer-Assisted 
Language Learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Levy, M. (1997). A rationale for teacher education and CALL: The holistic view and its implications. 
Computer and the Humanities, 30, 293–302. 
Liu, Y., Theodore, P., & Lavelle, E. (2004). Experimental effects of online instruction on teachers’ 
concerns about technology integration.  International Journal of Instructional Technology and Distance 
Learning, 1(1), Retrieved from http://www.itdl.org/journal/Jan_04/article03.htm 
Mackey, A., & Gass, S. M. (2005). Second language research: Methodology and design. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erblaum. 
Mishra, P. & Koehler, M. J. (2006). Technological pedagogical content knowledge: A framework for 
integrating technology in teacher knowledge. Teachers College Record, 108(6), 1017–1054.  
Mohan, B. (2007). Knowledge Structures in Social Practices. In J. Cummins & C. Davison (Eds.), 
International Handbook of English Language Teaching (pp. 303–315). Boston, MA: Springer. 
Nobles, S., Dredger, K., & Gerheart, M. D. (2012). Collaboration beyond the classroom walls: Deepening 
learning for students, preservice teachers, teachers, and professors. Contemporary Issues in Technology 
and Teacher Education, 12(4). Retrieved from 
http://www.citejournal.org/vol12/iss4/languagearts/article1.cfm 
Peters, M. (2006). Developing computer competencies for pre-service language teachers: Is one course 
enough? In P. Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher Education in CALL (pp. 153–165).  Philadelphia, PA: 
John Benjamins.  
Polly, D., & Brantley-Dias, L. (2009). TPACK: Where do we go now? TechTrends, 53(5), 46–47. 
Redmond, P., Albion, P., & Maroulis, J. (2005). Intentions vs reality: preservice teachers' ICT integration 
during professional experience. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference of the Society for 
Information Technology & Teacher Education (SITE 2005) (pp. 1566–1571). Association for the 
Advancement of Computing in Education (AACE). 
Reinders, H. (2009).  Technology and second language teacher education.  In A. Bums & J. C. Richards 
(Eds.), The Cambridge Guide to Second Language Teacher Education, (pp. 230–237).  New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Shulman, L. (1987). Knowledge and teaching: Foundation of the new reform. Harvard Educational 
Review, 57(1), 1–22. 
Shoffner, M. (2007). Preservice English teachers and technology: A consideration of weblogs for the 
English classroom. Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education, 7(4). Retrieved from 
http://www.citejournal.org/vol7/iss4/languagearts/article1.cfm 
Slaouti, D. & Motteram, G., (2006). Reconstructing practice: Language teacher education and ICT. In P. 
Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher Education in CALL (pp. 81–97).  Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins. 
Tai, S. J. D., Crawford, D., & Wang, W. (2014). Observe to Understand Teachers’ TPACK: Beyond Self-
Shu-Ju Diana Tai From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 164 
report Data. Unpublished manuscript. 
Tai, S. J. D. (2013). From TPACK-in-Action Workshops to English Classrooms: CALL Competencies 
Developed and Adopted into Classroom Teaching. Graduate Theses and Dissertations. Paper 13335. 
Retrieved from http://lib.dr.iastate.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=4342&context=etd 
Thompson, A & Mishra, P. (2008). Breaking news: TPCK becomes TPACK. Journal of Computing for 
Teacher Educators, 24(2), 38. 
Van Olphen, M. (2007). Digital portfolio: Balancing the academic and professional needs of world 
language teacher candidates.  In M. Kassen, R. Lavine, K., Murphy-Judy, & M. Peters, (Eds.), Preparing 
and Developing Technology-Proficient L2 Teachers (pp. 265–294).  San Marcos, TX: Calico. 
Wong, L. & Benson, P., (2006). In-service CALL education: What happens after the course is over? In P. 
Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher Education in CALL (pp. 251–264).  Philadelphia, PA: John 
Benjamins. 
 
