Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2015/schreiber.pdf 
October 2015, Volume 19, Number 3 
pp. 69–87 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 69 
“I AM WHAT I AM”:  
MULTILINGUAL IDENTITY AND DIGITAL TRANSLANGUAGING 
Brooke Ricker Schreiber, Pennsylvania State University 
This paper presents a case study of the multilingual writing practices of a Serbian 
university student on Facebook, examining how he uses multiple varieties of English and 
Serbian, images, and video to shape his online identity and establish membership in local 
and global communities. Drawing on data from stimulated-recall interviews, online 
participant observation, and rhetorical analysis, this study shows how Aleksandar, a hip-
hop artist, appropriates hip-hop codes and employs the “gate-keeping” function of posting 
links (Baek, Holton, Harp, & Yaschur, 2011) by embedding links to music videos in his 
own highly personal code-mixed text in order to establish himself as a distinctly Serbian 
member of the global hip-hop community. The findings suggest that Aleksandar’s 
language practices and attitudes might be better understood as translingual (Canagarajah, 
2011), as the student integrates diverse linguistic and semiotic resources into a unified 
expression of identity, relying on the multimodal affordances of digital writing to 
accomplish his communicative goals. However, these sophisticated textual practices go 
undervalued in his EFL writing courses, where formal, monolingual, non-digital literacy 
remains primary (Saxena, 2011). These findings suggest a need to re-evaluate what it 
means to have a second language-mediated identity, and to expand the focus of EFL 
writing pedagogy. 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English 
Keywords: ICT Literacies, Identity, Multimodal Texts, Social Networking, Technology-
Mediated Communication 
APA Citation: Schreiber, B. R. (2015). “I am what I am”: Multilingual identity and 
digital translanguaging. Language Learning & Technology, 19(3), 69–87. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2015/schreiber.pdf 
Received: August 5, 2014; Accepted: February 18, 2015; Published: October 1, 2015 
Copyright: © Brooke Ricker Schreiber 
INTRODUCTION 
no it doesn't matter if it's part Serbian, part English 
the people who know me 
will know what i'm talking about 
(Aleksandar, interview) 
It has been well established that digital writing, particularly writing on social networking sites, creates 
important spaces for second language play, development, and identity work. Digital writing creates vital 
connections across national borders for young people in diaspora and other multilingual communities, 
providing both the means and the motivation to write in multiple languages (e.g., Androutsopoulos, 2013; 
Berry, Hawisher, & Selfe, 2012; DePew & Miller-Cochran, 2010; Klimanova & Dembovskaya, 2013; 
Lam, 2000, 2004; You, 2011). The writing in these digital spaces is highly creative, a rich mix of 
linguistic and semiotic modes that reflects the reality of life in multilingual contexts, bending to the needs 
of diverse interlocutors and pushing the boundaries of academic conceptions of language (e.g., Fraiberg, 
2010; You, 2011), giving young people the opportunity to construct identities which may not be available 
to them in their formal, monolingual language classrooms (Lam, 2000, 2004; Saxena, 2011; Sharma, 
2012).   
Brooke Ricker Schreiber Multilingual Identity and Digital Translanguaging 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
Most recently, the rising popularity of social networking sites, in particular the internationally ubiquitous 
Facebook, has spurred research on identity construction in these communicative spaces. Though such 
work generally conceptualizes students’ linguistic identities as fluid and dynamic, it also tends to treat 
linguistic identities as fixed to particular languages; that is, it tends to view multilingual writers as 
deliberately switching between languages in order to communicate with different audiences or display 
aspects of their identities. For example, in Chen (2013), two Chinese graduate students use Mandarin on 
Facebook to connect with Chinese-speaking friends and to index a Chinese cultural identity, whereas their 
posts in English are aimed at “American” friends and index an academic or professional identity (p.152). 
Similarly, in DePew and Miller-Cochran (2010), multilingual student writers isolate their linguistic 
identities from one another by using separate social networking sites in different languages.    
Yet for some multilingual writers, this division of identities by first and second (and third and fourth) 
languages seems insufficient to explain the intricate intermingling of language resources so evident in 
online spaces. The excerpt from an interview with Serbian university student and rap artist Aleksandar1 
which begins this article indicates an approach to language that moves past a writer choosing one 
language to address one audience. When composing online, Aleksandar mixes linguistic codes freely, 
drawing upon his full linguistic repertoire, so that the specific languages used become for him 
secondary—they “don’t matter” when stacked up against his relationship(s) to his audience. In so doing, 
Aleksandar is evincing translingualism: “the ability of multilingual speakers to shuttle between languages, 
treating the diverse languages that form their repertoires as an integrated system” (Canagarajah, 2011, p. 
401). Attitudes such as Aleksandar’s suggest the need to reconsider our conceptions of how students 
understand language use and identity in their digital writing—and what it might mean to have a second 
language identity online.  
The purpose of this paper is to examine one student’s use of multiple linguistic codes and semiotic 
resources on Facebook through the theoretical concept of translingualism. Adopting a qualitative case 
study approach, this paper presents Aleksandar’s linguistic history, online composing processes, and 
perceptions of his own writing, exploring his portrayal of an identity which has both local and global 
resonance. The primary focus is on how Aleksandar exploits the multimodal nature of writing on a social 
networking site to support his translingual approach to language, allowing him to accomplish his 
communicative goals with a linguistically diverse audience. This case study works to complicate our 
understandings of the relationship between first and second language identity, exposing the deep gap 
between students’ lived literacy practices and the narrow conception of language use still widely held in 
language classrooms (DePew & Miller-Cochran, 2010; Saxena, 2011; Sharma, 2012). As Chen (2013) 
points out, “exploration of multilingual writers’ use and appropriation of various symbolic resources in 
online communities … contribute[s] to our knowledge of the interdependency between literacy, identity, 
and Internet-based communication” (p. 144), and in turn helps to make our literacy teaching practices 
more inclusive of diverse forms of digital literacy.  
Multilingual Identity Online 
The current view of identity adopted by second-language researchers is a dynamic, post-structuralist one, 
incorporating notions of performativity, positioning, discourse, and negotiation (Norton, 2000). 
According to Block (2007), identities can be thought of as “socially constructed, self-conscious, ongoing 
narratives that individuals perform, interpret, and project … identities are about negotiating new subject 
positions at the crossroads of the past, present and future” (p. 27). 
It is precisely this definition of identity as fluid and constructed which is taken up in research about the 
online writing practices of multilinguals (e.g. Androutsopoulos, 2013; Chen, 2013; DePew & Miller-
Cochran, 2010; Saxena, 2011; Sharma, 2012; You, 2011). These studies have highlighted the ways in 
which students’ digital literacy practices in English, involving high levels of code-mixing, invented 
spellings and transliterations, and other forms of linguistic creativity, express new, often hybrid identities. 
Brooke Ricker Schreiber Multilingual Identity and Digital Translanguaging 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
Online composing provides space for students’ appropriation and re-imagining of standard forms of 
English, a process inextricably linked to their identity formation. For example, You (2011) investigated 
the creative use of English by Chinese white-collar workers on electronic bulletin boards and found that 
these young bilinguals mixed a variety of Chinese and English codes to create an “domestic diaspora” 
community (p.411); by using nonstandard, abbreviated, and colloquial English forms they were able to 
create informal, relaxed personae, in sharp contrast to their formal professional selves. As Lam (2000) 
puts it, “students appropriate elements from a diversity of discourses to create a new, written voice” (p. 
460), which she also calls a “textual identity” (p. 464).   
These textual identities have complex relationships to students’ offline lives, and in many cases, digital 
writing provides students a way to express identities not available to them in school settings. As DePew 
and Miller-Cochran (2010) point out, the identities of second language (L2) writers in traditional 
language classrooms tend to be essentialized, reduced to sets of language skills. In contrast, digital writing 
is a wide-open space for identity creation using multiple language resources, which in turn serves to 
further the development of L2 literacy. A classic example is Eva Lam’s (2000) study of a Chinese 
immigrant student who escaped his high school classification as a deficient ESL learner by creating an 
online identity as an expert in Japanese pop music. More recently, Klimanova and Dembovskaya (2013) 
found that using a social networking site in L2 Russian allowed students to move past the identity of L2 
learner placed on them in the classroom and into the identity of L2 user—one that much more closely 
resonates with their understandings of themselves. When school contexts demand that students adhere to 
formal and strictly monolingual norms, students may take their language play to the unregulated spaces of 
Facebook, where their hybrid language practices are embraced by their interlocutors (Saxena, 2011). The 
use of L2 codes, particularly English, in social networking sites can further serve to index worldly, 
cosmopolitan identities (Sharma, 2012). In other words, social networking sites create spaces for students 
to create or project identities more competent, more fluid, and less limited than those of language 
students.   
Crucially, these new identities are created both in search of and in collaboration with a “transborder 
network of peers” (Lam, 2000, p. 475).  Berry et al.’s (2012) study of the digital literacy practices of 
young “transnationals,” those with strong connections to multiple nations, suggests that global identities 
are “forged, developed, shaped, and sustained within digital communication networks,” and that such 
identities are created “using bits and pieces of multiple languages” (n.p.). Likewise, Chen (2013) finds 
that the use of multiple languages in social networking sites for sojourned international students serves to 
index various aspects of multilingual writers’ identities in communication with both local and home 
communities.   
Identity on Facebook 
Social networking sites (SNS) are distinct among platforms for online writing in the ways in which they 
support and shape identity construction. boyd and Ellison (2008) define SNS by three features: they allow 
users to construct a profile, maintain a list of connections to other users, and follow the path of those 
connections to find others within the site. According to Gonzales and Hancock (2008), SNS include two 
key components for online identity formation: the presentation of demographic information (a name, 
birthday, photograph, etc.) and the potential for an audience. SNS such as Facebook are thus both 
inherently communicative and always at least semi-public, as users can see both the activity of their own 
“friends” and those friends’ connections; it is this interaction with an audience that prompts and refines 
the writer’s identity. 
In SNS, both multimodality and intertextuality are crucial parts of the construction of identity. SNS users 
represent themselves implicitly and explicitly by selecting images and text for their homepages and by 
sharing links to articles, images, and videos on other sites (Bolander & Locher, 2010). Rhetorically, 
linking serves as a way of re-entextualizing others’ words and ideas into a more personal frame, as users 
Brooke Ricker Schreiber Multilingual Identity and Digital Translanguaging 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
are able to describe and comment on the links they post. Baek, et al. (2011), in their study of the 
motivation for using links on SNS, conclude that Facebook positions each user “as a gatekeeper or filter 
of information for a given community (i.e.,‘friends’)” (p. 2244). Because users share links to information 
they find significant in some way, linking to information demonstrates a user’s attitudes, tastes, and 
beliefs; linking to information thus “serves as a self-representation tool” (p. 2246).   
Multimodal affordances and the use of multiple languages fundamentally characterize the act of writing 
online for multilingual young people (Androutsopoulos, 2013), and it is precisely these elements which 
are missing in the writing students do in school settings. DePew and Miller-Cochran (2010) note that “the 
writing practices of Web 2.0, and the complex literacies they support, have not been readily embraced—
or valued—by the academy” (p. 274), and this is especially true in many English as a foreign language 
(EFL) contexts, where spoken language takes primacy and writing tends to be viewed as a means of 
practicing and perfecting grammar rather than expressing opinions or making new meaning (Leki, 2001). 
In other words, the language ideology generally found in classrooms is fundamentally monolingual with 
an emphasis on correctness; in online spaces, multilingual creativity is the rule.  
Theorizing Multilingualism: Code-Switching to Translingualism  
Traditional conceptions of bi- and multilingualism are essentially additive: they conceptualize each 
language as a separate system and multilingual speakers as double or parallel monolinguals. These 
understandings have been increasingly challenged in recent years by approaches which instead view 
individuals as possessing “a complex of specific semiotic resources” (Blommaert, 2010, p. 102), from 
which they pick and choose to accomplish their communicative goals. The concept of translanguaging has 
emerged as part of this set of new theorizations, which challenge both “the boundaries around languages” 
(Creese & Blackledge, 2010, p.106) and the “essentialist restrictions in previous theorising of 
multilingualism” (Androutsopoulos, 2013, p.2).   
Drawn from research in bilingual education, translanguaging can be defined as a speaker using all of his 
or her linguistic resources “to make meaning, transmit information, and perform identities,” such that 
individual “languages” appear as part of a single integrated system (Creese & Blackledge, 2010, p.109). 
Translanguaging therefore encompasses a wide range of multilingual language practices, including code-
switching and language mixing (Androutsopoulos, 2013). Canagarajah (2011) has proposed the term 
codemeshing as “the realization of translanguaging in texts” (p.403), extending the concept of 
translanguaging to include the use of registers and dialects within languages, as well as nonlinguistic 
resources like symbols. The use of these practices in digital spaces has been theorized by Fraiberg (2010) 
as code-mashing, “the complex blending of multimodal and multilingual texts and literacy practices” (p. 
102), and with regards to SNS, by Androutsopoulos (2013) as “networked multilingualism”, which covers 
the use of multilingual resources as shaped by “digital writtenness, access to the global mediascape…and 
orientation to networked audiences” (p. 17).  Each concept offers valuable insight into digital literacy 
practices, capturing writers’ use of diverse resources.  
In this paper, I adopt the term code-mashing to describe Aleksandar’s overall performance on Facebook, 
in order to highlight the multimodality of his digital literacy practices, and the term codemeshing in my 
analysis of Aleksandar’s digital writing.2 I argue that Aleksandar evinces attitudes which can best be 
understood as translingual, considering translanguaging as referring to a set of practices, and translingual 
as referring to the beliefs about language that underlie those practices—an orientation to languages as 
neither discrete nor stable, but dynamic and negotiated (Matsuda, 2014). As a theoretical frame, 
translanguaging places emphasis on the process of communication, rather than the product, and so 
demands research on “the strategies people adopt to produce and interpret” translingual texts 
(Canagarajah, 2013b, p. 10). The aim of this paper, therefore, is first to understand how this writer 
understands his own use of language and communicative purposes in his Facebook writing and how, for 
him, integrating these linguistic codes is related to his construction of local and global identities, and 
Brooke Ricker Schreiber Multilingual Identity and Digital Translanguaging 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
second to extend the body of work on digital multilingual composing by applying the concept of 
translingualism to this writer’s practices.  
METHODOLOGY 
Participant Selection 
This case study emerged from a larger study of university students’ multilingual writing on Facebook. 
Participants were selected from the English department at a Serbian university where I had previously 
been a visiting lecturer. During the larger study, Aleksandar stood out not only as a highly engaged user 
of Facebook, regularly posting multiple times a day, but as one of the participants who most consistently 
used both multiple linguistic codes and multiple semiotic modes in his posts. In addition, Aleksandar’s 
Facebook activity constituted notably visible and thematic identity work—his page overflowed with hip-
hop images, links, and textual references, while his writing combined his native dialect of Serbian with 
standard Serbian and English codes and a heavy dose of hip-hop slang. In short, Aleksandar’s use of 
Facebook appeared to be deliberately crafted to portray his identity as a Serbian rap artist.   
Observation 
As with many of my former students, Aleksandar had added me to his Facebook network in order to keep 
in contact, and we often read and commented on each other’s posts. I was thus able to observe his writing 
as a participant in a shared online community. With Aleksandar’s permission, I reviewed his Facebook 
postings from April to December 2012, focusing primarily on status updates and information sharing 
posts (links to other online content), as these types of posts are most directly linked to identity creation 
(Baek et al., 2011; Knobel & Lankshear, 2008). I also observed his use of images, specifically his profile 
photos and homepage banner, and the text in his “about me” section on his homepage, as these constitute 
implicit and explicit identity claims (Zhao et. al, 2008, quoted. in Bolander & Locher, 2010). In order to 
focus on the process of translingual composition, I then selected 10 examples of what I perceived to be 
writing employing multiple linguistic codes—not coincidentally, all were links to hip-hop music videos 
presented with Aleksandar’s commentary (see Table 1). The posts were captured via screenshots to 
preserve their multimodal quality.   
Interview 
The interview was qualitative and semi-structured. The first half, modeled on both the literacy interviews 
in Lee (2007) and the elicitation of literacy narratives from Berry et al. (2012), addressed the participant’s 
digital literacy and language learning history and current digital composing practices (see Appendix). In 
the second half, the selected text samples were shown to the participant, who was asked to reflect on the 
process of writing each post—a way of investigating his perceptions of his rhetorical situation, including 
his purpose for creating the post and intended audience.  
The interview was conducted in English and lasted approximately three hours. Aleksandar requested to be 
interviewed via Facebook chat, and excerpts presented here have been formatted to preserve the extra-
linguistic features (use of emoticons and line spacing). Data from the interviews and writing samples, 
together with notes from participant-observations, were further examined using a grounded content 
analysis approach (Strauss & Corbin, 1990), in which patterns and themes that emerge from the data are 
identified, compared, and coded. Analysis focused on themes that emerged around Aleksandar’s beliefs 
about language, use of linguistic resources, and perception of his audience on the SNS. Finally, 
Aleksandar had the opportunity to read and comment on the analysis, as an informal member check. 
Research Setting 
Academic Environment  
The Serbian university system is based on a European model: students take entrance exams for specific 
Brooke Ricker Schreiber Multilingual Identity and Digital Translanguaging 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
departments and once enrolled, follow a mostly set curriculum. Proficiency goals for the students follow 
the Common European Framework of Reference, such that students should be at a B2 (upper 
intermediate) level when they enter, and a C2 (advanced proficient) level by the time they graduate 
(Council of Europe, 2001). In the English department, writing instruction takes place most visibly in each 
semester’s required writing course, one of a set of three skills-based courses that form the core of the 
English curriculum. Assessment for these courses is almost exclusively through timed essay exams which 
are graded on linguistic accuracy and sophistication, along with adherence to the essay form, so that 
writing instruction tends to emphasize learning essay structures, improving vocabulary, and practicing 
timed writing. As a result, the students’ focus is on producing timed, formal, grammatically correct 
writing for exam purposes, as is typical across EFL writing contexts (Leki, 2001; Reichelt, 2009; You, 
2004). It is in sharp contrast to these deeply monolingual academic writing practices that students like 
Aleksandar forge their multilingual identities online (Saxena, 2011).  
Linguistic Environment 
Serbia, the largest of the former Yugoslav nations, is located in the central Balkans. The official language, 
Serbian, was formerly considered one dialect of Serbo-Croatian; since the breakup of Yugoslavia and 
ensuing civil wars in the early 1990’s, the governments of the newly independent nations have moved to 
differentiate national languages, though the imposed changes and the actual boundaries between 
languages remain extremely controversial (Greenberg, 2004). Serbian is therefore politically difficult to 
use with speakers from the other former Yugoslav nations as well as with other than Serbian diasporic 
communities; it is not widely spoken outside of the region. Serbian is therefore, in Blommaert’s (2010) 
terms, on a “lower”, more local scale.   
English, arguably the highest-scaled of all modern languages, has permeated deeply into Serbian society. 
It is required for all students as a foreign language beginning in the first grade, and private English-
language schools are common throughout the country. English media, particularly music and television 
shows, are highly prevalent and are subtitled rather than dubbed.  Young people regularly use English-
language websites, including search engines, news sites, and social networking.   
For countries on the global periphery, English has powerful associations with “being modern, educated, 
and western” (Saxena, 2011, p. 288). In post-socialist or -communist states, knowledge of English is 
additionally seen as the ticket to membership in the global free market economy: traveling, getting a good 
job, and becoming an expert in technical fields (see, for example, Slobodanka, 2005). Prendergast (2008) 
has pointed out, however, that for many citizens of post-communist nations, English has become a 
double-edged sword, offering international mobility at the expense of the local language. The question for 
Aleksandar, then, is this: how can he “jump scales” (Blommaert, 2010) to participate in a global hip-hop 
community without abandoning his distinctly local set of linguistic resources?   
ALEKSANDAR’S PRACTICES 
Digital Literacy History and Self-Presentation 
From the very beginning, Aleksandar’s use of computers has been intertwined with both English and hip-
hop music. Aleksandar was born in 1990, just at the advent of the Internet, and he was introduced to 
computers early in life, at approximately eight years of age. This early exposure was entirely extra-
curricular: he remembers playing computer games at a friend’s house, where the two boys taught 
themselves how to operate the computer. The acquisition of his first computer was such a momentous 
occasion for Aleksandar that he still remembers the exact date: February 4, 2003. His excitement then was 
primarily because of the access it gave him to hip-hop media, and his use of the internet remains focused 
on hip-hop: listening to rap, watching movies, and now recording and mixing his own music.  
His first experience with Facebook came in 2009. Though initially he wasn’t very engaged by the site, he 
Brooke Ricker Schreiber Multilingual Identity and Digital Translanguaging 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
quickly discovered that Facebook was a means to explore the hip-hop music community via fan pages and 
to learn about upcoming album releases and tour dates. He reports that he now uses Facebook every day, 
and that the vast majority of his friends use Facebook. This includes monoligual Serbian speakers, 
bilingual Serbian-English speakers like his fellow students, and international friends who do not speak 
Serbian, primarily rap artists from other countries. He uses Facebook to maintain communication with all 
of these groups and has used it to facilitate his participation in an international “mix tape project,” in 
which rappers from several countries collaborate by exchanging lyrics and beats. Thus, Aleksandar’s 
perceived audience on Facebook is highly international and linguistically diverse.  
In time, Aleksandar’s use of Facebook came to include the promotion of his own music group—a rap 
duo. He considers Facebook an effective promotion tool, because it is free (unlike other possible venues, 
such as hosting an individual site) and reaches both his own network of friends and rap fans more 
generally via his group’s fan page. He describes his use of Facebook in Excerpt 1. 
Excerpt 1  
B: what do you mostly use [Facebook] for now? 
A: promoting my music, communicating with my friends, hooking up with 
 promiscuous young ladies (hoes) :D and spreading hip hop culture 
 :D 
 and love :D 
 spreading love 
 :D 
Aleksandar’s purposes can be read both in the content and the style of his reply: he uses Facebook to 
construct for himself a public, hip-hop identity, indexed here by his use of slang expressions (“hooking 
up”, “hoes”, and “spreading love”). This linguistic styling was consistent throughout the interactions I 
observed and participated in on his Facebook wall. In his interview with me, his former teacher, 
Aleksandar is playfully exaggerating a stereotypical hip-hop persona, as suggested by the heavy use of 
laughing emoticons (:D) and juxtaposition of slang with elevated vocabulary.   
 
Figure 1. Banner and profile picture. 
Aleksandar’s hip-hop presentation is furthered by the use of hip-hop images and text on his Facebook 
Brooke Ricker Schreiber Multilingual Identity and Digital Translanguaging 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
wall. During my observation, the images featured in the customizable banner at the top of his home page 
changed regularly, but exclusively displayed cover art from rap or hip-hop albums and photographs of rap 
artists, images which often appeared as his profile picture as well. Figure 1 shows a typical example.  
Here, both the banner image and his profile picture display Aleksandar’s strong affiliation with the hip-
hop community. The favorite quotes listed on his information page throughout my observation were 
exclusively rap lyrics in English.   
However, the most signficant way in which Aleksandar signals his participation in the global hip-hop 
community is by positioning himself as, in Baek et al.’s (2011) term, “a gatekeeper” (p. 2244) for 
information about hip-hop through the posting of links to music videos. During my observation, these 
types of posts appeared to comprise the vast majority of the content on his wall. To quantify this 
impression, I tallied Aleksandar’s posts from three sample months and found that posting links to music 
videos made up on average approximately 80% of the content he posted. 
Table 1. Types of Posts 
 April 2012 August 2012 December 2012 
Total posts 35  31  77  
Links to videos 29 (82%) 18  (58%) 68  (88%) 
 with text 13  15  41  
 without text 18    3  27  
Other posts   6 (18%) 13 (42%)   9  (12%) 
Though posting links to music videos is typical for Facebook users, the fact that they make up such a 
large proportion of Aleksandar’s content is somewhat unusual (see, for comparison, Bolander & Locher, 
2010), which points to Aleksandar’s engagement with Facebook specifically in order to connect with the 
hip-hop community.   
Multimodal Re-entextualization 
In a digitally-mediated world of global cultural flows, Pennycook (2003) argues, hip-hop is among the 
most truly global phenomena, a “global urban subculture”, in which the use of English juxtaposed with 
local codes creates both “global citizenry and rap identities” (p. 516). Higgins (2009), in her study of 
rappers in East Africa, has theorized this juxtaposition as a form of re-entextualization. Drawing on 
Bakhtin’s (1981) concept of polyphony, re-entextualization describes the process of placing a piece of 
discourse into a new context and thus imbuing it with new meaning, layered on top of previous meanings. 
Higgins (2009) sees it in the hip-hop practices of sampling, as well as the appropriation of African-
American Vernacular English (AAVE) codes, which artists use “to create a simultaneously global and 
local identity for themselves” (p.94)—a goal Aleksandar appears to share.   
However, unlike the multilingual rap artists studied by Higgins (2009) and Pennycook (2003, 2010), 
Aleksandar does not appropriate English codes in his lyrics. A survey of the lyrics posted on his group’s 
website reveals that aside from a few brand names (i.e. Armani and Nike Air), the lyrics are written 
exclusively in Serbian. As a person with a long and rich exposure to English-language hip-hop, 
Aleksandar would be more than capable of mixing AAVE into his rap, as is commonly practiced in global 
hip-hop. In fact, he once produced a collaborative rap entirely in English, but the other artists weren’t 
satisfied enough with their own use of English to publicize it. Aleksandar chooses to rap about Serbian 
Brooke Ricker Schreiber Multilingual Identity and Digital Translanguaging 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
themes in the Serbian language; rather than integrating African-American artists’ codes to show his 
affiliation with global hip-hop, Aleksandar has appropriated the artistic form itself.    
In his online persona, Aleksandar’s participation in what Higgins (2009) calls “the global hip-hop nation” 
(p.93) revolves around re-entextualization via the linking feature of Facebook. As described above, by far 
the most frequent type of post on Aleksandar’s Facebook page is the posting of a link to a rap or hip-hop 
video, typically in English. Aleksandar regularly posts videos without any accompanying text, and simply 
placing the videos into the general frame of his Facebook wall is arguably a form of re-entextualization, 
as he manipulates the positioning of internationally circulating texts (Fraiberg, 2010). However, for the 
purposes of this analysis, I will focus on how Aleksandar uses textual frames.   
In the interview, Aleksandar reported that his textual frames tend to echo the language of the posted link 
(Excerpt 2).  
Excerpt 2  
B: are there some topics where you use more English, do you think? 
A: hm... 
 hip hop definitely 
 since i prefer listening to American hip hop 
 so whenever i post a hip hop song i usually comment in English or post some  
 of the lyrics 
 which are also in English 
Like the multilingual students in Androutsopoulos’s (2013) study, whose “language choices for video 
taglines often align to the audio-visual content of the posted video” (p.13), and who frequently quote 
lyrics from the videos in those taglines, Aleksandar often incorporates content from the link into his 
framing of the videos he posts (see Figures 3 and 4). However, in contrast to Androutsopoulos’s 
participants, it is this framing of posting videos which elicits Aleksandar’s codemeshed writing, rather 
than writing textual status updates. All the examples I found of his writing using multiple linguistic codes 
appeared as introductions for these music videos, as in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Malo rnb malo chill out post. 
Here, the video “Round and Round” by Jonell is re-entextualized into a codemeshed frame drawing on 
Brooke Ricker Schreiber Multilingual Identity and Digital Translanguaging 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
Serbian and AAVE-style English codes. Specifically, the Serbian adverb malo (a little, some) is combined 
with the English borrowing rnb (rhythm and blues) and the hip-hop expression chill out to describe 
Aleksandar’s own evaluation of the video. When I asked Aleksandar about his thought process in 
composing this post, he commented that he hadn’t intended to compose in multiple languages. Rather, the 
lexical items he needed simply happened to originate in English (Excerpt 3). 
Excerpt 3  
A: well frankly i couldn't remember of way to say RNB in Serbian :D 
B: haha 
 is there a word for it even? 
A: yeah 
 RNB 
 :D 
The expression RNB has been adopted in Serbian as the name for the type of music, so that the presence 
of the name (and the music itself) reflects global flows of culture and language (Appadurai, 1990). 
Aleksandar’s focus in the writing of the post was not on using a particular language, but on 
communicating with his network of friends—bringing this video to the attention of his audience, 
presenting his assessment of it as a knowledgeable member of the hip-hop community. He drew on a 
Serbian grammatical construction and lexical items originating in both English and Serbian to accomplish 
his rhetorical goal.   
Aleksandar’s interlocutors take up this multilingual re-entextualization in various ways. While some 
respond simply by using the “like” function, others comment in Serbian or in hip-hop influenced English, 
as in the following example: 
Brooke Ricker Schreiber Multilingual Identity and Digital Translanguaging 
 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
 
Figure 3. 20 godina kasnije post. 
Here, Aleksandar’s Serbian introduction of the album as being 20 godina kasnije (20 years later) is 
meshed into his AAVE-style approval of the artist Dr. Dre’s album The Chronic (“The Chronic 
4eva…Long Live Dr. Dre”). Here, as in Androutsopoulos (2013), Aleksandar has taken up the song’s title 
in his framing, code-meshing his own words with linguistic resources freely available on the web. A 
fellow rapper aligns to the hip-hop slang in his comment on the video, and Aleksandar then further replies 
in kind. This re-entextualization, then, also achieves Aleksandar’s communicative purposes; he has 
brought the music to the attention of the members of his community and received uptake.     
Perhaps the most intricate example of re-entextualization is one which blends multimodality with 
intertextuality, as Aleksandar appropriates not only the link to a video but also writing in English about it: 
 
Figure 4. Late rainy night post. 
The introductory text reads:  
Brooke Ricker Schreiber Multilingual Identity and Digital Translanguaging 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
citam za ovu pesmu neki clanak, kaze da ima “late night jazz vibe”… Bogami bas mi je  dobra uz ovu 
late rainy night...(I’m reading some article about this song, it says it has a “late night jazz vibe”… By 
God it’s really good for me on this late rainy night.)  
Here, Aleksandar has introduced a link to an English language hip-hop video by the artist Jay-Z with 
code-meshed writing in standard Serbian, his home dialect, and English. He quotes an article he was 
reading in English online, which describes the song as having a “late night jazz vibe”—a phrase he re-
entextualizes by not only embedding it in a Serbian sentence, but also by repeating it with a slight 
variation to describe his own situation (from “late night jazz vibe” to “late rainy night”). Reflecting on the 
context of this writing, Aleksandar wrote:  
Excerpt 4  
A: i was listening to jay-z's album that night 
 and when i heard that song 
 i wanted to find out which song was sampled for that beat 
 and then i ran into an article 
 that said that the song has 
 "a late night jazz vibe" 
 :D 
 and i was impressed because it was late night 
 it was raining 
 and i love to listen to jazz while it's raining3 
In his framing, Aleksandar describes the embodied physical and emotional experience of his listening, of 
the sensory pleasure of a jazzy song late on a rainy night. He re-entextualizes this video not only into his 
own specific time, place, and mood, but also into a code-meshed linguistic frame. In doing so, he displays 
his informed enjoyment of the genre (he reads about hip-hop), his linguistic repertoire (he does so in 
English and then plays with the phrasing), and his passionate commitment to the art form. 
Aleksandar’s Linguistic Identity 
Though he has studied English in a school setting since about age nine, Aleksandar emphasizes that his 
primary influences in English are extra-curricular: hip-hop movies and music. He describes himself as 
being very comfortable speaking English, which he attributes directly to the influence of American music 
from an extremely young age. He remembers beginning to listen to hip-hop and trying to understand the 
words at the age of six, when he discovered imported hip-hop CDs at a local gym. English is now so 
much a part of his life that he reports feeling no change of identity when moving [“shuttling”, in 
Canagarajah’s (2011) terms] between languages (Excerpt 5). 
Excerpt 5  
B: does it [English] let you be a different person? 
 or the same person, just in another language? 
A: i am what i am, no matter what language i speak or the place i'm at... 
 i just feel so cool being able to understand 
 so much things going on in the world better than other people 
Aleksandar, here, emphasizes the access that English gives him to information, “things going on in the 
Brooke Ricker Schreiber Multilingual Identity and Digital Translanguaging 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
world,” and the pride that this knowledge gives him. Yet he does not describe a sense of having another 
identity in his second language—rather, his use of English grants him cultural capital, a form of privilege 
which less multilingual “other people” lack. In other words, English does not seem to create a separate 
second-language identity for Aleksandar in this context of SNS writing and self-presentation, as the use of 
an L2 does for participants in Klimanova and Dembovskaya (2013), or even a separate facet of an 
identity, as it does for the multilingual writers in Chen (2013). Rather, the use of English codes is part of 
the foundation of his perception of himself as a worldly, knowledgeable person, and a springboard for his 
participation in the global hip-hop music scene.   
Translingual Writing Process 
Aleksandar’s descriptions of his writing process also evince a strongly translingual orientation. When I 
brought up his habit of combining multiple codes in a single post, he reacted with feigned surprise 
(Excerpt 6).  
Excerpt 6  
B: so I noticed that often when you post videos or something 
 you mix Serbian and English together 
A: really? 
 :D 
 i wasn't aware of it? 
 :D 
 maybe because we use many English words on a regular basis 
B: when you say we you mean musicians, or all the students, or...? 
A: I mean all non-english speaking nations 
Aleksandar’s use of question marks (“really?”, “i wasn't aware of it?”) together with his use of the 
broadly-smiling emoticon, seems to express that my observation strikes him as entertaining—his (largely 
monolingual) former teacher is seriously interested in what seems to him to be a perfectly common and 
natural use of language. When I directed his attention to a code-meshed post written the day before the 
interview, he reacted with a representation of laughter. This response seems to signify that Aleksandar’s 
integration of his languages is so long-standing and natural to him, so much an ordinary part of life, that 
for me to notice or remark on it strikes him as funny and worthy of teasing.   
Aleksandar’s explanation for his unconscious meshing of codes is cultural, rather than personal—though 
he takes pride in his English abilities, he also places his multilingualism into the context of the “non-
english speaking nations” in which English functions as a major lingua franca. He goes on to comment 
that the people in his community, not only university students but also the general public, are “bombed 
with English every day” in the form of pop culture and advertising. It’s clear that Aleksandar’s 
translingual identity, then, does not exist in isolation. It is part and parcel of the rise of English as an 
international language.  
Translingual Interlocutors 
Aleksandar’s easy mixing of languages, it might be argued, limits the potential audiences for his posts to 
those who can read both English and Serbian codes. Yet through Facebook Aleksandar maintains 
connections with both non-English speakers in Serbia and with non-Serbian speakers internationally. 
When asked if he considers the monolingual speakers in his Facebook network before he posts in one 
language or the other, he replied (Excerpt 7): 
Brooke Ricker Schreiber Multilingual Identity and Digital Translanguaging 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
Excerpt 7 
A: hm... 
 it doesn't really matter which language you use when you post a link with it too 
 if they like the link 
 they will like your post 
 if they don't they won't 
Aleksandar’s code-meshed Facebook postings, then, are supported by his use of multiple semiotic modes. 
He is aware that his audience does not share his particular set of linguistic resources—the German rappers 
he collaborates with, for example, who do not speak Serbian—but because his translingual writing is 
coupled with links to music videos, he can achieve uptake within the community regardless of his framing 
(Excerpt 8): 
Excerpt 8 
B: so when you post in Serbian, do the German guys ever comment or 
 like something? 
A: They might like a song if it's rap 
 but they don't comment 
The “like”, a type of communication specifically afforded by the features of the SNS, is generally 
considered to demonstrate noticing or awareness (Androutsopoulos, 2014); Trester and West (2013) 
define a “like” as “signaling acknowledgment and approval of the content” (p.138). For Aleksandar, 
“likes” from his fellow hip-hop fans represent their recognition of his shared content, and thus the 
achievement of the communicative purpose of his posting—“gatekeeping” information (Baek et al., 
2011). Aleksandar has shared his selected videos, framed within the code-meshed text of his choice, and 
has received confirmation of his audience’s uptake. He is therefore able to regard the language used as 
relatively unimportant, “not really mattering”. His multimodal posts are able to “jump scales” 
(Blommaert, 2010) into the global hip-hop community precisely through their multimodality, an 
affordance of digital writing, and in turn support his creation of his hip-hop artist identity for a wide 
variety of interlocutors, regardless of their own language proficiencies.   
CONCLUSION 
Aleksandar’s self-presentation in the digital space of Facebook is, in many ways, similar to the 
representations of other multilingual young people, displaying high levels of linguistic creativity and 
drawing on an assortment of semiotic resources and widely circulating digital texts (Androutsopoulos, 
2013; Fraiberg, 2010; Sharma, 2012; You, 2011). The dominant feature of Aleksandar’s self-presentation 
is his posting of links to music videos, a practice which enables him to express membership in the global 
hip-hop community in two ways: by acting as a “gate-keeper” of information about hip-hop music (Baek 
et al., 2011), and by re-entextualizing such videos into his own framing—re-entextualization also being 
an important practice within the global hip-hop community (Higgins, 2009; Pennycook, 2003, 2010). As 
in Androutsopoulos (2013), when captioning the videos he posts, Aleksandar can choose to echo the 
language of the video, incorporating the title or lyrics into his framing, but he can also choose to re-
entextualize hip-hop videos into writing that reflects his identity as a distinctly Serbian hip-hop artist. By 
meshing Serbian and other codes in his introductions to links to multimodal content, Aleksandar is able to 
“jump scales,” projecting an online image of himself as firmly grounded in his local identity and, at the 
same time, as a knowledgeable member of the global hip-hop community.  Exploiting the affordances of 
Brooke Ricker Schreiber Multilingual Identity and Digital Translanguaging 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
digital, networked writing, he is able to simply be himself, a Serbian artist and savvy hip-hop fan. 
My intention in this article has been to draw attention to the specifically translingual attitude Aleksandar 
demonstrates; unlike students in previous studies (e.g., Chen, 2013; Klimanova & Dembovskaya, 2013), 
Aleksandar does not see himself as having separate linguistic identities which are fixed to particular 
languages. He recognizes that his audience is composed of people with widely varying sets of linguistic 
proficiencies, but rather than switching between languages to reach sections of his audience, Aleksandar 
relies on the multimodal nature of online composing to maintain a translingual attitude—he knows that he 
will achieve uptake regardless of his choice of codes. This study, therefore, works to challenge our 
previous conceptual understanding of students’ linguistic identities as tied to individual languages, and 
suggests that we might instead usefully view their practices and beliefs through the framework of 
translingualism, a shift that has important implications for language pedagogy.     
Pedagogical Implications  
For young people around the world, the classification of English as a foreign or even second language has 
become blurry, as they spend increasing out-of-class hours using English for communicative purposes 
both playful and serious on a wide range of media (Saxena, 2011; Sharma, 2012). Like Aleksandar, in 
their non-academic writing, they are incorporating multiple languages into a unified whole, projecting 
identities which draw on both their cultural as well as their local and global linguistic resources. While 
this single case study is not intended to be representative, it does serve to open the possibility of new 
ways of understanding students’ practices, and to invite further research from a translingual perspective.  
For teachers, studying students’ online writings creates a window into students’ deliberate and 
sophisticated audience-based rhetorical choices and use of multimodality in identity construction (DePew 
& Miller-Cochran, 2010). Making these practices visible is especially valuable for students like 
Aleksandar, whose hip-hop based literacy went unappreciated in his classroom writing experiences; he 
reports that his teachers were individually supportive of his love of hip-hop as an extra-curricular activity, 
but found no place for it in the content or style of his classroom writing. As Chen (2013) argues, knowing 
which discourses influence and motivate our students enables us as teachers to “develop materials that 
embrace students’ multiple voices, foster their personal growth as multilingual subjects, and engage their 
real life practices and purposes” (p. 163). 
In commenting on a draft of this manuscript, Aleksandar reported that for him, the point of learning 
English or any foreign language is the opportunity to use it, functionally and creatively, outside of class. 
While he values the broadened linguistic repertoire his studies provide, it is interaction with the audience 
in these socially networked spaces which shapes his choices as a writer, creating an immediate rhetorical 
situation that drives his linguistic innovation. In other words, engaging Aleksandar and fostering his 
growth as a learner and user of L2 English is a matter of understanding that his use of English is about 
participation in a very real online community, one composed of hip-hop artists around the world who 
work together to create and promote music.   
One option is bringing social networking sites into academic settings, as in Klimanova and 
Dembovskaya’s (2013) study, which allows students to use multiple semiotic resources to express aspects 
of their identity “through a conscious and strategic selection of digital artifacts” (p. 81). As for 
Aleksandar, the use of such digital artifacts helps students create layered, multifaceted portrayals of 
themselves not available through purely text-based writing forms, and provides an additional set of 
semiotic resources for engaging in translingual forms of communication, smoothing their transition from 
L2 students to L2 users. EFL writing instructors may not be able to incorporate such technologies into 
their pedagogies, but they can acknowledge the changing nature of the literacy required in the digital era, 
and tap into the rhetorical skills students develop in these social networking spaces to enhance their 
academic writing.  
Brooke Ricker Schreiber Multilingual Identity and Digital Translanguaging 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
Another way to take advantage of those skills is by incorporating opportunities for code-meshing in 
academic texts. Canagarajah (2011, 2013a) provides one example of an assignment in which students had 
the option to draw on linguistic resources other than English. As students revised their writing with 
feedback from peers and teachers, they practiced strategies for translanguaging more effectively in an 
academic environment, developing “sensitivity to the rhetorical constraints and possibilities available to 
them in different communicative situations” (Canagarajah, 2011, p. 415). While these pedagogical 
practices are not without limitations (see Matsuda, 2014, for a thorough critique), they can work to break 
down monolingual assumptions in the classroom that may ultimately hinder language learning (Creese & 
Blackledge, 2010).    
In the social arena of computer-mediated communication, writers have found space to use all of the 
semiotic resources at their disposal to construct for themselves complex and yet unified new roles. As 
Aleksandar says, “i am what i am, no matter what language i speak”—an artist and a citizen of a 
networked world.  
 
APPENDIX. Interview Questions 
English literacy history:   
How long have you been studying English? How comfortable do you feel reading and writing in English? 
What does speaking English mean/represent to you? How important is it to you to be fluent in English?   
What kinds of writing do you typically do in English? How does your English writing differ from your 
writing in Serbian? In what situations do you typically choose to write in English?   
Technological literacy history 
When did you first use a computer? What did you use a computer for when you were first learning? What 
were your early experiences with computers like?   
Do you have a computer in your home now? How many hours do you spend using a computer in a typical 
day? For what purposes do you use a computer now?     
When did you first begin using Facebook? How were you introduced to Facebook? What were your early 
experiences with Facebook like? How often do you use Facebook today? For what purposes do you use 
Facebook? Do you think those purposes are typical of your friends? Why do you use Facebook as 
opposed to (or in addition to) other social networking sites?   
Composing processes:  
When and where do you usually access Facebook? What else are you usually doing while you are using 
Facebook? For example, what other websites do you look at while you use Facebook? Do you consult 
online dictionaries or other language resources while using Facebook?   
Perceptions of rhetorical situation:   
Who do you communicate with on Facebook primarily? Do you target individual posts to individual 
people or specific groups of people?   
How do you decide what language to use on Facebook? Are there certain topics or kinds of posts for 
which you would be more likely to use English?   
Do you feel like there are appropriate and inappropriate uses of Facebook? What constitutes appropriate 
use, in your opinion? How do people in your network respond to inappropriate use?   
 
Brooke Ricker Schreiber Multilingual Identity and Digital Translanguaging 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
NOTES 
1. Aleksandar requested that his real name be used in publication. 
2. Canagarajah (2006) originally defines codemeshing as the blending of non-dominant varieties of 
English into standard English texts, and later redefines codemeshing as a practice which 
“accommodates the possibility of mixing communicative modes and diverse symbol systems” (2011, 
p. 403). Fraiberg’s (2010) definition of code-mashing moves this practice into the digital realm. 
Aleksandar’s overall performance on Facebook, then, can be described as code-mashing, but the 
writing framing his posts (the focus of this analysis) can best be described as codemeshing.   
3. Excerpts 4, 5, and 6 are presented without the interviewer’s backchannelling turns for the sake of 
space. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I wish to thank Dorothy Worden, Xiaoye You, and the three anonymous reviewers for their thoughtful 
suggestions and insights. I also extend thanks to Aleksandar and to all of my former students in Serbia, 
who so generously invited me into their online world. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Brooke Ricker Schreiber is a PhD candidate at Pennsylvania State University.  Her research interests 
include digital multilingual writing practices, writing instruction in EFL contexts, and the use of World 
Englishes in composition courses.  
E-mail: bmr220@psu.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Androutsopoulos, J. (2013). Networked multilingualism: Some language practices on Facebook and their 
implications. International Journal of Bilingualism (published online before print June 11, 2013, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1367006913489198). 
Androutsopoulos, J. (2014). Moments of sharing: Entextualization and linguistic repertoires in social 
networking. Journal of Pragmatics, 73, 4–18.  
Appadurai, A. (1990). Disjuncture and difference in the global cultural economy. Theory, Culture & 
Society, 7(2), 295–310.  
Baek, K., Holton, A., Harp, D., & Yaschur, C. (2011). The links that bind: Uncovering novel motivations 
for linking on Facebook. Computers in Human Behavior, 27, 2243–2248. 
Bahktin, M. (1981). The dialogic imagination. (M. Holquist, ed. and C. Emerson and M. Holquist, transl.) 
Austin: University of Texas Press.  
Berry, P. W., Hawisher, G. E., & Selfe, C. L. (2012). Transnational literate lives in digital times. Logan, 
UT: Computers and Composition Digital Press/Utah State University Press. Retrieved from 
http://ccdigitalpress.org/transnational 
Block, D. (2007). Second language identities. New York, NY: Continuum International. 
Blommaert, J. (2010). The sociolinguistics of globalization. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Brooke Ricker Schreiber Multilingual Identity and Digital Translanguaging 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
Bolander, B., & Locher, M. A. (2010). Constructing identity on Facebook: Report on a pilot study. Swiss 
Papers in English Language and Linguistics, 24, 165–187.  
boyd, D. M., & Ellison, N. B. (2008). Social network sites: Definition, history, and scholarship. Journal 
of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13, 210–230.  
Canagarajah, A.S. (2006). The place of World Englishes in composition: Pluralization continued. College 
Composition and Communication. 57(4), 586-619.  
Canagarajah, A. S. (2011). Codemeshing in academic writing: Identifying teachable strategies of 
translanguaging. The Modern Language Journal, 95(3) 401–417.  
Canagarajah, A. S. (2013a). Negotiating translingual literacy: An enactment. Research in the Teaching of 
English, 48(1), 40–67.  
Canagarajah, A. S. (2013b). Translingual practice: Global English and cosmopolitan relations. New 
York, NY: Routledge.  
Chen, H. I. (2013). Identity practices of multilingual writers in social networking spaces. Language 
Learning & Technology, 17(2), 143–170. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/chen.pdf 
Council of Europe. (2001). Common European framework of reference for languages: Learning, 
teaching, and assessment. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Creese, A., & Blackledge, A. (2010). Translanguaging in the bilingual classroom: A pedagogy for 
learning and teaching? The Modern Language Journal, 94(1), 103–115. 
DePew, K. E., & Miller-Cochran, S. K. (2010). Social networking in a second language: Engaging 
multiple literate practices through identity composition. In M. Cox, J. Jordan, C. Ortmeier-Hooper, & G. 
Shwartz (Eds.), Reinventing identities in second language writing (pp. 273–295). Urbana, IL: National 
Council of Teachers of English. 
Fraiberg, S. (2010). Composition 2.0: Toward a multilingual and multimodal framework. College 
Composition and Communication, 62(1), 100–121. 
Gonzales, A. L., & Hancock, J. T. (2008). Identity shift in computer-mediated environments. Media 
Psychology, 11, 167–185.   
Greenberg, R. D. (2004).  Language and identity in the Balkans: Serbo-Croatian and its disintegration. 
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.  
Higgins, C. (2009). English as a local language: Post-colonial identities and multilingual practices. 
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Klimanova, L., & Dembovskaya, S. (2013). L2 identity, discourse, and social networking in Russian.  
Language Learning & Technology, 17(1), 69–88. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2013/klimanovadembovskaya.pdf  
Knobel, M., & Lankshear, C. (2008). Digital literacy and participation in online social networking spaces. 
In C. Lankshear & M. Knobel (Eds.), Digital literacies: Concepts, policies and practices (pp. 249–278). 
New York, NY: Peter Lang. 
Lam, W. S. E. (2000). Second language literacy and the design of the self: A case study of a teenager 
writing on the internet. TESOL Quarterly, 34, 457–82. 
Lam, W. S. E. (2004). Second language socialization in a bilingual chat room: Global and local 
considerations. Language Learning & Technology, 8(3), 44–65. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num3/pdf/lam.pdf 
Brooke Ricker Schreiber Multilingual Identity and Digital Translanguaging 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
Lee, C. K. M. (2007). Text-making practices beyond the classroom context: Private instant messaging in 
Hong Kong. Computers and Composition, 24, 285–301.  
Leki, I. (2001). Material, educational, and ideological challenges of teaching EFL writing at the turn of 
the century. International Journal of English Studies, 1(2), 197–209.  
Matsuda, P. K. (2014). The lure of translingual writing. PMLA, 129(3), 478–483. 
Norton, B. (2000). Identity and language learning: Gender, ethnicity, and educational change. Harlow, 
UK: Longman. 
Pennycook, A. (2003). Global Englishes, Rip Slyme, and performativity. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 
7(4), 513–533.  
Pennycook, A. (2010). Language as local practice. New York, NY: Routledge.  
Prendergast, C. (2008). Buying into English: Language and investment in the new capitalist world. 
Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press. 
Reichelt, M. (2009). A critical exploration of writing teaching programs. In R. Manchón (Ed.), Writing in 
foreign language contexts: Learning, teaching, and research (pp. 183–208). Bristol, UK: Multilingual 
Matters. 
Saxena, M. (2011). Reified languages and scripts versus real literacy values and practices: Insights from 
young bilinguals in an Islamic state. Compare, 41(2), 277–292. 
Sharma, B. K. (2012). Beyond social networking: Performing global Englishes in Facebook by college 
youth in Nepal. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 16(4), 483–509. 
Slobodanka, D. (2005). English in Macedonia. World Englishes, 24(2), 187–202. 
Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. M. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and 
techniques. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
Trester, A. M., & West, L. (2013). Facework on Facebook: Conversations on social media. In D. Tannen 
and A. M. Trester (Eds.), Discourse 2.0. Language and new media. (pp. 133–154 ). Washington, DC: 
Georgetown University Press. 
You, X. (2004). “The choice made from no choice”: English writing instruction in a Chinese university.  
Journal of Second Language Writing, 13, 97–110.  
You, X. (2011). Chinese white-collar workers and multilingual creativity in the diaspora. World 
Englishes, 30(3), 409–427. 
