Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2015/king.pdf 
October 2015, Volume 19, Number 3 
pp. 106–123 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 106 
WIKIPEDIA WRITING AS PRAXIS: COMPUTER-MEDIATED 
SOCIALIZATION OF SECOND-LANGUAGE WRITERS 
Brian W. King, City University of Hong Kong 
This study explores the writing of Wikipedia articles as a form of authentic writing for 
learners of English in Hong Kong. Adopting Second Language Socialization and 
Language Learning & Identity approaches to language learning inquiry, it responds to an 
identified shortage of research on computer-mediated language socialization. Focus is 
placed on the development of participant identities as valid writers of English texts for a 
perceived mass public. As part of Wikipedia writing praxis, writers are socialized to 
varying degrees into the community of Wikipedia. This study focuses on Hong Kong 
university students’ reported experiences as legitimate peripheral participants, looking at 
the early stages of potential community membership. Ethnographic observations serve to 
provide a description of both the classroom and the Wikipedia site as dynamic social 
settings. Data sources include field notes, participant-generated written reflections, and 
transcripts of focus group interviews. Through these various channels it becomes clear that 
perception of a potentially vast reading public wields a subtle but important influence. 
Experiences with the Wikipedia community also play a role, motivating some participants 
to think deeply about their writing and prompting them to invest in writer identities online 
and in their local context. 
Language(s) Learned in Current Study: English 
Keywords: Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Computer-Mediated Communication, 
Discourse Analysis, Literacy, Social Context, Writing
APA Citation: King, B. W. (2015). Wikipedia writing as praxis: Computer-mediated 
socialization of second-language writers. Language Learning & Technology, 19(3), 106–
123. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2015/king.pdf 
Received: July 30, 2014; Accepted: March 19, 2015; Published: October 1, 2015 
Copyright: © Brian W. King 
INTRODUCTION 
There is considerable evidence to support the notion that becoming a writer is a long-term process in 
which identity construction, proficiency, and craft are inseparable, one in which dispositions of self 
develop within social relationships inside and outside of formal writing instruction (Compton-Lilly, 2014). 
This study aims to apply these insights to online writing, using discourse analysis to investigate authentic 
Wikipedia writing experiences of English-as-a-foreign-language (EFL) writers in a Hong Kong university. 
It queries the ways in which Wikipedia writing can socialize learners of English into identities as 
competent writers of English by providing a context of language socialization beyond the English 
classroom. The study takes as its focus a first-year university assignment in which students 
collaboratively write an original Wikipedia article in groups and publish it on the Wikipedia site. 
Subsequently they monitor its fate, responding to critiques by readers and reflecting on the whole 
experience in an individual final essay. 
Previous studies of computer-mediated language socialization have argued that learners writing online in 
so-called “Web 2.0” environments (i.e. the read-write web, such as wikis and social media) have 
demonstrated an enhanced ability to develop identities as competent writers in English in various written 
genres or styles (Black, 2005; Lam, 2004). One apparent reason is that Web 2.0 technologies add “real-
world” (i.e. non-institutional) relevance to the experience by linking learners with fellow writers and 
Brian W. King Wikipedia Writing as Praxis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 107 
readers beyond the classroom (Sykes, Oskoz, & Thorne, 2008). By interacting with people who are not 
reading/writing for class, learners can move beyond the conventional institutional roles and identities that 
are associated with being a language student in their local context (Lam, 2004; Sykes, Oskoz & Thorne, 
2008; Thorne & Black, 2007). Learner writers can successfully integrate a sense of authorship into their 
English writer identities by positioning themselves as communicators within a Web 2.0 interactive world 
(Ushioda, 2011). They also position themselves in the local English learning context of Hong Kong where 
English is learned as a foreign language and used primarily for social, economic, and academic upward 
mobility (Evans, 2013).  
The current study responds to recent calls for further investigation of computer-mediated language 
socialization (Duff & Talmy, 2011; Duff, 2010b, 2014; Norton & McKinney, 2011; Reinhardt & Zander, 
2011), particularly Wikipedia writing (Warschauer, 2010), and on socialization into certain subjectivities, 
or identities (Garrett, 2007). The study draws from two theoretical outlooks on research—Second 
Language Socialization and Language Learning and Identity—treating them as fundamentally compatible 
methodological positions (Duff, 2014; Norton & McKinney, 2011). The language socialization model 
provides a perspective in which the practices involved in becoming a writer of a second or third language 
are inseparable from processes of participation in various social groupings (e.g. communities and publics). 
During participation, aspects of identity develop that are connected to the use of a second language: these 
second-language identities are inseparable from social identity (Benson, Barkhuizen, Bodycott, & Brown, 
2013). Combining these two approaches is fruitful because it enables the analyst to keep both 
participation and identity in view during analysis. 
THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVE 
Authorship and Audience 
Under social-constructionist concepts of authorship, an audience is a group of socialized members of 
some kind of collective (i.e. an aggregate of people who are in some way aligned) and so writing involves 
entering groupings of various sorts which are often referred to as communities (Warschauer & Grimes, 
2007). In comparison with other types of formal writing such as read-only web articles or print media, 
Web 2.0 writing occurs on a rather different spatio-temporal scale and largely for a different kind of 
community or grouping. The power of an often mutually co-present and immediately interactive audience 
which is essentially unlimited in number (Warschauer & Grimes, 2007) is that it introduces modes of 
belonging and types of community membership which previously tended to be much more difficult for 
academic writers to access. This access is particularly relevant for those not working in a first language, 
as is the case with EFL students in Hong Kong (Flowerdew, 2000). For this reason, I will employ 
imagined communities (Kanno & Norton, 2003; Wenger, 1998), communities of practice (Eckert & 
McConnell-Ginet, 1999; Wenger, 1998) and publics (Coulmas, 2013; Warner, 2002) as constructs which 
are most relevant for the examination of formal writing by learners using Wikipedia’s read-write interface 
due to the capacity of these constructs to include a relatively new type of audience. 
Communities of Practice and Imagined Communities 
A Wikipedia community of practice (CoP) sits behind the public face of the encyclopedia and is made up 
of core and peripheral members (Bryant, Forte, & Bruckman, 2005; O’Sullivan, 2009). It has its own 
“culture of use” (i.e. localized practice) which both enables and constrains writing activity and is likely to 
impact the learning of English writing (Thorne, Black, & Sykes, 2009, p. 804). A further observation is 
that online communication tools make available specific semiotic resources for the construction of social 
identities (Thorne, Black & Sykes, 2009). It is therefore likely that the Wikipedians, with their shared 
practices and repertoires, have a specific role to play in computer-mediated socialization by presenting 
support, conflict, disagreement, and challenge as part of a process of socialization (Mills, 2011).  
This Wikipedia CoP is not accessed directly by all Wikipedia writers, yet it still exists as a social 
Brian W. King Wikipedia Writing as Praxis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 108 
imaginary [i.e. a way in which people envision their relations to others (Taylor, 2004)], and this is another 
powerful manifestation of that community. The notion of investment in imagined communities posits that 
learners can have in their minds an image of a ‘community’ of target language speakers. They aim to 
integrate or communicate with these people in some way even though they and most others in that 
aggregate of people have never met either face-to-face or online. In spite of this lack of interactional co-
presence, the members (often far flung individuals) still imagine that they share something in common 
with each other based on a certain trait or a collection of traits they hold in common (King, 2014). These 
communities of the imagination (Wenger, 1998) are thus driven by a specific mode of belonging (i.e. the 
imagination) that is actually quite powerful: driving learner investments in the target language, shaping 
learning trajectories, and providing the impetus for long-term language learning efforts (Carroll, Motha, 
& Price, 2008; Kanno, 2008; Kendrick & Jones, 2008; King, 2008; Norton, 2001, 2013; Pavlenko & 
Norton, 2007). In addition to the community of practice of Wikipedia contributors and the imagined 
community they might constitute, publics are a third audience distinction that is useful for theorizing the 
role of a global Wikipedia readership in this process. 
Publics 
Coulmas (2013) refers to such online readers as an online reading and writing public. Similar to an 
imagined community, a public is a social imaginary that taps into imagination as a mode of belonging and 
brings with it similar possibilities for identity work. Warner (2002) has described a public as an indefinite, 
uncountable audience that is transformed by being addressed through circulated discourse. As Warner 
(2002) explains, “The idea of a public is motivating, not simply instrumental. It is constitutive of a social 
imaginary” (p. 12). In other words, in writing on Wikipedia for an imagined group of readers somewhere 
out in the world, students are not just writing for instrumental goals such as assignment completion; they 
are writing for motivational reasons such as circulating messages and ideas to readers somewhere. They 
are writing to communicate to a “mass public” (Warner, 2002, p. 13) who will potentially read their 
writing and perhaps even respond. This type of online activity has been shown to promote discovery and 
act as a renewing driver of literate activity (McNely, Teston, Cox, Olorunda, & Dunker, 2010). For this 
case study, publics are a useful conception of a reading audience because students circulate their writing 
via the Wikipedia platform with its particular Web 2.0 affordances. 
The Web 2.0 Context 
Contribution to Wikipedia has an anarchic quality because anyone can contribute, creating an 
unprecedented discourse context (Herring, 2013). Wikipedia’s vastness is both enabling and potentially 
limiting for language learning purposes. Anecdotally speaking, Wikipedia writing in general is reported to 
be highly motivating (Tardy, 2010; Warschauer & Grimes, 2007), and this is primarily because it 
provides access to a more noticeable and potentially enormous mass public than other wikis (Miller, 
2014). On the flipside of this motivational and exciting fact is the possibility that learners will find the 
idea of publishing their second-language writing on a huge public platform like Wikipedia rather 
unsettling (Tardy, 2010). For this reason, teachers on the course in focus scaffolded elements of the task 
in order to socialize the students towards being able to write a Wikipedia article and publish it, 
scaffolding being particularly important in socialization processes (Duff, 2010a). I elaborate more on this 
scaffolding process under Participants and Context. 
Second Language Socialization and Identity 
Second language socialization assumes that learners are not only language learners; it asks how they lay 
the foundation for participation in a particular sphere (Duff, 2010a). Thus, it follows that language 
socialization research does not just examine learning as linguistic development but also examines other 
forms of knowledge learned in and through overlapping types of socialization (Duff & Talmy, 2011; Duff, 
2011). Keeping all of these entwined forms of socialization in sight during research requires an ecological 
perspective of learning-in-context. Such a perspective entails analysis of learning through praxis—
Brian W. King Wikipedia Writing as Praxis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 109 
learning in everyday activities through observation, participation, and performance as members of 
communities of practice (Duff & Talmy, 2011). In other words, it entails learning by doing and 
participating, and is inseparable from ongoing development of community membership and identities. 
The adoption of a community of practice approach to the investigation of language learning brings with it 
the notion that social interaction with more proficient members of a particular community drives learning. 
This interaction is the primary mediational means for attaining not only communicative competence but 
also some knowledge of the community’s “values, practices, identities, ideologies and stances” (Duff & 
Talmy, 2011, p. 98). This notion implies investigation of how the learner’s diverse experiences and 
affiliations interact to influence how they are socially positioned by members of the CoP (Lam, 2004). 
Thus learners are viewed as being actively engaged in language practices as well as demonstrating 
varying levels of competence (Garrett, 2007). In keeping with these basic assumptions, I am interested in 
the emergence of writer subjectivity in English, with a focus on learners as writing practitioners rather 
than as exemplars of competence. 
Participants and Context 
The participants in this study were first-year university students in an English Medium of Instruction 
university in Hong Kong. They had enrolled as students in the arts (broadly conceived) but had not yet 
chosen a major and had opted to study English as one of their first-year subjects. The course serves as an 
introduction to topics that will be encountered by English majors (e.g. literature, applied linguistics, and 
professional communication). During the two semesters of data collection for the main study, the course 
numbers were as follows:  
• Semester A: 143 students across five classes and five teachers (35 writing groups) 
• Semester B: 180 students across five classes and five teachers (45 writing groups) 
In both semesters the ratio of females to males was four to one. The vast majority of the students (309) 
consented in writing to have their essays and articles included in this study. Wikipedia writing comprised 
one major assignment amongst three in the course.  
The Wikipedia writing assignment was written collaboratively by groups of 4–5 students who first drafted 
and edited an article together on Google Drive before publishing it on the Wikipedia site. Drafts were 
reviewed by their teacher before the final stage (for a detailed guide on how to use Google Drive in this 
way, see King, 2015). The writing process required a small amount of coaching and guidance. 
Scaffolding was provided in relation to choosing a notable topic and noticing the appropriate genre and 
tone for an encyclopedia article and some support in how to publish it to the site, all of which took about 
fifteen percent of class time for the course. Students were encouraged to focus on a Hong Kong topic in 
order to be able to claim a level of “expert” status as writers. By positioning themselves as experts on 
Hong Kong, considerable confidence was instilled in them. This status as a local expert provided them 
with more traction during debates with Wikipedians about the notability of their topics. The students also 
completed an individual reflective essay after monitoring responses to their articles for two weeks, 
fielding responses from Wikipedians that varied widely from relative silence (i.e. tacit approval) to 
requests for editing of the article (i.e. language accuracy, quality of sources, genre appropriateness) and 
even deletion debates. In the end about a third of their articles ended up being deleted within four weeks; 
the rate dependent upon how determined the group was to defend their article or improve it. 
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY 
In the context of Wikipedia writing and its interactive read-writing environment, the research questions 
that frame this study are: 
1. What constructions of English writer identity do the students form in relation to Wikipedia 
Brian W. King Wikipedia Writing as Praxis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 110 
publics, imagined communities, and communities of practice? 
2. What practices do they employ to perform these identities? 
In order to explore these questions, an ethnographic approach was adopted, with fieldwork in the 
classroom and on Wikipedia itself. Discourse analysis was used to investigate the students’ practices 
during assignment writing and interviews. It has become common practice in language socialization 
research to use interviews that engage participants in meta-linguistic reflection (Duff & Talmy, 2011), 
and this is done to gain access to learners’ emic perspectives (i.e. insider meanings and perspectives). Of 
course, accessing emic perspectives of participants is a primary aim of any ethnographic approach to 
research, and the present study does incorporate my ethnographic observations of the participants’ 
experiences in Wikipedia and the classroom. However, a reiterative cycle of new students passes through 
the program each semester, ruling out a longitudinal case study. Thus, interviews and student reflective 
essays are relied upon for their emic perspective. Ethnographic observations in this instance serve mostly 
to provide me, as a teacher in the program, with a way to access my own emic perspective (Copland & 
Creese, 2015) and gain some analytic distance from a familiar setting in order to facilitate observation. 
This combination of insider knowledge and ethnographic observation permits a “from-inside-outwards 
trajectory” (Rampton, 2007, p. 591), taking advantage of my historical insight into the local setting while 
striking a balance between reliance upon insider knowledge and a healthy suspicion of that same 
knowledge (Johnstone, 2000). Moreover, it has become common practice in language socialization 
research to conduct work that occurs on a shorter timescale (i.e. not longitudinal) and relies on interviews 
and other sources of data, as I propose here (Duff & Talmy, 2011). Caveats to such an approach will be 
addressed in the data analysis section. 
The first time the Wikipedia project was included in the course, a pilot study was conducted that 
comprised a pilot focus group discussion as well as detailed ethnographic observations and the taking of 
fieldnotes in the classroom and on the Wikipedia site. In this first cohort of students, there were 245 
students in the course, with sixty-two groups across five classes and four teachers. After the groups 
published their articles, a selection of the articles was monitored in order to observe whether edits were 
requested and whether the students responded. The observations soon expanded to include the Wikipedia 
article “talk pages” where discussions and debates about the articles take place, and these pages were 
captured as screenshots with detailed records. The pilot focus group discussion tested questions which 
were later adapted to be used in the main study. 
Wikipedia Writing 
Wikipedia “exposes the very existence of a reader” (Forte & Bruckman, 2006, p. 187) through its wiki 
technologies, permitting anyone with an Internet connection to edit Wikipedia articles. Part of being a 
legitimate peripheral participant on Wikipedia is gaining awareness that there is actually a community of 
Wikipedians to join and that many roles besides reader, writer, and editor exist (Forte & Bruckman, 2006). 
Ethnographic observations during the pilot study revealed some evidence for the existence of core 
membership roles in the community of practice, most of them focused on gate-keeping and quality control. 
I closely watched what happened to some students’ articles after they had published them, and I was able 
to observe several deletion debates as part of ethnographic observations, sometimes occurring weeks after 
the pilot study assignment had finished. The emergence of these debates during ethnographic fieldwork 
revealed a potential learning experience for students. Following their articles after publishing them and 
responding to the critiques of Wikipedians appeared to hold great potential for increasing student 
investment in the writing process. This is because it would provide direct evidence to the students that 
their writing was being read by someone and thereby guide them to a deeper understanding of what 
constitutes formal, professional writing. Subsequent to this observation, students in the course were asked 
to track their article’s status and respond to requests for editing of its contents. Provided with some basic 
scaffolding and then sent to the Wikipedia platform to learn the genre and finally publish their work, 
Brian W. King Wikipedia Writing as Praxis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 111 
students learned about formal writing through praxis by performing it as legitimate peripheral Wikipedia 
participants. 
Writing for an Imagined Wikipedia Community 
Although Hong Kong students are very familiar with Wikipedia and generally arrive to the course already 
convinced that a mass public is likely to read what is written there, few have yet developed an awareness 
of the role of other Wikipedians in the imminent writing process. Learners were, for that reason, advised 
to consider that Wikipedians will scrutinize their contributions in a gate-keeping process, and they were 
provided with examples of the types of criticism commonly directed at new articles (i.e. inadequate 
notability of topic, inappropriateness of sources either in quality or density, and inappropriate tone). Thus 
by reminding the learners about this highly critical and powerful Wikipedian community readership, the 
seeds of an imagined community were planted for participants. The next section addresses how the 
second language socialization experiences of these learners were investigated in relation to these various 
modes of belonging and audience and how these experiences related to their formation of writer identities 
in English; but first a word on the participants’ relationship with the intersecting socio-historical contexts 
of Hong Kong.  
English Learning in the Context of Hong Kong 
Hong Kong was a crown colony and subsequently a dependent territory of Britain for about 150 years in 
total, but has officially been part of China since 1997 under what has been called the “one country, two 
systems” policy. Cantonese is unquestionably the dominant language in most domains for the majority of 
the population while English is an official language with great symbolic and instrumental value (Lai, Gao, 
& Wang, 2015). Hong Kong students are therefore required to study English from age six and to pass 
English public examinations before they can move on to higher education. A recent study in this linguistic 
setting has demonstrated that Hong Kong students as young as 11 or 12 can be aware of this 
socioeconomic reality that privileges English. It is therefore woven into their personal identities as 
speakers of English because second-language identity is tied closely to attendance at English medium of 
instruction schools (Besser & Chik, 2014). Those without privileged access tell narratives of English 
learning that are chiefly concerned with proficiency levels, grades, and test scores (Besser & Chik, 2014). 
It will soon become clear that this Hong-Kong-based ideological position was indirectly referenced by 
some of the participants in my study as they contrasted their past English writing experiences with their 
Wikipedia writing experiences, emphasizing a disconnect during secondary school between English and 
its communicative purposes. 
Data 
An investigation of second language socialization in this case means asking how learners simultaneously 
lay foundations as communicative writers, knowledge producers, and as Wikipedians (potential and/or 
peripheral). It is therefore necessary to identify by what means writer identity socialization progresses on 
Wikipedia, and in what ways it overlaps with other types of socialization. In a similar fashion to many 
other second language socialization studies, data has been drawn from a variety of sources (Duff, 2011); 
in this case from student reflective essays (309 essays were initially coded), focus group interviews (four 
groups with four students in each focus group), ethnographic field notes, and Wikipedia talk pages (one 
for each of the 77 articles collected).  
In the reflective essays, participants wrote about their Wikipedia writing experiences and those reflections 
contributed to their socialization into writer identities in English. The focus group interviews also served 
as a place of dynamic reflection and co-construction and provided a further venue for identity negotiation 
and performance (although most students did not volunteer to take part in these optional interviews). 
These two methods also align with a trend in identity and language learning towards acceptance and 
valuing of participants’ own perspectives and portrayals as both important and relevant (Besser & Chik, 
Brian W. King Wikipedia Writing as Praxis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 112 
2014). The assortment of data sources aims at triangulation and allows for a focus on tensions between 
the various forms of data collected. Again following best practice in language socialization research, the 
methods aim to bring to light contradictions and critical incidents or interactions reported by participants 
or observed by the researcher (Duff, 2014, p. 419) and examine how these interact with learners’ 
identities and practices. 
ANALYTICAL METHODS 
In the coming analysis I treat interviews as accounts which are performed collaboratively, thus requiring 
analysts to attend to the interview as a social interaction (Mann, 2011; Richards, 2009; Talmy, 2011). 
This treatment entails paying particular attention during discourse analysis to how interview talk is 
occasioned and co-constructed. Data from student reflective essays is also interpreted while keeping in 
mind that they were writing for credit, and writing for their teacher. After some deliberation I have 
decided to divide the sections of analysis based not on the type of data source (i.e. deletion debates vs. 
reflective essays vs. focus group interviews) but rather on what I perceive to be the main force that sits 
behind the writer identity performances found in those data sources (i.e. imagined community vs. 
community of practice vs. reading public). Thus, in each section various types of data are drawn upon 
because their analysis helps to illustrate the development of identities. 
In analyzing the students’ essays and the focus group transcripts, the first step taken was to use a two-
pronged approach. Certain categories identified during ethnographic observation provided a starting point 
for coding while other categories emerged in a bottom-up fashion during the coding process. As outlined 
above, the students were obliged to collaboratively write the article, publish it on Wikipedia, and respond 
to the critiques of Wikipedians (if any). These processes provided broad categories with which to 
commence coding the reflective essays using NVivo, and a fourth category soon emerged—learners’ 
observations about their affective responses during the Wikipedia writing assignment. Two researchers 
coded separately in order to maximize inter-coder reliability, with agreement in ninety-five percent of 
cases. While coding for these four broad categories, it emerged that the learners were writing about these 
topics in relation to the various perceived reading audiences introduced above: imagined Wikipedians, 
encountered Wikipedians, and a mass Wikipedia readership. The coding was then split into these more 
finely tuned categories, which were ultimately labeled imagined community, community of practice, and 
public. The same coding process was then applied to the focus group transcripts. Data was chosen for 
inclusion in this paper based on its representativeness of broader patterns in the entire corpus of data. 
ANALYSIS 
The first interaction has been taken from a focus group discussion recorded in May, 2014. The 
participants included myself as interviewer and four students appearing here under pseudonyms; Kit 
(female) and Keung, Ching, and Ting (male). Prior to this excerpt we had been discussing a blogging 
assignment from a different course. In Excerpt One the focus group (myself included) begins to co-
construct an imagined Wikipedia community and various writer identities. Please refer to the Appendix 
for transcription conventions. 
Excerpt 1. Focus Group B: Writing for an imagined community is different 
310 Keung the assignment requires us to do this 
311 Brian yeah so you’re doing that, but then (.) how about the actual writing 
  y’know when you were WRITing it (1.0) do you think you were as CAREful↑ 
  as with the wikipedia article↑ or do you think it’s similar↑ or different //or// 
312 Keung //uhh// when i write wrote the wikipedia articles 
  i I (.) had the MINDset that someone would CHECK the wordings 
Brian W. King Wikipedia Writing as Praxis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 113 
  either the members or robots or something like that 
  but when i wrote my blog i didn't have this mindset 
313 Brian so what did that (1.0) what was the DIFFerence then 
  so if you have the mindset what does it create 
  what does it cause you to do 
314 Keung i i w- (.) i will be more careful when i write (.) uhhh the wikipedia page 
  i need to CHOOSE the best words to write 
315 Brian //ok// 
316 Keung //but// in writing::: my blog- i just 
  O:::H i don't CARE about i:::t yeah (hehe) 
317 Brian so that (.) i see you’re nodding Kit 
  so do you think that is a COMMon thing↑ 
  or do you agree that you would feel that way↑ or {looking at Kit} 
318 Kit well i think um sometimes we have to put up our assignments on to the blogs 
  but it's not really writing for the::: uh (.) readers 
319 Brian //mhm// 
320 Kit //it's// just posted and people can read it  
  but people actually don't 
  so (.) i think it’s really um (.) DIFFerent 
  if i really want people to read it then i will write for the AUDience 
321 Brian //mhm//↑ 
322 Kit //but// some (.) mmMOST of the time we write for the teacher  
  (1.0) and then we POST it on the blog 
  and we don't really care about what people will think 
  and whether they look at it (.) as long we (.) as our essays are marked 
In line 311, I ask Keung to focus on the actual process of writing, asking if he was as careful in his 
blogwriting as with Wikipedia. Here I refer back to a previous discussion in which the participants 
positioned Wikipedia writing above blog writing by claiming that Wikipedia writing prompted them to 
look beyond the assignment rubric for a standard (unlike blogging). However, the comparative 
construction deployed by me (i.e. “as careful as”) has the effect of suggesting that Wikipedia writing 
might engender more care and attention. Keung then orients to this idea in line 312 and uses the word 
mindset to refer to the presence in his mind of an imagined community of Wikipedia members and of 
“robots” (i.e. automatic text checking software). He asserts that for this imagined community he chooses 
his words much more carefully, and in line 316 his tone changes to be more dismissive about his blog 
writing, saying “O:::H i don't CARE about i::t.” This passage results in a sense that the imagined 
community of Wikipedia prompts him to think more deeply about his writing; therefore, he performs a 
writer subject position that sits outside of a student subjectivity. Kit then nods and is invited to contribute. 
In line 320 she says that she will “write for the audience” if she feels convinced that people other than the 
teacher will read it, and in line 322 she states that students “don’t really care” about other classroom 
writing. In this sense she is referring to a process of socialization in which she feels more invested in 
writing for the Wikipedia imagined community and its readers. I would therefore suggest that in this 
Brian W. King Wikipedia Writing as Praxis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 114 
conversation Keung and Kit co-construct blog writing as an exercise, but Wikipedia writing is constructed 
as an act of identity.  
Numerous learners in their reflective essays also alluded to the Wikipedia community members and the 
importance of gaining their approval, whether tacit or explicit. Although some groups did not end up 
interacting directly with Wikipedians, the imagined community members still played an important role as 
“mentors of socialization” (Duff, 2011, p. 566) in terms of the learners’ writer identities. Lau is one 
student who revealed in her essay that her group members did not end up interacting directly with any 
Wikipedians. In Excerpt 2 she reflects on her affective response.  
Excerpt 2. Individual Reflective Essay: Lau on satisfaction 
1 Apart from my attitude towards Wikipedia, this assignment has also influenced my view towards 
2 writing. I used to say that I hated writing, as it is really an annoying task to me. Nonetheless, after 
3 writing the Wikipedia article, I realized that writing could be fascinating. During the process of 
4 writing, I rewrote the sentences several times. But every time I rewrote them, they got better and 
5 better. And after publishing the article, I felt a great satisfaction that I have never felt before. 
6 Although we have not earned any honours with our article, to me, not being deleted is already a 
7 great reward for us. I am really impressed by the experience. In the future, I will put more efforts 
8 on writing and learn from every experience to make the advancement. 
This passage emerged as part of an assignment that Lau wrote for her teacher. However, identity 
construction is also taking place while she is attempting to address the transactional task of writing an 
essay. She indicates in lines 1–2 that writing on Wikipedia has “influenced [her] view” on writing, 
suggesting subsequently that her fascination with the process had prompted her to “[rewrite] the 
sentences several times” (line 4). Implicit in these statements is a sense that extra care and attention was 
given to the writing, and so the imagined community of Wikipedians has in this way contributed to Lau’s 
socialization into an identity as a writer of English—one in which she is invested in the details of the 
writing process. She then suggests in lines 5 and 6 that the process has been uniquely satisfying, and the 
source of this satisfaction lies in “not being deleted” (line 6). Thus, the imagined Wikipedia community 
has placed its tacit stamp of approval on the article. There is a sense here of an ideal English-writing 
future self (Dörnyei, 2009) that has been sparked by a socialization experience outside of the formal 
instructional environment. 
Engaging in the Community of Practice 
Wikipedia articles are beginnings rather than ends, for they will subsequently be edited by others in the 
Wikipedia community. As seen in the previous section, learners invest in an imagined community of 
Wikipedians. However, once they have published their articles, they become legitimate peripheral 
participants in a community of practice. Students participate in that community of practice as writers, and 
as part of their socialization into that community a learner can begin to socialize into an identity as a 
competent writer of English. The Wikipedia community of practice plays a clear role in this process by 
providing a repertoire of observable community practices and affective stances through which identities 
can materialize and take shape via language socialization (Garrett, 2007). The following analysis follows 
a learner in her direct interaction with Wikipedians in order to gain a sense of how this experience 
contributes to writer identity socialization and how this identity development can link back to a learner’s 
local identity in the context of Hong Kong. 
On the talk page in Figure 1, Lok is arguing against the speedy deletion of her group’s article. I have 
obscured the article’s topic and the aliases of both Lok and the other community member for ethical 
Brian W. King Wikipedia Writing as Praxis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 115 
reasons. The topic’s notability had been questioned by the Wikipedia community. By responding on the 
talk page, Lok enters into a direct interaction with the community members.  
Figure 1. Student article deletion debate. 
In paragraphs 1–3 she puts forward some evidence for the topic’s notability and asserts firmly that it 
represents a cultural phenomenon in Hong Kong and so should be permitted to stand. In this way she 
takes on a subject position as an expert on Hong Kong society. The Wikipedia member is then at pains to 
explain that s/he believes Lok, but there are specific criteria that need to be satisfied if the article is to 
remain. In her essay, Lok reflects in some detail on this experience (Excerpt 3 below). 
Excerpt 3. Individual Reflective Essay: Lok on community participation 
1 It is like changing the role as I was usually the one looking up information on Wikipedia. Now I  
2 am one of the contributors to this worldwide community. It gave me a sense of achievement. 
3 These positive feelings motivated me in writing. In the past, nearly all of the articles I wrote were 
4 read by teachers and peers only. The Wikipedia Project that I just worked on gave me totally 
5 different feelings. I found that writing could be very meaningful. 
In lines 1 and 2, Lok refers to a changing of roles from a Wikipedia reader to a Wikipedia contributor, 
identifying this reversal as a motivating factor for writing. The phrase “contributor to this worldwide 
community” in line 2 reveals that her experience interacting with real Wikipedians has indeed contributed 
to her computer-mediated socialization into a sense of writer identity well beyond educational institutions. 
It is an identity that is likely to continue developing. Writing as a member of the Wikipedia community of 
 
Brian W. King Wikipedia Writing as Praxis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 116 
practice is deemed to be more “meaningful” than writing for “teacher and peers only” (lines 3 and 4). 
This passage constitutes an exploration of affect in which there is a realization that these classroom 
experiences have been preparing her for the more authentic experience of communicating with people in 
English outside of educational institutions. Lok’s essay reflections constitute a performance of English 
writer identity, one that certainly provides evidence that she might have shifted to a deeper investment in 
writing in English. But importantly, in terms of language socialization pedagogy, this is also a 
performance which serves as a further catalyst for that investment. In other words, the essay task and the 
identity socialization process it highlights cannot be easily separated. 
Lok’s net positive experience notwithstanding, it is important to acknowledge that not all students in the 
course felt so positively about interacting with the Wikipedia core members, as Asmita’s experience 
demonstrates quite clearly (Excerpt 4 below). 
Excerpt 4. Individual Reflective Essay: Asmita on community of practice marginalization 
1 Fortunately, we managed to keep the article up for 2 weeks which gave us hope that it would not 
2 have a dead end. However, it has been deleted recently which has put us on edge. We have tried to 
3 contact the related members but so far have not received any replies. Such a response discourages 
4 me from publishing further on Wikipedia. We are still trying to negotiate with the community and 
5 hope to end up with positive result. Although I don’t see myself continuing the practice of  
6 posting on Wikipedia I would, definitely, publish on other reliable and flexible platforms. After  
7 the practice, I have become more confident about publishing online. I will continue the practice. 
Asmita says in lines 6-7 that she has “become more confident about publishing online” and “will continue 
the practice” in spite of being disillusioned with Wikipedia after feeling ignored by those who were 
criticizing her group’s article. In any community of practice, there is a possibility of marginalization 
which can lead to non-participation in the community and a lack of investment in its practices (Norton, 
2001). However, in Asmita’s case she projects a future writing self, suggesting that the experience has 
socialized her into a writer identity in English, though perhaps not one that incorporates the Wikipedia 
community of practice. 
Writing to Communicate with a Public 
In the following focus group and reflective essay data, learners explore the idea of writing to 
communicate, and in so doing continue to construct writer identities as Hong Kongers who address a 
mass public in English. In Excerpt 5, the speakers are the same as in Excerpt 1 but approximately ten 
minutes has passed in the focus group discussion. In line 365 I focus attention directly on the Wikipedia 
writing assignment itself, asking what the group members think they might have learned from the 
experience. With a lengthy pause before and after the word “REALLY”, spoken with emphatic volume 
and intonation, I am attempting as interview facilitator to stress that I am interested in hearing the truth 
from their perspective. 
Excerpt 5. Focus Group B: Writing to communicate with a public 
365 Brian so WHAT do you think (3.0) REALLY   
  (1.0) what do you think you learned about writing from this experience  
  if anything 
366 Kit maybe we learn about the importance↑ of writing↑ and because (1.0) uh 
  the main difference between wikipedia writing  
Brian W. King Wikipedia Writing as Praxis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 117 
  and other writing that we normally do as assignments is that  
  wikipedia writing is for the public 
  and and::: when it's for the public↑ and they read it for information  
  we have to be careful 
  so we hav- (.) we will learn about the importance of writing objectively 
  and how it affects other people's mindset and perceptions 
367 Brian so that sounds to me (.) like you feel a responsibility 
368 Kit (nodding) YES (.) DEFINITELY 
369 Brian (laughs) yeah 
  do you agree with that↑ (sweeping hand gesture towards group) 
370 Ching (4.0) i want to say (.) i think in the perspective of language  
  um::: (.) well this assignment allows us to bring our (.) how do you say  
  uh we have learnt English 
  in  Hong Kong i mean 
  for (.) (rapid speech) from primary school or kindergarten↑ 
371 Keung kindergarten (.) //we start from kindergarten// 
372 Ching //kindergarten three years↑// and then (.) nine and then six or seven 
  (1.0) around ten to fifteen years↑ of English then  
  every time we use English 
  most of the time it is on (.) on academic stuff in class  
  but after the class w- after SCHOOL we do not speak English actually  
  we speak in Cantonese or Mandarin 
373 Brian //mhm// 
374 Ching //and then// that made us have a very 
  (.) i mean stra:::nge feeling about English is only for work or for schooling  
  but this assignment allows us to just like 
  (.) how to use English as a communicative i mean (.) a TOOL 
  it gave the original (.) i mean PURpose of English to students 
  it’s to communicate 
375 Brian so- //yeah// 
376 Ching //RATHER// than just writing an academic paper then 
  you will NEVER read it again 
377 Brian mm= 
378 Ching =and you would find it really BORing 
  and then challenging on writing a proper academic paper 
  and for this assignment it’s totally different 
379 Brian because of the outside audience↑ 
380 Ching yes 
Brian W. King Wikipedia Writing as Praxis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 118 
381 Brian you are communicating= 
382 Ching =YES= 
383 Brian =to somebody outside of the //classroom// 
384 Ching //yes// yes 
In response to my initial question, Kit in line 366 speaks of writing for a public as a highly distinctive 
academic writing experience. She says that writing for a public means that writers “have to be careful” 
and “write objectively” and so implies that she has thought more deeply about writing than is habitual. 
Thinking about “how [their writing] affects other people” means that the learners must develop identities 
as writers, more than students, in order to address this sense of “responsibility” (my word, line 367) that 
they feel. Thus, during these focus group reflections, Kit is performing an identity as a writer who makes 
a contribution to knowledge in English—an identity that reaches beyond her identity as a student in a 
Hong Kong university. 
When asked whether or not he agrees with this assessment, Ching then speaks up for an extended turn in 
line 370, emphasizing that the purpose of Wikipedia writing is to communicate – a crucial distinction 
from his past English learning experiences in the Hong Kong context. He paints that context as one in 
which the domain of English use was almost exclusively the classroom (“i mean stra:::nge feeling about 
English is only for work or for schooling”) and involved just writing “academic papers” which is a 
“boring” process. He implies in this contribution that writing for a public larger than an educational 
institution is more authentically communicative than writing an academic paper to be read only by a 
school-based readership. In this sense he builds on Kit’s previous point that writing for a Wikipedia mass 
public is a contribution. Communication is its “original purpose”. In co-constructing the Wikipedia 
writing subject, the members of this focus group construct it as a writer’s identity first while placing 
student identities in the background. 
In the student reflective essays there were also many examples of students framing Wikipedia writing as a 
contribution to knowledge and to the wider world, and in so reflecting, they constructed themselves as 
valid writers of English. In Excerpt 6, Yan also links this experience back to Hong Kong’s local context. 
Excerpt 6. Individual Reflective Essay: Yan on linking the global and local 
1 I can imagine the people from different parts of the world reading our article to know more about 
2 [TOPIC], I am glad that I have contributed to Hong Kong by letting more people understand us. I 
3 think I will write more articles about Hong Kong later on Wikipedia. Being a Hong Konger, I 
4 have the responsibility and honour to express for people who are concerned about what is 
5 happening in Hong Kong, and what makes it a place that we love to live in. Now, it makes me feel  
6 I am one of the “professional” publishers of Wikipedia. 
In line 1, Yan writes “I can imagine the people from different parts of the world reading our article” and 
so makes direct reference to a Wikipedia mass public that exists in her social imaginary. In the next lines, 
she frames writing for this mass public as a contribution to Hong Kong as much as being a contribution to 
world knowledge. Her future imagined self is a writer of English who represents Hong Kong beyond its 
borders. Thus, writing for Wikipedia and reflecting on the process has contributed to Yan’s ongoing 
socialization into a valid English writing identity. This sense of honour and responsibility for Hong Kong 
points to further research that is waiting to be done—research on the effects on second-language writer 
identities of writing for an international public. 
DISCUSSION 
Brian W. King Wikipedia Writing as Praxis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 119 
Because the students are writing for communities and publics that extend far beyond educational 
institutions, they find themselves writing not as students but instead as writers, pitching their work to an 
audience of reader-writers “out there” who are reading their work. Importantly, these extra-institutional 
readers are reading it neither for purposes of grading nor to comment for course credit, but rather to 
receive its messages and to respond. In practical terms this means that the learners invest in various 
readerships, whether imagined or immediate, thereby making use of knowledge and language skills to 
“take on powerful identities as effective communicators” (Thorne, Black & Sykes, 2009, p. 807). The 
authenticity of the experience seems to have prompted the learners’ socialization as writers of English 
more than any highly scaffolded activity ever could. Thus, Wikipedia’s perceived authenticity, writing to 
communicate with a public and a community, is a crucial factor missing from most other wiki writing 
experiences. The concept of publics is useful in this study because Wikipedia’s so-called “audience” of 
readers is just such an aggregate of imaginary others. Positioned beyond the imagined community of 
Wikipedia contributors and outside of the Wikipedia community of practice, the Wikipedia public seems 
to have a strongly motivating effect on these learners, prompting them in many cases to invest in 
aspirational selves as writers of English instead of just taking a superficial approach to writing. 
Web 2.0 technologies present writing as a means to generate ideas rather than as a means to deliver them 
(Purdy, 2010, p. 57), and this notion is evident in the student reflections. These learners construct 
identities for their future selves through which they use English writing to communicate and make a 
contribution to knowledge. It has been argued that a “reconceptualization of authorship” is taking place 
through the medium of Web 2.0 technologies (Sykes, Oskoz & Thorne, 2008, p. 531) and that the 
read/write web provides an unprecedented sense of “authorial purpose” (p. 532). These technologies 
allow learners to move from being knowledge consumers to also being producers and contributors to 
knowledge (Bloch, 2007; Purdy, 2010; Sykes Oskoz & Thorne, 2008) and furthermore advance language 
development (Potts, 2005). Data from the current study demonstrate that there is a great deal of validity to 
these assertions, for these affordances are salient to the participants in relation to Wikipedia.  
CONCLUSION 
Wikipedia is a public space for collaborative writing where users can create knowledge rather than just 
consume it, and this experience helps students to see their role in larger scholarly conversations; that is, 
“[t]heir voices matter” (Purdy, 2010, p. 56). Wikipedia writing is what Warschauer (2005) has called a 
“strong purpose activity” (p. 45), and this strong sense of purpose arises from the distinctive affordances 
of Wikipedia’s modes of belonging. It is a sense of belonging to both a community of the imagination and 
potentially a community of practice (Wenger, 1998) as well as a sense that one is writing for a worldwide 
mass public. By focusing on modes of belonging, it has been possible to demonstrate the particular social 
relevance of Wikipedia-writing for the participants and how this computer-mediated socialization 
experience can “ignite the vision” (Dörnyei, 2009, p. 33) of an ideal English writing self in the future. 
Wikipedia offers a computer-mediated way for writers to “explore and construct their relation to the 
language” (Lam, 2004, p. 60) and hopefully transfer this sense-making back to the local Hong Kong 
context via a newfound identity as someone who can legitimately write and communicate in English. 
 
APPENDIX. Transcription Conventions  
//  Slashes indicate overlapping speech. 
 word- A hyphen indicates abruptly cut-off speech. 
 (1.0) Numbers in parentheses indicate elapsed time of silence in seconds. 
 (.)  A dot in parentheses indicates a short silence/gap, less than 1 second. 
 ::  Colons indicate prolongation of the immediately prior sound. The length of the row of  
   colons indicates the length of the prolongation. 
Brian W. King Wikipedia Writing as Praxis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 120 
 WORD  Capitals indicate especially emphasized sounds compared to surrounding talk (normally  
capitalized words are not capitalized in order to fit this convention, including “I”). 
 ( )  Single parentheses contain prosodic contributions - e.g. (laughter). 
 { }  Curly parentheses contain author’s descriptions rather than transcriptions. 
 ↑  A straight up arrow indicates rising intonation in the preceding syllable. 
  An upward moving arrow indicates falling and then rising intonation in the preceding    
  syllable. 
  A downward moving arrow indicates rising and then falling intonation in the preceding 
  syllable. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank the EDGE department at City University of Hong Kong for providing a TSG grant 
which has made this classroom assignment and this research possible. Additionally I would like to thank 
Richard Cheng (senior research assistant) and Mark Cheng (technical assistant) for their long-term and 
invaluable contribution to the Wikipedia assignment and to this study. I am also very grateful to the 
anonymous reviewers and the editors of this special issue for their invaluable comments. Foremost, I 
would like to express my sincere thanks to the teachers for helping to make this assignment rewarding for 
the students and to the student participants for generously consenting to analysis of their coursework. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Brian King’s primary research interests are in language use in communities, computer-mediated discourse, 
and language learning and identity. He has published articles in international journals such as Language 
in Society, Journal of Language Identity and Education, Sexualities, Gender and Language, and Journal 
of Language and Sexuality. 
E-mail: bwking@cityu.edu.hk 
 
REFERENCES 
Benson, P., Barkhuizen, G., Bodycott, P., & Brown, J. (2013). Second Language Identity in Narratives of 
Study Abroad. London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Besser, S., & Chik, A. (2014). Narratives of second language identity amongst young English learners in 
Hong Kong. ELT Journal, 68(3), 299–309. 
Black, R. W. (2005). Access and affiliation: The literacy and composition practices of English-language 
learners in an online fan fiction community. Journal of Adolescent and Adult Literacy, 49(2), 118–128. 
Bloch, J. (2007). Abdullah’s blogging: A generation 1.5 student enters the blogosphere. Language 
Learning & Technology, 11(2), 128–141. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num2/bloch/default.html 
Bryant, S. L., Forte, A., & Bruckman, A. (2005). Becoming Wikipedian: Transformation of participation 
in a collaborative online encyclopedia. In Proceedings of ACM GROUP: International conference on 
supporting group work (pp. 1–10). Sanibel Island, FL. 
Carroll, S., Motha, S., & Price, J. N. (2008). Accessing imagined communities and reinscribing regimes 
of truth. Critical Inquiry in Language Studies, 5(3), 165–191. 
Compton-Lilly, C. (2014). The development of writing habitus: A ten-year case study of a young writer. 
Written Communication, 31(4), 371–403. 
Brian W. King Wikipedia Writing as Praxis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 121 
Copland, F. & Creese, A. (2015). Linguistic ethnography: Collecting, analysing and fresenting data. 
London, UK: Sage.  
Dörnyei, Z. (2009). The L2 motivational self system. In P. A. Duff & E. Ushioda (Eds.), Motivation, 
language identity and the L2 self (pp. 9–42). Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Duff, P. A. (2010a). Language socialization. In N. H. Hornberger & S. L. McKay (Eds.), Sociolinguistics 
and Language Education (pp. 427–452). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Duff, P. A. (2010b). Language socialization into academic discourse communities. Annual Review of 
Applied Linguistics, 30(1), 169–192. 
Duff, P. A. (2011). Second language socialization. In A. Duranti, E. Ochs, & B. B. Schieffelin (Eds.), The 
Handbook of Language Socialization (pp. 564–586). Oxford, UK: Blackwell. 
Duff, P. A. (2014). Identity, agency, and second language acquisition. In S. M. Gass & A. Mackey (Eds.), 
The Routledge Handbook of Second Language Acquisition (pp. 410–426). London, UK: Routledge. 
Duff, P. A., & Talmy, S. (2011). Language socialization approaches to second language acquisition. In D. 
Atkinson (Ed.), Alternative approaches to second language acquisition (pp. 95–116). London, UK: 
Routledge. 
Eckert, P., & McConnell-Ginet, S. (1999). New generalizations and explanations in language and gender 
research. Language in Society, 28(02), 185–201. 
Evans, S. (2013). The long march to biliteracy and trilingualism: Language policy in Hong Kong 
education since the handover. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 33(1), 302–324. 
Flowerdew, J. (2000). Discourse community, legitimate peripheral participation, and the nonnative-
English-speaking scholar. TESOL Quarterly, 34(1), 127–150. 
Forte, A., & Bruckman, A. (2006). From Wikipedia to the classroom: Exploring online publication and 
learning. In International conference of the learning sciences (pp. 182–188). Bloomington, IN. Retrieved 
from http://www.cc.gatech.edu/~asb/papers/conference/forte-bruckman-icls06.pdf 
Garrett, P. B. (2007). Language socialization and the (re)production of bilingual subjectivities. In M. 
Heller (Ed.), Bilingualism: A social approach (pp. 233–256). New York, NY: Palgrave MacMillan. 
Herring, S. C. (2013). Discourse in Web 2.0: Familiar, reconfigured, and emergent. In D. Tannen & A. M. 
Trester (Eds.), Discourse 2.0: Language and New Media (pp. 1–26). Washington, D.C.: Georgetown 
University Press. 
Johnstone, B. (2000). Qualitative methods in Sociolinguistics. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Kanno, Y. (2008). Language and Education in Japan: Unequal Access to Bilingualism. Basingstoke, UK: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
Kanno, Y., & Norton, B. (2003). Imagined communities and educational possibilities: Introduction. 
Journal of Language, Identity, and Education, 2(4), 241–249. 
Kendrick, M., & Jones, S. (2008). Girls’ visual representations of literacy in a rural Ugandan community. 
Canadian Journal of Education, 31(3), 372–404. 
King, B. W. (2008). “Being gay guy, that is the advantage”: Queer Korean language learning and identity 
construction. The Journal of Language, Identity and Education, 7(3/4), 230–252. 
King, B. W. (2014). Tracing the emergence of a community of practice: Beyond presupposition in 
sociolinguistic research. Language in Society, 43(1), 61–81. 
King, B. W. (2015). Online writing as a discovery process: Synchronous collaboration. In A. Chik, T. 
Brian W. King Wikipedia Writing as Praxis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 122 
Costley, & M. C. Pennington (Eds.), Creativity and Discovery in the University Writing Class: A 
Teacher’s Guide (pp. 321–345). New York, NY: Equinox. 
Lai, C., Gao, F., & Wang, Q. (2015). Bicultural orientation and Chinese language learning among South 
Asian ethnic minority students in Hong Kong. International Journal of Bilingual Education and 
Bilingualism, 18(2), 203–224. 
Lam, W. S. E. (2004). Second language socialization in a bilingual chat room: Global and local 
considerations. Language Learning & Technology, 8(3), 44–65. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num3/lam/ 
Mann, S. (2011). A critical review of qualitative interviews in Applied Linguistics. Applied Linguistics, 
32(1), 6–24. 
McNely, B. J., Teston, C. B., Cox, G., Olorunda, B., & Dunker, N. (2010). Digital publics and 
participatory education. Digital Culture & Education, 2(2), 144–164. 
Miller, J. (2014). Building academic literacy and research skills by contributing to Wikipedia: A case 
study at an Australian university. Journal of Academic Language and Learning, 8(2), 72–86. 
Mills, N. (2011). Situated learning through social networking communities: The development of joint 
enterprise, mutual engagement, and a shared repertoire. CALICO Journal, 28(2), 345–368. 
Norton, B. (2001). Non-participation, imagined communities and the language classroom. In M. Breen 
(Ed.), Learner Contributions to Language Learning (pp. 159–171). Harlow, UK: Pearson Education. 
Norton, B. (2013). Identity and Language Learning: Extending the Conversation (2nd ed.). Bristol, UK: 
Multilingual Matters. 
Norton, B., & McKinney, C. (2011). An identity approach to second language acquisition. In D. Atkinson 
(Ed.), Alternative Approaches to Second Language Acquisition (pp. 73–94). London, UK: Routledge. 
O’Sullivan, D. (2009). Wikipedia: A New Community of Practice? Surrey/Burlington, UK: Ashgate. 
Pavlenko, A., & Norton, B. (2007). Imagined communities, identity, and English language teaching. In J. 
Cummins & C. Davison (Eds.), International Handbook of English Language Teaching (pp. 669–680). 
New York, NY: Springer. 
Potts, D. (2005). Pedagogy, purpose, and the second language learner in on-line communities. Canadian 
Modern Language Review, 62(1), 137–160. 
Purdy, J. (2010). The changing space of research: Web 2.0 and the integration of research and writing 
environments. Computers and Composition, 27(1), 48–58. 
Rampton, B. (2007). Neo-Hymesian linguistic ethnography in the United Kingdom. Journal of 
Sociolinguistics, 11(5), 584–607. 
Reinhardt, J., & Zander, V. (2011). Social networking in an intensive English program classroom: A 
language socialization perspective. CALICO Journal, 28(2), 326–344. 
Richards, K. (2009). Trends in qualitative research in language teaching since 2000. Language Teaching, 
42(2), 147–180. 
Sykes, J. M., Oskoz, A., & Thorne, S. L. (2008). Web 2.0, synthetic immersive environments, and mobile 
resources for language education. CALICO Journal, 25(3), 528–546. 
Talmy, S. (2011). The Interview as Collaborative Achievement: Interaction, Identity, and Ideology in a 
Speech Event. Applied Linguistics, 32(1), 25–42. 
Tardy, C. M. (2010). Writing for the world: Wikipedia as an introduction to academic writing. English 
Brian W. King Wikipedia Writing as Praxis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 123 
Teaching Forum, 48(1), 12–27. 
Taylor, C. (2004). Modern Social Imaginaries. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Thorne, S. L., & Black, R. W. (2007). Language and literacy development in computer-mediated contexts 
and communities. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 27(1), 133–160. 
Thorne, S. L., Black, R. W., & Sykes, J. M. (2009). Second language use, socialization, and learning in 
Internet interest communities and online gaming. Modern Language Journal, 93(Issue Supplement s1), 
802–821. 
Ushioda, E. (2011). Language learning motivation, self and identity: Current theoretical perspectives. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 24(3), 199–210. 
Warner, M. (2002). Publics and Counterpublics. New York, NY: Zone Books. 
Warschauer, M. (2005). Sociocultural perspectives on CALL. In J. L. Egbert & G. M. Petrie (Eds.), CALL 
Research Perspectives (pp. 41–51). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Warschauer, M. (2010). Invited commentary: New tools for teaching writing. Language Learning & 
Technology, 14(1), 3–8. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num1/commentary.pdf 
Warschauer, M., & Grimes, D. (2007). Audience, authorship, and artifact: The emergent semiotics of 
Web 2.0. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 27(1), 1–23. 
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning and Identity. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
