Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2015/review1.pdf 
June 2015, Volume 19, Number 2 
pp. 36–39 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 36 
REVIEW OF TECHNOLOGY-MEDIATED TBLT: RESEARCHING 
TECHNOLOGY AND TASKS 
 
Technology-mediated TBLT: Researching Technology 
and Tasks 
Marta González-Lloret and Lourdes Ortega  
2014 
ISBN: 9789027207289 
US $49.95 
336 pp. 
John Benjamins 
Amsterdam 
 
 
Review by Pia Sundqvist, Karlstads Universitet 
Technology-mediated TBLT: Researching Technology and Tasks, edited by Marta González-Lloret and 
Lourdes Ortega, presents a new framework in which tasks and technology are integrated in the language 
curriculum. Although Task-Based Language Teaching (TBLT) and Computer-Assisted Language 
Learning (CALL) have been around for some time, the integration of language learning tasks and new 
technologies has remained an under-researched area, as pointed out by the editors. The current volume 
offers several empirical studies as well as a theoretical framework, which is likely to be a welcome 
contribution to research and to teaching practice.  
The book is divided into twelve chapters of varying lengths and foci. In the introductory chapter, the 
editors present their vision for how “the canonical principles of task-based language teaching (TBLT) can 
be fitted integrally into the new language education and digital technology realities” (p. 1). They propose 
three requirements that they believe will assist in this process of integration: (a) to work with a TBLT-
informed definition of tasks, (b) to be cognizant of the implications the integration brings about for the 
construction of knowledge as well as for any kind of learning (which of course includes language 
learning), and (c) to bring the curriculum into the forefront. They highlight the three cornerstones of 
traditional TBLT (needs analysis; task selection and sequencing; materials development and instructional 
design) and add a fourth component that they argue should be equally important (assessment of learners’ 
learning processes and learning outcomes). It is a promising start that is likely to heighten readers’ 
curiosity. Whereas many of these contributions focus on empirical studies that are linked in different 
ways to technology-mediated TBLT, others are more theoretically oriented, or illustrate possible future 
paths for research into technology-mediated TBLT.  
Chapter 2, by González-Lloret, is about the necessity for needs analyses (NA) in technology-mediated 
TBLT. She highlights the importance for language teachers to consider which technologies will mediate 
(and hence transform) the task at hand. While it is crucial to conduct NAs, she also discusses the possible 
challenges of conducting such analyses, which might in fact explain why there are so few concrete 
examples of NAs for TBLT programs. One challenge mentioned is the fact that teachers may trust 
textbooks to offer the necessary material and, as a consequence, they stop worrying about their specific 
Pia Sundqvist                           Review of Technology-mediated TBLT  
 
Language Learning & Technology  37 
language program or learners. González-Lloret also addresses the importance of attending to learners’ 
digital literacies and argues that while most young learners are relatively computer and multimedia 
literate, their skills may vary greatly across settings and populations.  
Chapter 3 (by Adams and Nik) deals with prior knowledge and second language task production in group 
text chat among engineering students in Malaysia. It is an impressive chapter that includes a solid 
theoretical background, useful reports on previous studies, and a study on the quality of predictions of the 
Cognition Hypothesis (Robinson, 2005) in chat tasks. In the study, a so-called resource-dispersing 
variable – prior knowledge – is investigated, to see whether it impacts language production. The results 
failed to provide evidence for the applicability of the Cognition Hypothesis to the type of data examined, 
and the authors suggest that, “it is the distinct nature of text chat that best explains these findings” (p. 72). 
In text chat, production and transmission of messages are separated, so that production happens first (as 
learners compose and edit their posts), whereas transmission takes place later (when the message has been 
posted). This separation leaves room for learners to focus on form when they are off-line, which may 
enhance the accuracy and complexity of their linguistic output “under less cognitively complex conditions 
of task performance” (p. 72). The findings of rather advanced inferential statistics are communicated in a 
reader-friendly way that can be understood by readers with varying degrees of familiarity with higher-
order statistical procedures. 
In Chapter 4, Solares reports on an action research study in a textbook-bound EFL context. The author 
was the teacher-researcher in this Mexican study whose aim was to investigate the educational value of 
blending technology into a task-based instruction module that targets grammar learning (simple past; past 
continuous; used to). The whole module culminated in a writing activity. Three groups were examined: 
the first group engaged in a task-based, technology-mediated instructional design, the second experienced 
the same design but without digital tools, and the third worked in line with the original textbook design. 
Questionnaires and interviews were used to collect the data. While all three approaches led to similar 
linguistic gains, the first two groups appreciated the task design more than the technological element. As 
noted by the author, although a researcher-teacher design is typical of action research, it has the 
disadvantage that it may introduce inadvertent bias into studies. I appreciate that she brings this up, 
because many student comments were easy to predict. In addition, the PostScript encompasses details of 
Solares’s further-developed technology-mediated teaching, which provides valuable information to 
instructors.  
Chapter 5 (Oskoz and Elola) centers on a study targeting collaborative writing through the use of Web 2.0 
tools and tasks. The participants were advanced-level Spanish majors at an American university who 
completed two writing modules (argumentative and expository essays). A task-based approach was used 
for each genre, and the students used chats and wikis for each essay. The researchers set out to analyze 
the extent to which a task-based approach to collaborative writing – combined with the use of chats and 
wikis – would aid learners in developing their writing competencies. The results revealed that content was 
focused in both modules. Further, macro language aspects were more focused in the chats than in the 
wikis, whereas the opposite relationship was found for micro language aspects. The evidence supports the 
sociocultural theoretical view that learners’ interactions, here manifest in Web 2.0 tools, mediated the 
collaborative writing activity. However, this was a small study, and the authors acknowledge the 
difficulty of knowing whether there were indeed developmental explanations to their findings (learner 
productions became more advanced over time) or rather a tradeoff effect (learners used less complex 
grammatical structures in the second, expository essay). It seems clear, though, that the carefully 
sequenced set of tasks that guided the learners through the writing processes assisted them in reaching 
high levels of critical thinking, which is in line with findings in Ware and O’Dowd (2008).  
In Chapter 6, Sykes returns to her well-known synthetic immersive environment (SIE) called 
Croquelandia, created specifically for the learning of L2 pragmatics in Spanish. The study is based on in-
game data and interviews with college-level learners in the U.S. Sykes examines students’ restarts of 
Pia Sundqvist                           Review of Technology-mediated TBLT  
 
Language Learning & Technology  38 
tasks, or more specifically, the notion of fail states as evidenced through quest restarts, which is “one 
critical component of TBLT in SIEs” (p. 154). These fail states allow for a continued repetition of tasks, 
leaving it up to each student/player to decide on the number of repetitions needed in order to successfully 
complete a quest. ‘Task’ in this context is defined as “a real-world, authentic activity which prepares 
learners for, and engages learners with, meaningful language use” (p. 152) – a definition that most 
contributors in this volume seem to adhere to. The results were slightly disappointing in that only half of 
the participants produced quest restarts; the remaining half never made any use at all of the in-game 
restart feature (built into the game for the purpose of language learning). In addition, out of those who 
used the restart feature, the majority only did so once. There is an important discussion at the end about 
the difference between playing to learn (players complete tasks in order to learn something) and learning 
to play (tasks are more than mere practice; they are the authentic reason for needing to learn to do 
something).  
Chapter 7 (authored by Canto, de Graaff, and Jauregi) is about collaborative tasks for negotiation of 
intercultural meaning in virtual worlds (e.g., Second Life) and video-web communication (e.g., Adobe 
Connect), and stems from the European Networked Interaction in Foreign Language Acquisition and 
Research project (NIFLAR). Both virtual worlds and video-web communication may create opportunities 
for language learners to synchronously interact outside the classroom. Here, networked synchronous 
interactions of two triads (two L1 Dutch students of Spanish; one L1 Spanish pre-service teacher in 
Spain) were examined, along with questionnaire data from students and pre-service teachers. The findings 
were positive: both learners and pre-service teachers became more aware of intercultural differences and 
similarities, so the setup clearly contributed to mutually beneficial experiences. In addition, this type of 
computer-mediated communication gives opportunities for real interaction, indeed a good basis for L2 
learning. 
The following chapter (Gánem-Gutiérrez) describes a theoretical framework informed by Sociocultural 
Theory (SCT) and Activity Theory supposed to be used for the design and evaluation of pedagogical tasks 
for 3D virtual environments. Although I would have appreciated a heavier focus on tasks, the chapter is 
still interesting and includes a useful, detailed table comparing SCT principles and 3D virtual world 
affordances for TBLT. 
In Chapter 9, Sauro explores the use of fandoms and fandom tasks as pedagogical tools in technology-
enhanced language classes. In online fandoms, users appropriate both emerging and established 
technologies, and they do so in order to analyze and/or produce creative works based upon source 
material such as J. K. Rowlings’s books about Harry Potter. Sauro guides readers through four fandom 
tasks and the technology applications used for each one. The tasks are organized in the order of technical 
complexity of the applications involved, and she explores the linguistic skills and proficiency levels 
targeted by each task. Technical and linguistic complexity goes hand in hand; for instance, so-called 
threaded games are basic in terms of technical complexity and beginning/intermediate in terms of 
linguistic complexity and are, thus, described first. At the advanced level, Wikis and literary lexicons are 
described. All of this is done in a pedagogical fashion, which makes the chapter accessible and inspiring. 
Anyone teaching comparative literature or writing classes would be keen to try some of the suggested 
tasks, perhaps even incorporating them into their curriculum.  
Chapter 10 (Winke) reports on a project that takes place among advanced level Chinese learners in the 
U.S. The aim was to introduce task-based, formative assessments of spoken language, designed by the 
author to aid students in monitoring the development of their own oral proficiency skills. After the 
author/researcher had teamed up with the students’ teacher, the students contributed with self-assessments 
(of accuracy, fluency, complexity, and accent/tones), which were then compared with expert raters’ 
assessments on two tasks. With the help of formative assessment, the purpose was to enable learners to 
recognize their own learning trajectory, so that major achievements did not pass by unnoticed. During the 
course of the study, the learners became better and more realistic judges of their own oral production. The 
Pia Sundqvist                           Review of Technology-mediated TBLT  
 
Language Learning & Technology  39 
chapter offers an enjoyable reading experience and, as in many other chapters, provides valuable 
suggestions for further research.  
In chapter 11, Nielson also targets learning Chinese, but in this study the participants were high school 
students who wanted to continue their studies after having taken part in a summer program. The learners 
comprised two groups: the first (n = 35) completed a yearlong, task-based online course, and the second 
(control, n = 12) did not participate in the online format but completed pre- and post-course testing. The 
aim was to examine the effectiveness of this specific course. While the results indicate that learner 
proficiency improved after the online version of the program, it was not possible to conclude that the 
improvements resulted from the online course per se; the small sample sizes in combination with low 
assessment completion rates precluded any significance testing. Nevertheless, this research constitutes a 
valuable contribution to both online teaching and TBLT. For anyone teaching online classes, this chapter 
offers particularly interesting theory and findings.  
It is a great choice to have Chapelle writing the Afterword, since she made important, early contributions 
in the field of CALL and TBLT. In the afterword, she uses the chance to comment on developments and 
future directions. Her chapter sums up the book, highlights gaps in the field, and identifies challenges, 
among which include the redefinition of target language competence and the identification of real world 
tasks in the context of emerging new technologies across learning contexts.    
Overall, Technology-mediated TBLT comes across as a timely contribution in that it presents a new 
theoretical framework, brings together scholars from all over the world, and encompasses several 
languages. Strangely enough, the cover material specifies that the contexts of study span “adult college-
level education settings”, but I would like to stress that there are also highly relevant contributions from 
secondary school settings in this book. The mix of tasks and technologies, of languages and educational 
levels, and of theory and empirical studies could easily run the risk of creating a chaotic impression, but 
that is certainly not the case in this volume. On the contrary, Technology-mediated TBLT is an easily 
accessible and enjoyable read, and the editors have made excellent choices when selecting the chapters. 
For me, it was slightly bewildering that the phrases pedagogic task and pedagogical task were used 
inconsistently throughout the book, but this is a very minor complaint. On the whole, there are few formal 
mistakes, which indicate a careful editing process. While the scientific quality varies across chapters, 
most are relevant and strong pieces, in particular Chapters 5, 7, 9, and 11. Most likely, many teachers and 
researchers involved in CALL and/or TBLT will find this book both useful and inspiring. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Pia Sundqvist is Associate Professor in English linguistics at Karlstad University, Sweden. Her main 
research interests are extramural/out-of-school language learning (in particular through digital gameplay), 
L2 vocabulary acquisition, and assessment of L2 oral proficiency. She has extensive experience in 
language teaching from secondary and upper-secondary school to university-level courses.   
E-mail: pia.sundqvist@kau.se 
 
REFERENCES 
Robinson, P. (2005). Cognitive complexity and task sequencing: Studies in a componential framework for 
second language task design. IRAL, 43, 1–33.  
Ware, P., & O'Dowd, R. (2008). Peer feedback on language form in telecollaboration. Language Learning 
& Technology, 12(1), 43–63. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/pdf/wareodowd.pdf 
 
