Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/action2.pdf 
February 2015, Volume 19, Number 1 
pp. 34–45 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 34 
ACTION RESEARCH 
PROMOTING PRE-SERVICE TEACHERS’ REFLECTIONS THROUGH A 
CROSS-CULTURAL KEYPAL PROJECT 
Aleksandra Wach, Faculty of English, Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań 
This paper reports the results of an action research-based study that investigated 
participants’ reflections on EFL learning and teaching in a computer-mediated 
communication (CMC)-based project. Forty pre-service teachers from two universities, in 
Poland and in Romania, exchanged emails on class-related topics; the email exchange was 
followed by a project evaluation questionnaire. E-mail entries and quantitative and 
qualitative findings from the questionnaire were analysed to evaluate the effects of 
participating in the keypal project on stimulating participants’ reflections. Results point to 
considerable potential for the collaborative project as a means of evoking reflections on 
participants’ knowledge, experience and practice. The investigation also highlighted the 
very positive perceptions of the participants about the value of the project for their 
professional training. 
Keywords: Teacher Education, Technology-Mediated Communication, Collaborative 
Learning. 
APA Citation: Wach, A. (2015). Promoting pre-service teachers’ reflections through a 
cross-cultural keypal project. Language Learning & Technology, 19(1), 34–45. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/action2.pdf 
Received: February 17, 2014; Accepted: July 28, 2014; Published: February 1, 2015 
Copyright: © Aleksandra Wach 
INTRODUCTION 
Contemporary trends in teacher education stress the need for teachers to adjust instruction to diverse 
contexts and learners, viewing teaching as a decision-making process, rather than focusing on the process-
product paradigm of the transmission model of education (Freeman, 2002). This is in line with a view of 
teachers as lifelong learners, who, at any stage of their careers, should try to make sense of their didactic 
procedures. Reflection is thus an essential element of both L2 teaching practice and L2 teacher training, 
and promoting reflective thinking is an objective of most teacher education programs (Burton, 2009; 
Farrell, 1999; Richards & Lockhart, 1996).  
Activities which foster reflective thinking in pre-service teachers can take multiple forms, such as journal 
writing, peer observation and peer teaching, filling in surveys, participating in discussions, etc. Currently, 
providing opportunities for trainees to engage in collaborative activities through computer-assisted 
language learning (CALL) resources is increasingly being recognized as a relevant option for pursuing 
professional education and enhancing reflection (Hanson-Smith, 2006; Hubbard, 2008; Hubbard & Levy, 
2006; Kessler, 2006; Lord & Lomicka, 2011; Meskill, 2009; Murray, 2013). Different forms of computer-
mediated communication (CMC), such as bulletin boards, blogging, or emailing, can stimulate 
collaborative dialogs among CMC participants, allowing them to share experiences, challenge beliefs, get 
mutual support, and thus, reflect upon their own experience and practice. Research on teacher education 
in CALL shows that discussions through CMC can encourage L2 pre-service teachers to consider  
multiple perspectives on educational issues, both those covered in teacher training courses and those they 
have experienced themselves, leading to a new understanding of ideas (Kamhi-Stein, 2000; Liaw, 2003; 
Mann & Talandis, 2012; Seale & Cann, 2000).  
Aleksandra Wach Promoting Pre-service Teachers’ Reflections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
This article presents the outcomes of an action research study in which pre-service teachers from 
universities in Poland and in Romania were engaged in email correspondence as a way of enhancing their 
reflections about L2 learning and teaching. First, however, the relevance of reflection in pre-service 
teacher education, particularly in CALL environments, is discussed. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Reflection and Collaboration in CALL Teacher Education 
Most definitions of reflective thinking include the notion of creating conceptualizations from a learning 
experience, which leads to a new understanding of a given situation or phenomenon (Seale & Cann, 
2000). Because reflection fosters awareness of oneself and one’s actions, serving as a link between 
knowledge and experience, it is considered to be a cornerstone of professional development and a central 
element in contemporary L2 teacher education (Burton, 2009; Farrell, 1999; Freeman, 2002; Mann, 2005; 
Richards & Lockhart, 1996).  
Moreover, the need to integrate technology into foreign language teacher education programs has been 
stressed for many years (e.g. Egbert, 2006; Hampel, 2009; Hanson-Smith, 2006; Hubbard, 2008; Hubbard 
& Levy, 2006; Kessler, 2006; Krajka, 2012; Murray, 2013). One reason for this is that the application of 
technology may promote reflective thinking in pre- and in-service teachers by creating opportunities for a 
conscious articulation of their practice, a reconstruction of knowledge, and enhanced awareness of 
learning and teaching processes. In such environments, students have time to reflect before they respond, 
as well as opportunities for deeper thinking and challenging assumptions, and for formative feedback and 
peer mentoring (Chapman, Ramondt, & Smiley, 2005). In the view of Freeman (2002), providing trainees 
with the means and occasions to articulate their experience is a vital aim of teacher education courses, as 
articulation and reflection are linked processes, and CALL teacher training may help achieve this goal. 
Egbert (2006) and McNeil (2013) see a link between CALL teacher education and “situated learning,” 
during which trainees can combine their “expert” and “craft” knowledge in authentic contexts. Finally, 
technology-based activities often involve the written medium, and, as noted by Burton (2009), since 
writing is based on a composing process, it “actually involves reflection” (p. 303). 
Another benefit derived from technology-enhanced teacher education is its potential to stimulate 
collaboration, which has also been recognized in research  as a way of supporting reflection (Arnold & 
Ducate, 2006; Lord & Lomicka, 2004; Mann & Talandis, 2012). Arnold and Ducate (2006) note that 
asynchronous CMC, in the form of emails or electronic bulletin boards, seems to be especially 
appropriate within teacher training programs, as the lack of time pressure allows more space for 
reflection; moreover, asynchronous formats are usually more task-focused and encourage deeper and 
more extended interactions. Warschauer (1997) stresses the potential of CMC in stimulating people to 
collaborate in knowledge construction, “thus linking reflection and interaction” (p. 437). Because of the 
capacity of CMC to lead learners to reframe their ideas through cooperation, engaging teacher trainees in 
sharing experiences with peers can create opportunities for the development of critical thinking skills, 
deeper reflection, realized as a social process, and transformative learning (Bauer-Ramazani, 2006; Lord 
& Lomicka, 2007). 
Previous Research on CALL Teacher Education 
Many recent studies have revealed positive influences of CMC environments, including collaborative 
keypal projects, on promoting different aspects of L2 teacher training. Kamhi-Stein (2000), for example, 
compared teacher-trainees’ participation in a face-to-face environment and on a Web-based bulletin 
board, noting that the online environment stimulated more peer discussions conducted without a trainer’s 
intervention, and produced higher levels of student collaboration and mutual support. Similar conclusions 
were drawn by Son (2002), who investigated online interactions among native and non-native speaker 
teachers of English within CMC discussion groups, and observed multiple opportunities for collaborative 
Aleksandra Wach Promoting Pre-service Teachers’ Reflections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 36 
learning, peer support, and positive evaluations of the project among the study participants. In Liaw’s 
(2003) study, a group of Taiwanese trainees exchanged emails with a peer group from a U.S. university 
on topics of their own choice (some of these topics were related to learning and teaching languages, 
others involved interpersonal and sociocultural issues). The participants’ notions about the other culture 
were challenged, their knowledge deepened and reconstructed, and, generally, reflective thinking was 
fostered. Arnold and Ducate (2006) described a study in which teacher trainees from two universities used 
a discussion board for exchanging information, views, and opinions about theoretical and practical topics 
connected with foreign language learning and teaching. The experience proved to be beneficial for the 
participants’ professional training for both social and cognitive reasons. In Yang’s (2009) study, 
Taiwanese EFL teacher trainees participated in online discussions through blogging with the aim of 
engaging in and examining their own reflective practice. CMC was shown to be a flexible means of 
stimulating active involvement in discussions, leading to reflective inquiry. Increased reflection, as one of 
the advantages of participating in CALL-based teacher education programs, was also frequently 
mentioned by L2 teachers in a study conducted by Slaouti and Motteram (2006). Other benefits, related to 
the concept of teacher reflectivity, included knowledge transformation, increased awareness of teachers’ 
and learners’ roles, and reconstructive processes evident in teachers’ actions and thinking. 
The Conceptual Framework of the Present Study 
The main pedagogical foundation for the present study was provided by the social-constructivist theory, 
which views learning as co-construction of knowledge in a social context. Individuals are actively 
engaged in making sense of knowledge through interacting with others in a specific sociocultural context. 
Thus, a constructivist program in teacher education may involve an emphasis on learning as reflective 
thinking and productivity, context-rich learning which focuses on authentic activities and allows for 
student collaboration in exploring and evaluating ideas (Warschauer, 1997; Williams & Burden, 1997). 
As noted by Kern and Warschauer (2000), the interactive nature of CALL aptly allows for this kind of 
learning, and Kessler and Bikowski (2010) make the point that within technology-mediated 
environments, the adaptation of the social-constructivist theory to new contexts of learning needs a 
redefined interpretation.  
The study was also inspired by the sociocultural perspective on learning, derived from the principles of 
social-constructivist theory. Johnson and Golombek (2011) explain that within the sociocultural 
perspective, “human cognition originates in and emerges out of participation in social activities” (p. 1). 
Learning is  
not the straightforward appropriation of skills or knowledge from the outside in, but the 
progressive movement from external, socially mediated activity to internal mediational control by 
individual learners, which results in the transformation of both the self and the activity.(Johnson, 
2009, p. 2) 
The final, most specific inspiration for the study was the beneficial effects of collaborative learning, a 
premise based on the social-constructivist theory, which is often discussed within CALL contexts as 
offering exposure to diverse perspectives on relevant issues with a problem-solving orientation, as well as 
helping to establish relationships among participants (Beatty & Nunan, 2006; Belz, 2002; Elola & Oskoz, 
2010). In teacher education programs, the flexibility of CALL-based collaboration can contribute to 
trainees’ engagement and autonomy (Kessler, 2013; Kessler & Bikowski, 2010; Reinders & Hubbard, 
2013). 
REASEARCH AIMS 
To investigate the potential of online collaboration as a reflection-enhancing tool, an action research 
project was designed using cross-cultural email exchanges in two groups of pre-service teachers. The 
primary aim of action research is to work out a solution to a problem; hence, it is based on a series of 
Aleksandra Wach Promoting Pre-service Teachers’ Reflections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
stages, including an identification of a problem, planning and implementing an intervention, data 
collection and evaluation, and, if necessary, revising the plan (Burns, 2010; Wallace, 1998). The direct 
stimulus behind the present study was the largely insufficient level of reflective thinking displayed by 
prospective teachers and their overall willingness to rely on ready solutions to various ELT issues 
discussed in class. Given that CALL teacher education, among its benefits, can stimulate reflective 
thinking, once the problem was identified, it was hypothesized that online collaboration focused on 
exploring course-related issues could have a positive effect on fostering students’ reflections.  Since 
preparing future teachers for the role of intercultural mediators is a vital objective of contemporary 
teacher training—and the participants had few opportunities to get hands-on experience in developing 
their intercultural awareness within the constraints of their EFL contexts, a cross-cultural collaboration 
project seemed to be an optimal kind of intervention.  
The research questions were: 
1. Will pre-service teachers benefit from collaborating online with keypals from another country? If 
they do, what kinds of benefits will they experience? 
2. Will any evidence of reflections emerge from their interactions? 
3. What will their perceptions be of their participation in the project? 
METHOD 
Participants 
Forty pre-service teachers, 20 (16 females and four males) from a university in Poland and 20 (19 females 
and one male) from a university in Romania, participated in the study. All participants were students in 
the final year of three-year BA programs, and all were training to be teachers of English. The Polish 
group was more homogeneous in this respect, as all of the Polish students were majoring in English; in 
the Romanian group, some students were majoring, while others were minoring, in English (their major 
was Romanian or another foreign language). Another difference between the groups lay in that all the 
Polish students were having their practicum at the time of the study. In the Romanian group, some of the 
students had already started the practicum, while others had not. 
Procedures 
The study lasted for 11 weeks, from the beginning of November 2012 to mid-January 2013. The students 
were paired up at random by the trainers, and cross-cultural pairs of students exchanged emails on 
assigned topics. Topics concerned their own courses of study, with a special focus on the teacher training 
components; the situation of English teachers in the two countries; the qualities of a good teacher; and 
effective teaching. The full list of the topics in the form that the students received them is included in the 
Appendix. In the final task, the students collaboratively made a presentation which summed up what they 
had learned from their partners. The emails (altogether, 292 entries) and the presentations were forwarded 
to the trainers. The study was concluded by in-class feedback sessions, during which students filled out 
questionnaires evaluating the project experience. Thirty-five of the participants filled out questionnaires: 
all of the Polish students (20), and 15 Romanian ones. The questionnaire consisted of five Likert-type 
questions, to which the students responded by ticking the most appropriate answer on a 5-point scale, 
where 1 meant “not at all”, 2 – “no”, 3 – “hard to say”, 4 – “yes”, and 5 – “very much indeed.” For each 
question, space was provided for the students’ descriptive comments; moreover, the questionnaire ended 
with an open-ended question: “Generally, what did you learn from the experience of participating in the 
project?” The answers to these open-ended prompts offered more in-depth insight into the students’ 
perceptions about how helpful the project was for their professional development. 
 
Aleksandra Wach Promoting Pre-service Teachers’ Reflections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 38 
RESULTS 
Examples of reflections from the emails 
The concept of reflection, due to its complexity, can be approached and described from a variety of 
perspectives. Within the scope of this study, reflective discourse was operationalized as possessing at 
least one of the following features (Hatton & Smith, 1995; Moon, 1999): 
• an expression of participants’ own thoughts, comments, and beliefs related to L2 learning and 
teaching, rather than a quotation of information from other sources; 
• relating to what a participant’s keypal has written about L2 learning or teaching and an 
attempt to understand the other person’s thinking; 
• an indication of applying course-based knowledge to the context of a participant’s own 
practice; 
• a descriptive interpretation of one’s academic or professional performance. 
In the body of participants’ email entries, portions of text which contained reflective discourse (referred to 
as reflection units) were coded, divided into theme threads (mostly related to the topics explored in the 
exchanges), and subjected to further analysis. To illustrate the proportion of samples containing reflective 
discourse, Table 1 presents information about the numbers of the email entries and words gathered in the 
study. As can be seen, reflection units were present in more than half of the emails and constituted about 
60% of the total number of words produced by the participants. 
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics of the Number of Emails and Words Gathered in the Study. 
          N        % 
Total number of email entries 292 100 
Number of email entries containing reflection units 157 53.7 
Total number of words 53,144 100 
Number of words in reflection units 32,228 60.6 
All of the reflections present in the emails were stimulated by the assigned topics (Appendix). While 
discussing the topic of what constitutes good teaching practices, students referred both to knowledge 
obtained in the didactics courses and to their own experiences as learners and trainees. Quite often, they 
evaluated their own practice in the context of discussing a wider topic, while at the same time sharing 
ideas with their partners, as seen in the following example:  
Today we had a micro-teaching session in our didactics class and we were supposed to prepare 
some activities to teach vocabulary. I chose difficult words connected with a bike, like a valve, a 
saddle, etc., and my students made comparisons, such as: I’m like a rim because... or My friend is 
like a saddle because... . (…) it was real fun:)  (Ania 6/12/2012) 
One student reflected upon the project they were participating in, concluding that it was beneficial for 
learning:  
When I am finally a real teacher, I will try to involve my students in projects similar to the one 
we’re now taking part in. There are so many opportunities for kids to get in touch with people 
from other countries and naturally they will be forced to use English. (Adam 8/12/2012) 
Many reflections resulted from rethinking their own learning experience, often from high school, from a 
Aleksandra Wach Promoting Pre-service Teachers’ Reflections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 39 
teacher-trainer perspective and drawing more generalized conclusions, as in the following examples, in 
which students shared ideas about what it takes to be a good teacher: “When it comes to the qualities of a 
good teacher, I think that one has to love what he or she does. The worst teachers I’ve ever met were fed 
up with their job” (Karolina 28/11/2012); “Effective teachers use facts as a starting point, and always ask 
‘why’ questions, encouraging students to think for themselves. Some of my teachers at school were like 
that, but most of them weren’t” (Andrea 7/12/2012). 
The interactive character of the project stimulated the students to build upon their partners’ ideas and add 
their own comments, which was evident in most of the emails, as in this example: “I agree that a good 
lesson is one in which (just like you said) the teacher varies activities” (Alexandra 10/12/2012). 
Numerous reflections concerned the challenges involved in being a teacher and illustrated the students’ 
doubts about the benefits of pursuing  a career in teaching. These excerpts display some of their feelings: 
“I’m afraid that it is so difficult to be a really good teacher that I’m even afraid to try. Maybe one day ... 
when I’m wiser;)” (Beata 27/11/2012);  
There are so many elements which have to be taken into account when you are in front of the 
class. You have to keep control of everything and organize every activity. I think that it is a 
difficult job, but a beautiful one. (Ioanna 22/11/2012) 
I have my practicum at primary school and although I find it very fulfilling, as I've said before, it 
seems to me that teachers in Poland are underestimated. Also, discipline problems and tense 
relations with parents are something that discourages me a little bit. (Anna 23/11/2012) 
Closed-Ended Questionnaire Responses 
The mean values and standard deviation levels for the students’ responses are presented in Table 2. As 
can be seen, the students positively evaluated the relevance of the discussion topics assigned by the 
trainers and admitted that the email exchanges stimulated their reflections on teacher training (for both of 
these questions, the average responses oscillated between 4.0 and 5.0 in both groups). 
Table 2. Descriptive Statistics of the Participants’ Responses to the Likert-Type Questions 
 Polish (N=20) Romanian (N=15) Totals 
 Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD 
Before the project started, did you have positive 
feelings about it? 
3.60 .883 3.07 1.335 3.37 1.114 
Did you find the topics for interactions relevant 
and adequate? 
4.00 .459 4.33 .488 4.14 .494 
Did you learn about the system of teacher training 
and the position of ELT in the other country? 
3.25 .639 4.40 .507 3.74 .817 
Did you reflect upon your own experience of 
learning to be a teacher? 
4.05 
 
.605 4.47 .640 4.23 .646 
Generally, are you glad that you took part in the 
project? 
3.75 .550 4.67 .488 4.14 .692 
Note: 1 = “not at all,” 2 = “no,” 3 = “hard to say,” 4 = “yes,” and 5 = “very much indeed.” 
Interestingly, while the Romanian students marked definitely positive answers to the question concerning 
their learning about the other country’s teacher training system, the Polish group’s answers were less 
positive. The mean scores to the initial question indicate that the students did not know what to expect 
Aleksandra Wach Promoting Pre-service Teachers’ Reflections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 40 
from the project (it was the first time any of them had participated in such an activity), and their feelings 
were not very positive before it started. However, their responses point to high levels of overall 
satisfaction with the project, although the Romanian students’ responses were considerably more positive 
than the Polish students’. 
The Open-Ended Questionnaire Comments 
Both the comments which explained the Likert-type answers and the answers to the final, open-ended 
question, provided an array of opinions about the benefits of the project. The fact that it provided 
opportunities for reconsidering (or, in other words, reflecting upon) the participants’ own practice, their 
own system of education, and their beliefs, was the most frequently cited benefit of the experience. One 
Polish student wrote: “With my partner, we talked about our teaching experience, which made me reflect 
upon my own practice. I also described some specific situations that happened in the lessons I conducted 
and we discussed them.” Similarly, other students also stressed the importance of rethinking their 
experience: “When I wrote about my experience, I started feeling like a real teacher, not just a student! I 
reflected about my favorite techniques and some problems that I have encountered in teaching, which 
helped me understand many things better”; “While interacting with my keypal, I always related to my 
own experience, both as a teacher and a learner” (Polish students’ comments). 
Many of the students noted that in order to write comprehensive answers to the questions, they had to 
integrate their knowledge, experience, and feelings, as can be seen in the following comments: “I referred 
to my experience of learning to be a teacher, but also sometimes read some material from the previous 
semester (when we covered the theoretical aspects of teaching) to be able to comment upon the topics” (a 
Romanian student);  “The topics we discussed required sharing our personal feelings, opinions and 
experiences, and were not only based on ‘bookish’ knowledge” (a Polish student). Such an integration 
may be conducive to enhanced reflectivity.  
The students clearly valued the chance to reflect upon various issues related to their training, as it 
enriched their knowledge base. One Polish student wrote: “I learned to look at a given topic from a 
different perspective.” Another added: “When discussing the topics, we could compare our situations, 
draw conclusions, and not only broaden our knowledge about teaching, but also pick up some practical 
ideas.” 
At the same time, some remarks indicated that the process of engaging in reflection and verbalizing them 
was not easy: “Sometimes the topics were difficult, as they required some reflection and I didn’t have 
ready ideas” (a Polish student); “In order to answer my partners’ questions, I had to think about my 
experience in teaching. But I still have little experience, so it was rather difficult” (a Romanian student). 
Some of the students admitted that participating in the project caused them to begin considering the idea 
of taking up a teaching career after graduation: “I had to reflect a lot upon whether I really want to be a 
teacher in the future, and the project has convinced that I do enjoy teaching and this is what I want to do 
as my career”; “I found out so many interesting things about teaching, and in fact during this project I 
started thinking seriously about becoming a teacher” (Romanian students’ comments). 
Finally, some of the comments summed up the experience as an enjoyable one for professional and social 
reasons. Two examples of such comments, both made by Polish students, are:  “I am glad that I had a 
chance to share experience with a teacher trainee from another country”; “It was a useful opportunity to 
exchange our experience and opinions, and compare how differently teacher training may be conducted in 
different countries.” Similarly, two Romanian students stressed the relevance of interacting with peer 
trainees from another country: “Comparing our educational systems and discussing their pros and cons 
was thought-provoking”; “It was interesting and motivating to discover that we faced similar problems as 
teacher trainees, although we study in different countries.” 
 
Aleksandra Wach Promoting Pre-service Teachers’ Reflections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
DISCUSSION, CONCLUSIONS, AND LIMITATIONS 
Addressing the research questions, it can be concluded that the pre-service teachers in this study 
benefitted from taking part in the project in many different ways. First of all, they had a chance to 
participate in a novel, innovative learning-teaching situation within the didactics course (they had never 
taken part in a collaborative keypal project before), which offered them ideas and encouragement for their 
own practice. It has been shown that through technology-based hands-on experience in learning, 
prospective teachers are more likely to incorporate technology in their own teaching (as was also shown 
in other studies, e.g. by Lord & Lomicka, 2004, 2011; Arnold & Ducate, 2006).  The descriptive findings 
in the current study suggest that this was indeed the case.  
Most important within the scope of this paper were the email exchanges, which apparently stimulated 
“reflective conversation” (Burton, 2009, p. 301) and gave participants opportunities to see, describe, and 
analyze situations which they have experienced—both in the ELT courses and in in their teaching practice 
from a different perspective. As concluded by Seale and Cann (2000), creating meaning from an 
experience that helps a trainee see things in a different light lies at the core of reflective practice, and 
helping trainees discover links between the ideas and skills they learn from L2 didactics materials and the 
reality of an L2 classroom is considered to be an important benefit of collaborative learning in teacher 
education (Hanson-Smith, 2006; Hubbard & Levy, 2006). Numerous examples of email entries in this 
study revealed that in the interactions, participants had to link their knowledge with their own beliefs and 
practices, thus potentially increasing awareness about their training. They also learned about the system of 
teacher education in another country, which could stimulate reflections about their own programs of study 
and their own apprenticeship.  
Many of the reflections recorded in the emails were rather technical and not very deep (as they focused 
primarily on descriptions of behavior), but some students made attempts at deeper, more critical 
reflections by linking previous experiences to their present situation, and by making references to what 
their partner wrote and evaluating it critically. This was necessitated by the dialogic nature of the 
exchanges, and it points to the value of collaboration and peer feedback as serving to mediate reflective 
thinking skills. The students’ views were often challenged by their partners’ responses, and, as they later 
admitted, such situations posed a particular difficulty for them. It can be assumed that having to 
reevaluate certain ideas and beliefs and to express them could lead to an activation of deeper cognitive 
processing. This assumption corroborates with findings from other studies, in which collaborative 
projects brought cognitive benefits, such as improved critical thinking skills (Arnold & Ducate, 2006; 
Bauer-Ramazani, 2006; Liaw, 2003).  
The participants generally evaluated the usefulness of the project for their professional training very 
highly. As can be seen from the questionnaire responses, they were aware of the role of reflective 
thinking in their learning, and appreciated how the project created opportunities for reflection. Their 
keypals were found to create a form of support community, and the interactions were evaluated as both 
informative and enjoyable. It can, therefore, be concluded that the collaborative learning environment not 
only stimulated reflections in the trainees, but it also had a positive affective effect on them personally . 
Again, this is largely in line with the findings of other investigations which highlighted the importance of 
building communities of practice in online interactions as a source of achieving social and affective 
support in the process of learning (e.g. Hampel, 2009; Hanson-Smith, 2006). 
It should be acknowledged that this study had a number of limitations. First, the small number of 
participants allows for no generalizations. Second, although the participants were satisfied with the topics, 
more variety and more student independence in choosing their own topics could have been allowed. 
Finally, for various technical reasons, email was the only form of CMC used in the study. Applying other 
forms would have undoubtedly contributed to the attractiveness of the project.  
Despite these limitations, the main didactic implication derived from the study is that involving students 
Aleksandra Wach Promoting Pre-service Teachers’ Reflections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 42 
in cross-cultural collaboration online, and not only in EFL didactics courses, appears to be a relevant 
teaching procedure. It not only stimulates learners’ reflectivity, but also brings out their potential and 
allows them to develop skills they need to function in today’s increasingly complex and globalized world. 
 
APPENDIX. The prompts that served as a basis for interactions 
Topic 1: • What are you studying?  
• What is the organization of your study (i.e. what courses and how many of them do you 
take, are they obligatory, etc.)?  
• Which subjects do you like most / least?  
• Do you have to work hard? 
Topic 2: • Do you want to be a teacher of English when you graduate?  
• Why/Why not?  
• Is it good to be an English teacher in Poland / in Romania?  
• What are your prospects of finding a good job within the teaching profession? 
Topic 3: • What are the qualities of a good teacher?  
• Thinking back and recalling all your teachers, which of their teaching qualities did you 
admire most? 
Topic 4: • On the basis of your knowledge and experience (as learners or teacher trainees), what 
teaching procedures (techniques, materials, etc.) are the most effective?  
• Give some examples of good teaching activities that you have read 
about/observed/participated in/used. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank the students who participated in the study and my Romanian colleague, Dr. Elena 
Bonta, for their involvement in the project. Moreover, I would like to express my gratitude to the LLT 
editors and the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments on the earlier versions of the article. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Aleksandra Wach is an Assistant Professor at the Faculty of English, Adam Mickiewicz University in 
Poznań, Poland. Apart from teaching EFL, she is involved in training pre-service and in-service English 
teachers. Her current interests include teachers’ and learners’ reflectivity, learning and teaching grammar, 
and technology in foreign language instruction. 
E-mail: waleks@wa.amu.edu.pl 
 
REFERENCES 
Arnold, N., & Ducate, L. (2006). Future foreign language teachers’ social and cognitive  
collaboration in an online environment. Language Learning & Technology, 10(1), 42–66. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/arnoldducate/default.html 
Aleksandra Wach Promoting Pre-service Teachers’ Reflections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
Bauer-Ramazani, C. (2006). Training CALL teachers online. In P. Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher 
education in CALL (pp. 181–200). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Beatty, K., & Nunan, D. (2004). Computer-mediated collaborative learning. System, 32(2), 165–183. 
Belz, J. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning & 
Technology, 6(1), 60–81. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/belz/default.html  
Burns, A. (2010). Doing action research in English Language Teaching. A guide for practitioners. New 
York, NY: Routledge. 
Burton, J. (2009). Reflective practice. In A. Burns and J. C. Richards (Eds.), Cambridge guide to second 
language teacher education (pp. 281–308). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.  
Chapman, C., Ramondt, L., & Smiley, G. (2005). Strong community, deep learning: Exploring the link. 
Innovations in Education and Teaching International, 42(3), 217–230. 
Egbert, J. (2006). Learning in context: Situating language teacher learning in CALL. In P. Hubbard & M. 
Levy (Eds.), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 167–181). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Elola, I., & Oskoz, A. (2010). Collaborative writing: Fostering foreign language and writing conventions 
development. Language Learning & Technology, 14(3), 51–71. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2010/elolaoskoz.pdf 
Farrell, T. S. C. (1999). Reflective practice in an EFL teacher development group. System, 27(2), 157–
172. 
Freeman, D. (2002). The hidden side of the work: Teacher knowledge and learning to teach. Language 
Teaching, 35(1), 1–13. 
Hampel, R. (2009). Training teachers for the multimedia age: Developing teacher expertise to enhance 
online learner interaction and collaboration. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 3(1), 35–50. 
Hanson-Smith, E. (2006). Communities of practice for pre- and in-service teacher education. In P. 
Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 301–315). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: 
John Benjamins. 
Hatton, N., & Smith, D. (1995). Reflection in teacher education: Towards definition and implementation. 
Teaching and Teacher Education, 11(1), 33–49. 
Hubbard, P. (2008). CALL and the future of language teacher education. CALICO Journal, 25(2), 175–
188. 
Hubbard, P., & Levy, M. (2006). The scope of CALL education. In P. Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), 
Teacher education in CALL (pp. 3–20). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Johnson, K. (2009). Second language teacher education: A sociocultural perspective. New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Johnson, K., & Golombek, P. (2011). A sociocultural theoretical perspective on teacher professional 
development. In K. Johnson and P. Golombek (Eds.), Research on second language teacher education 
(pp. 1–12). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Kamhi-Stein, L. (2000). Looking to the future of TESOL teacher education: Web-based bulletin board 
discussions in a methods course. TESOL Quarterly, 34(3), 423–455. 
Kern, R., & Warschauer, M. (2000). Theory and practice of network-based language teaching. In M. 
Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice (pp. 1–19). New 
York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Aleksandra Wach Promoting Pre-service Teachers’ Reflections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
Kessler, G. (2006). Assessing CALL teacher training: What are we doing and what could we do better? In 
P. Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 23–42). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: 
John Benjamins. 
Kessler, G. (2013). Collaborative language learning in co-constructed participatory culture. CALICO 
Journal, 30(3), 307–322. 
Kessler, G., & Bikowski, D. (2010). Developing collaborative autonomous learning abilities in computer 
mediated language learning: Attention to meaning among students in wiki space. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 23(1), 41–58. 
Krajka, J. (2012). The language teacher in the digital age: Towards a systematic approach to digital 
teacher development. Lublin, Poland: Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Marii Curie-Skłodowskiej. 
Liaw, M. (2003). Cross-cultural e-mail correspondence for reflective EFL teacher education. TESL-EJ 
6(4). Retrieved from http://www.cc.kyoto-su.ac.jp/information/tesl-ej/ej24/a2.html 
Lord, G., & Lomicka, L. (2004). Developing collaborative cyber communities to prepare tomorrow’s 
teachers. Foreign Language Annals, 37(3), 401–408. 
Lord, G., & Lomicka, L. (2007). Foreign language teacher preparation and asynchronous CMC: 
Promoting reflective teaching. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 15(4), 513–532. 
Lord, G., & Lomicka, L. (2011). Calling on educators: Paving the way for the future of technology and 
CALL. In N. Arnold & L. Ducate (Eds.), Present and future promises of CALL: From theory and 
research to new directions in language teaching (2nd ed.) (pp. 441–469). San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Mann, S. (2005). The language teachers’ development. Language Teaching, 38(3), 103–118. 
Mann, S., & Talandis, J. (2012). Developing communities of practice at a distance. In L. England (Ed.), 
Online language teacher education: TESOL perspectives (pp. 122–136). New York, NY: Routledge.  
McNeil, L. (2013). Exploring the relationship between situated activity and CALL learning in teacher 
education. ReCALL, 25(2), 215–232. 
Meskill, C. (2009). CMC in language teacher education: Learning with and through instructional 
conversations. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 3(1), 51–63. 
Moon, J. (1999). Reflection in learning and professional development, theory and practice. London, UK: 
Kogan Page. 
Murray, D. (2013). A case for online English language teacher education. Monterey, CA: The 
International Research Foundation for English Language Education. Retrieved from 
http://www.tirfonline.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/TIRF_OLTE_One-PageSpread_2013.pdf 
Reinders, H., & Hubbard, P. (2013). CALL and learner autonomy: Affordances and constraints. In M. 
Thomas, H. Reinders, & M. Warschauer (Eds.), Contemporary Computer Assisted Language Learning 
(pp. 359–375). London, UK: Continuum Books. 
Richards, J.C., & Lockhart, C. (1996). Reflective teaching in second language classrooms. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Seale, J., & Cann, A. (2000). Refection on-line or off-line: The role of learning technologies in 
encouraging students to reflect. Computers & Education, 34, 309–320. 
Slaouti, D., & Motteram, G. (2006). Reconstructing practice: Language teacher education and ICT. In P. 
Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 81–97). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John 
Benjamins. 
Aleksandra Wach Promoting Pre-service Teachers’ Reflections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
Son, J.-B. (2002). Online discussion in a CALL course for distance language teachers. CALICO Journal, 
20(1), 127–144. 
Wallace, M. J. (1998). Action research for language teachers. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer-mediated collaborative learning: Theory and practice. Modern 
Language Journal, 81(4), 470–481. 
Williams, M., & Burden, R. (1997). Psychology for language teachers: A social constructivist approach. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Yang, S.-H. (2009). Using blogs to enhance critical reflection and community of practice. Educational 
Technology & Society, 12(2), 11–21. 
 
