Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2015/action2.pdf 
October 2015, Volume 19, Number 3 
pp. 38–51 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 38 
ACTION RESEARCH 
USING FACEBOOK TO PROMOTE KOREAN EFL LEARNERS’ 
INTERCULTURAL COMPETENCE 
Seunghee Jin, Pennsylvania State University 
Foreign language learners often have limited opportunity to interact with people from the 
target culture and develop their intercultural competence (IC) through those interactions 
both inside and outside of the classroom. To identify a new opportunity to engage Korean 
EFL learners in innovative ways to maximize target language interactions and develop 
their IC, this study adopts Facebook as a new computer-mediated communication (CMC) 
tool in a university classroom-based telecollaborative project between the U.S. and South 
Korea. The results revealed that Facebook offers Korean EFL learners an effective 
platform for intercultural interactions with people from the target culture, and Korean EFL 
learners demonstrate the abilities of the overall components of IC by showing many 
instances that fall well within Byram’s (2000) assessment criteria, although some 
conflicting results exist. This study suggests that the adoption of Facebook is a new, 
innovative, and practical way to facilitate effective intercultural interactions as well as 
promote IC in the EFL classroom. 
Language(s) Learned in Current Study: English as a Foreign Language 
Keywords: Intercultural Competence, Telecollaboration, EFL 
APA Citation: Jin, S. (2015). Using Facebook to promote Korean EFL learners’ 
intercultural competence. Language Learning & Technology, 19(3), 38–51. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2015/action2.pdf 
Received: March 1, 2015; Accepted: April 30, 2015; Published: June 1, 2015 
Copyright: © Seunghee Jin 
INTRODUCTION 
Developing foreign language (FL) learners’ intercultural competence (IC) to make them ‘intercultural 
speakers’ has been suggested as a major goal in FL education (Byram, 1997). Several studies show that 
immersion experiences like study-abroad programs, which allow for intensive intercultural exposure and 
real-time interactions, can help develop FL learners’ IC effectively (Belz, 2007; Byram, 1997; Lázár, 
2015). However, the objectives for ‘real-time interactions’ for intercultural learning offered by Byram 
(1997) are criticized as ambitious and unattainable in the FL context in that the majority of FL learners 
have fewer opportunities to have extensive contact with speakers of target languages (i.e., face-to-face 
interaction) in the ‘in-country’ context (i.e., EFL classroom) (Schulz, 2007). 
As a way to overcome this limitation, online intercultural interactions with speakers of the target culture 
using technological tools [i.e., computer-mediated communication (CMC) tools] for the development of 
IC have attracted much attention (Helm, 2009). Telecollaboration is “an approach to intercultural learning 
that uses Internet technology as a tool to facilitate intercultural communication between classes of 
learners in different countries” (Helm, 2009, p. 91), which aims to promote the development of (a) FL 
linguistic competence and (b) IC (Belz, 2003). Telecollaboration using CMC tools has received 
significant attention in terms of effective ways to promote IC in the current L2 pedagogy (Chun, 2011; 
O'Dowd, 2003). Although the majority of studies have adopted Web 1.0 technology (e.g., email, chat, and 
web-based discussion boards), little research has been conducted using the more recently developed Web 
Seunghee Jin  Promoting Korean EFL learners’ Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 39 
2.0 tools (e.g., blogs, podcasts, and Twitter) for intercultural learning. In particular, although Facebook—
the most famous Web 2.0 tool—shows great promise and possibilities for L2 learning, little information 
exists on its potential for fostering IC.   
In this respect, this study explored the educational possibilities of the new Web 2.0 tool, Facebook, for 
Korean EFL learners’ intercultural learning using a classroom-based telecollaborative project between the 
U.S. and Korea. In order to examine the possible effects of this type of learning environment on learners’ 
IC, this study adopted Byram’s (1997) model of intercultural communicative competence (ICC) and 
Byram’s (2000) assessment guidelines as the main intercultural frameworks.  
Research Question 
To what extent does intercultural competence take place in the intercultural interaction through Facebook? 
In particular, which IC components of Byram’s (1997) model can be exhibited in a Facebook intercultural 
exchange? 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Intercultural Competence and Byram’s (1997) Model of Intercultural Communicative Competence 
Byram’s (1997) model of intercultural communicative competence (ICC), adopted in this study, has been 
extensively used in foreign language (FL) teaching (Byram, 2009). IC refers to “the ability to interact 
effectively with people with different cultures other than one’s own” (Byram, 2000, p. 297). The five key 
components of IC are: (a) knowledge of social groups and their products and practices in both one’s own 
and others’ cultures; (b) intercultural attitudes, such as curiosity, openness, and readiness to suspend 
disbelief about other cultures and beliefs about one’s own culture; (c) skills of interpreting and relating, 
which enable one to interpret a document and events from other cultures and relate those interpretations to 
one’s own culture and experiences; (d) skills of discovery and interaction, which enables new cultural 
knowledge acquisition and the procedural application of knowledge in real-time communication and 
‘interactions; and (e) critical cultural awareness, which is defined as “an ability to evaluate critically and 
on the basis of explicit criteria perspectives, practices and products in one’s own and other cultures and 
countries” (Byram, Nichols, & Stevens, 2001, p. 7).  
This model describes the primary attributes of IC and what intercultural speakers’ abilities are, such as 
what knowledge, skills, attitudes, and perspectives they need, in addition to linguistic competence, for 
successful intercultural communication (Byram, 2009). According to Byram (1997), his model provides a 
framework for specifying objectives when planning teaching and assessment activities in that each 
component of IC serves as representative teaching goals in intercultural learning. Accordingly, this ICC 
model can serve as a good guideline and framework for effective instruction for developing learners’ IC. 
Developing Intercultural Competence through Telecollaboration   
Previous research on telecollaboration has shown that the use of telecollaborative projects helped learners 
develop their IC (Belz, 2003; Chun, 2011; Elola & Oskoz, 2008; Kramsch & Thorne, 2002; O'Dowd, 
2003, 2007; Schuetze, 2008). However, not all telecollaborative studies revealed success in developing 
learners’ IC. Some disappointments and failures were observed in such telecollaborative projects (Belz, 
2003; O'Dowd, 2003). For instance, O’Dowd’s (2003) study showed that some learners in email 
discussions fail to overcome stereotypes and negative attitudes about their partners’ culture. Belz’s (2003) 
work also observed some cases in which different conversational styles led to learners’ misunderstanding 
and reinforcement of stereotypes. In order to overcome such negative results and ensure success, much of 
the research has emphasized the important role of teachers (e.g., Lee, 2009; O'Dowd, 2003, 2007; Ware & 
Kramsch, 2005), well-designed tasks (e.g., Lee, 2009), and an appropriate choice of CMC tools (e.g., 
Chun, 2011; O'Dowd, 2007) in telecollaborative projects. 
Seunghee Jin  Promoting Korean EFL learners’ Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 40 
In recent years, the technological tools used in the telecollaborative projects have moved from Web 1.0 
[e.g., emails, discussion boards, or learning management systems (LMS)] toward the current Web 2.0 
tools (e.g., social networking sites, blogs, wikis, video-sharing sites, and web applications). In contrast to 
the earlier Web 1.0, which served as a static and mono-directional platform where users passively receive 
information (Shinn, 2008), Web 2.0 offers a participatory, interactive, and bi-directional platform where 
users become more active, create and share information, and participate in online collaboration and 
communication (Guth & Helm, 2010; O'Reilly, 2007). As Web 2.0 opens up new opportunities for 
collaborative and interactive pedagogies, there has been an increasing interest in making the best use of 
Web 2.0 tools’ capabilities for intercultural learning.  
Facebook is currently the most popular Web 2.0 social networking site (SNS), attracting millions of users. 
In recent years, Facebook has emerged as a new online learning environment for language instruction (cf. 
Lee, 2009; Sykes, Oskoz, & Thorne, 2008). Yet to date, few empirical studies have examined Facebook 
use for telecollaboration, and little information exists on the educational possibility of Facebook for an 
effective tool for intercultural learning. There is a pressing need for research to build theoretical and 
empirical foundations to implement a new Web 2.0 tool, such as Facebook, into current L2 pedagogy. 
METHODOLOGY 
Research Project 
The current study was carried out at an intermediate EFL course at a university in Korea in collaboration 
with a communication course at a university in the U.S. during the fall semester of 2012. The SNS 
Facebook provides an online learning environment that was used to offer Korean EFL students the 
opportunity to interact and communicate with American students on a regular basis during the 15-week 
study period. 
Participants 
Participants for this study were divided into two groups. One group consisted of 32 Korean EFL learners 
who were intermediate-level English language learners; their ages ranged from 19 to 22 years old. The 
other group included 20 American undergraduate students who were first language (L1) speakers of 
English and had a background in North American culture. However, this study mainly focused on 
understanding how Facebook intercultural exchange benefits Korean learners in the EFL setting in terms 
of IC. Accordingly, experiences and reflections from American students, the partner group in this 
exchange, were not explored. Future research should consider further examining how this intercultural 
exchange benefits American students as well in terms of IC. 
Procedures 
Prior to the course, the researcher set up a Facebook group page. To facilitate the process and encourage 
students to become familiar with the use of the Facebook platform for intercultural communication, 
participants received an orientation with a step-by-step handout on the first day of the course (see the 
orientation handout in Appendix A). The orientation deals with joining the group page, the features of 
Facebook, private issues that might be generated by Facebook use, and details about course activities for 
intercultural exchange. 
Topics and Tasks on Facebook  
All the online tasks, which were scheduled for each week during the course, were carefully designed 
before the project and assigned to participants through Facebook. All the tasks and aims of each task are 
summarized in detail in Appendix B. 
Based on the characteristics of the tasks, the course was divided into three phases. Phase I (weeks 3–7) 
tasks were designed mainly to promote discussion. Participants read entries posted by a researcher on 
Seunghee Jin  Promoting Korean EFL learners’ Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
Facebook and discussed selected intercultural topics with the partner group. In phase II (weeks 9–11), 
participants could choose their own topic for discussion, reflecting their own interests. During phase III 
(week 13), students were assigned the task of conducting an ethnographic interview with their partners in 
the U.S., an approach that has been frequently used to develop learners’ IC (e.g., Lee, 2009, 2011; 
O'Dowd, 2007). For this task, students were assigned to a corresponding L1 speaker of English partner, 
prepared interview questions, and conducted the interview using Facebook. Through the tasks designed 
for phases I, II, and III, students could actively participate in the online intercultural exchange by 
interacting and collaborating with other participants. 
In this study, a total of 439 postings and 813 comments were found to indicate students’ active interaction. 
Data Collection  
The present research was designed around a virtual ethnography approach, which is “a form of online 
ethnography in which the methods of a traditional ethnography can be meaningfully transferred to the 
Internet” (Bosch, 2009, p. 188). Hine (2000) introduced a virtual ethnography to explain the shared 
meaning of technologically mediated social behaviors and interactions among members present in virtual 
or online environments.  
In-depth participant observation is a key feature of virtual ethnographic studies. A traditional ethnography 
study includes such observations as well, but a virtual ethnography study does so in a virtual or online 
environment (Evans, 2010; Firat & Kabakci Yurdakul, 2011). A qualitative interview is another important 
method used to gain a better understanding of the topic based on learners’ experiences and explanations, 
which are factors that researchers cannot access through observation (Glesne, 2006). Accordingly, the 
present study used in-depth participant observations and qualitative interviews as the primary methods to 
collect data.  
Participant Observations  
In-depth participant observations following the schedule established for each week were undertaken 
during the 15-week course in order to gain insights into the online interactions among participants on 
Facebook. To record online observations, two tools were used: (1) ethnographic notes along with detailed 
observation forms and (2) screen capture software. Using screen capture software, all online activities and 
interactions among participants on Facebook were captured as images. 
Qualitative Interviews  
Qualitative interviews were conducted to obtain another level of detailed qualitative data for the study. 
This study focuses on Korean learners’ demonstration of IC; thus, only Korean participants were 
interviewed. The face-to-face interviews took place at the end of the semester. Each interview was 
recorded and lasted approximately 30 to 50 minutes. The interview questions fell into four main 
categories: (a) background information, (b) IC, (c) perspective on using Facebook and its effectiveness for 
intercultural learning, and (d) practical information (see Appendix C).  
Data Analysis 
For the qualitative data analysis, all audio-recorded interviews were transcribed, and all ethnographic 
notes from detailed observation notes as well as the screen captures of all entries from the Facebook 
group page were closely examined. In order to assess learners’ IC, data were analyzed by applying 
Byram’s (2000) assessment guidelines. Therefore, all data were content analyzed and coded based on 
these five assessment criteria in order to understand the effect of this telecollaborative project. 
 
 
Seunghee Jin  Promoting Korean EFL learners’ Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 42 
RESULTS 
Assessment of Intercultural Competence through Facebook Exchange 
Viewed through the prism of the component features of Byram’s (1997) model of ICC and his (2000) 
assessment criteria, the findings revealed compelling evidence that could indeed be characterized as the 
five components of IC. Table 1 provides examples of data in the five categories based on Byram’s (2000) 
criteria: (1) interest in other people’s way of life, (2) knowledge about another country and culture, (3) 
knowledge of the intercultural communication process, (4) ability to cope with living in a different culture, 
and (5) ability to change perspective.  
Table 1. Examples of the Assessment of Intercultural Competence 
Byram’s (2000) 
assessment criteria 
Description Students’ Examples 
1. Interest in other 
people’s way of 
life 
i. Interest in other people’s 
experience of daily life, 
particularly those things 
not usually presented to 
outsiders through the 
media 
1.  “I want to know about their high school life. In the 
movies, they go to proms … while we just study for 
the entrance exam during high school. They seem 
like they are enjoying their lives. They go to school 
on their skateboards. They live the life they pursue 
and they seem different from us. We go to college 
based on our exam scores. They seem to take into 
account their interests and aptitudes as priorities.”  
  ii. Interest in daily 
experience of a variety of 
social groups within a 
society, not only the 
dominant culture 
2.  “American society is a multicultural and multiracial 
society, so I wanted to know about various cultures 
and people within this society, but there wasn’t a 
subject for it. I had hoped we could deal with such 
subject.” 
2. Knowledge 
about another 
country and 
culture 
i. Knowledge of important 
facts about living in other 
cultures and about the 
country, state, and people 
3. “When I was doing the last course task, which was 
a one-on-one interview, I could see that my partner 
is a hard worker. Since college, I have hung out a 
lot just to have fun, but American students seemed 
to have gained their independence earlier than we 
did and are working hard for their lives. It made me 
think about myself, and I thought I should work 
harder.” 
  ii. Knowledge about how to 
engage in conversations 
with people of the other 
culture and maintain a 
conversation 
4. “In Korean culture, we try not to have eye contact 
with the other person. In American culture, they 
said it would be rude to not make eye contact. I 
thought I should be aware of these differences when 
I go to the U.S. to act properly.” 
3. Knowledge 
about the 
intercultural 
communication 
process 
i. Knowledge about how to 
resolve 
misunderstandings that 
arise from people’s lack 
of awareness about the 
viewpoint of another 
culture 
5. “If you see the big picture, Korean culture can be 
explained with Confucianism, and American culture 
with individualism. Talking about these differences, 
I realized that it is natural to be so different.” 
    6. “I thought our culture might look too rigid to the 
American students. Koreans don’t approve of living 
together before marriage, but Americans think it is 
more reasonable to live together before marriage to 
see what kind of person your lover is. Because of 
Seunghee Jin  Promoting Korean EFL learners’ Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
these differences, I thought they might think we are 
too rigid.” 
  ii. Knowledge about how to 
discover new information 
and new aspects of the 
other culture for oneself 
7.  “I asked my American partner about their eating 
habits. They said when they go on a diet, they 
usually eat salad, and this was something similar to 
our culture.” 
    8. “When the subject was ‘communicational 
differences,’ I searched on Naver (Korean search 
engine) to find out what the differences are, and I 
also tried to find images that explain the given 
subject. They were all helpful to me.” 
4. Ability to cope 
with living in a 
different culture 
 Ability to cope with a 
range of reactions one 
experiences when living 
in a different culture 
9. “We usually don’t tell the other person what we 
want even when there is something that we want. 
That is courtesy in Korea, so the person who offers 
to help must ask multiple times. This is our culture, 
and there is no such thing in the American culture. 
We act and think very differently. These differences 
might be hard to adjust to. When we speak to 
Americans, I think we should speak more directly.” 
5. Ability to 
change one’s 
perspective 
 Realization that other 
cultures can be 
understood by seeing 
things from a different 
point of view and by 
looking at one’s own 
culture from their 
perspective 
10. “As I mentioned before, I had negative thoughts 
about the differences between the two countries. 
But as I talked to them, I realized that we are both 
human beings and became more understanding. 
Now I try not to criticize American culture based on 
Korean culture and, instead, I try to accept the 
differences and make an effort to understand them.” 
    11. “I came to think that our way of thinking and 
culture is not the only way, and Americans and 
others are also understandable and reasonable.” 
Criterion 1. Interest in Other People’s Way of Life  
The most prevalent aspect of Korean learners; intercultural exchanges via Facebook is that they displayed 
a great interest in American partners with regard to their various daily life experiences, which provides 
evidence of the fundamental component of IC, attitude. In particular, Korean students mentioned school 
life in the U.S. the most frequently, as evident in example 1 in Table 1.  
Criterion 2. Knowledge about Another Country and Culture  
The most frequently occurring idea from Korean learners’ experiences was that their knowledge of 
America and its people has increased, as seen in examples 3 and 4. However, a few learners gained 
incorrect knowledge, as seen in the following comment by Student #12: “It seemed like they don’t get 
offended even when I speak bluntly about my feelings and thoughts.” This comment shows that the some 
Korean learners misunderstood the meaning of a “direct way of speaking” when learning about different 
communication styles between the two cultures (e.g., direct versus indirect ways of speaking). This 
student thinks that what can be regarded as rude behavior in some contexts is an effective way of 
speaking for American people. This finding suggests that teachers play a role in giving feedback about 
what learners obtain after intercultural exchange in order to guide learners in obtaining accurate 
knowledge and further avoiding misunderstandings and miscommunication.  
Criterion 3. Knowledge of the Intercultural Communication Process 
With regard to the interpreting and relating skills, examples 5 and 6 revealed that, by comparing and 
Seunghee Jin  Promoting Korean EFL learners’ Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
relating ‘others’ to the learner’s own culture, students figured out what causes differences between the 
two cultures (i.e., Korean culture with Confucianism versus American culture with individualism) and 
further misunderstanding. This awareness helped them better understand another culture. In terms of the 
skills involved in the discovery of new knowledge, Korean learners actively sought new information using 
online tools and websites, as seen in example 8. In addition, learners acquired new knowledge by directly 
asking questions of their American partners, as seen in example 7. The activity of Korean students’ asking 
questions directly to their American partners and American students’ directly responding with their 
various explanations was frequently observed on Facebook. This finding is crucial in that discovering 
new information directly from those who live in that environment was previously only possible in study 
abroad situations, which is an immersion context (Byram, Gribkova, & Starkey, 2002). Accordingly, this 
study suggests the new possibility that this similar discovery process among learners, which mirrors the 
immersion context, can take place during intercultural exchanges on Facebook.  
Criterion 4. The Ability to Cope with Living in a Different Culture 
Korean learners showed both positive and negative reactions to the skills of interaction involved in the 
application ability. With regard to negative reactions, a few students doubted their ability to apply what 
they learned in real-time circumstances in the U.S. Those students’ comments are shown below: 
Student #13: “For this Facebook course, we learned through only written words, so I am not sure how it 
would be when I get a chance to really speak to American people.” 
Student #14: “My concern is that when I actually have a chance to talk, I won’t be able to do what I did in 
the Facebook interaction because I still have trouble speaking in English.” 
These comments reveal that Korean learners consider Facebook interactions to be somewhat different 
from real-time communication because communication on Facebook is conducted only through writing 
rather than by speaking in person. This finding indicates the significant weakness of this type of 
intercultural exchange conducted primarily through asynchronous written interaction in terms of 
application abilities. Thus, efforts to reduce the gap between online written intercultural communication 
and real-world oral communication are necessary. 
Criterion 5. The Ability to Change One’s Perspective  
Students’ examples 10 and 11 showed that students changed their way of looking at another culture 
because they realized that cultural differences could be understood by seeing them differently, not judging 
them only by the learners’ own beliefs and values. However, some students showed negative responses, 
as reflected in the following comment, as reported by student #15: 
I think I am the same. I think and feel the same way about Korean culture. I don’t think this one 
course will change the way I think about something. It is hard to see things in a foreigner’s shoes. 
It is hard to think that way. I accept the fact that they think in a different way, but I don’t think I 
see things differently. 
This comment illustrates one student’s reluctance to change his perspective of another culture. It 
highlights that the ability to change one’s perspective is a somewhat compelling, sensitive, and time-
consuming process for some students because it requires them to change the way they look at things, 
which they have taken for granted throughout their entire lives. To overcome this conflicting result, future 
telecollaborative projects should pay more careful attention to promoting critical cultural awareness. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
This study examined the pedagogical possibility of using the most famous Web 2.0 tool, Facebook, for 
Korean EFL learners’ IC in the telecollaborative project. To fill the gap of the limited in-country 
Seunghee Jin  Promoting Korean EFL learners’ Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
experiences students in EFL classrooms have in terms of effective intercultural learning, this study took 
advantage of a new Web 2.0 CMC tool (i.e., Facebook) to provide Korean EFL learners with more 
opportunities to engage in intercultural communication with the speakers of a target culture, to have the 
chance to express their views on their own culture to their American partners, and to discuss various 
intercultural topics. As a result, this study demonstrated that employing Facebook in a telecollaborative 
project was pedagogically effective as Korean EFL learners exhibit all the components of IC based on 
Byram’s (1997) model and his (2000) assessment criteria in their Facebook exchanges. Facebook use has 
successfully given the students in an EFL setting an online environment for intercultural communication 
with the speakers of the target culture and further enabled learners to demonstrate their IC through this 
opportunity. This study’s findings are particularly meaningful for foreign language learners, like the 
Korean learners in this study, who have no opportunity to study abroad or have direct contact with the 
target culture and people for IC development.  
However, the conflicting results in some components of IC—namely, (a) knowledge, (b) skills of 
discovery and interaction, and (c) critical cultural awareness—suggest that this type of intercultural 
exchange via Facebook should be revised for future uses to maximize the effectiveness of fostering IC. 
For example, there should be teacher feedback regarding learners’ intercultural experiences after 
intercultural exchange to ensure that learners gain appropriate knowledge. In addition, with regard to the 
skills of discovery and interaction, this study suggests the need to include (a) increased one-on-one 
interactions, such as interview tasks, and (b) synchronous interactions with American students through the 
use of chatting (written communication) or video calls (oral communication) as part of the tasks, thereby 
providing much closer face-to-face interactions. Finally, for the somewhat challenging component of 
critical cultural awareness, it is suggested that more focused tasks that give learners the opportunity to 
take a step back and examine their own and others’ cultural values and behaviors from a different point of 
view be included. 
Overall, the technological features of Facebook itself, along with the tasks and discussion topics that were 
purposefully designed and the quality of interactions among learners, created the intended conditions for 
effective intercultural learning for EFL learners. This study demonstrated the possibility of using this new 
emerging Web 2.0 CMC tool in telecollaborative projects. As little information on using Facebook as a 
CMC tool in telecollaboration exists, this study sought to contribute to a greater understanding of how 
Facebook can be adopted in a telecollaborative project to promote EFL learners’ IC.  
In terms of the limitation of this study, American students’ experiences and reflections on this 
intercultural exchange could not be explored. Future research should further examine how this 
intercultural exchange also benefits American students in terms of IC. In addition, ongoing discussion has 
focused on the difficulty of assessing learners’ IC (e.g., Fantini, 2009; Schulz, 2007; Sercu, 2004). This 
study used interviews and Facebook entries as primary sources for the assessment. Future studies might 
consider the additional incorporation of learners’ portfolios—which were recently proposed and regarded 
as clear, provable demonstrations of students’ progress and achievements, as reported in Eaton’s (2010) 
research—to assess the development of IC.  
 
APPENDIX A. The Handout of Orientation, Practical English II 
Description of Facebook Use for the Course 
 Facebook will be adopted as a computer-meditated communication tool for the purpose of 
intercultural communication between students in Korea and the U.S. This course aims to develop 
Korean students’ communication skills as well as intercultural competence through real contact and 
experiences with the American culture and people through the use of Facebook. Throughout the 
course, Korean students will be able to communicate with American students with diverse cultural 
Seunghee Jin  Promoting Korean EFL learners’ Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
topics assigned to them. 
1. Create new account at Facebook 
 www.facebook.com (ID & Password) 
2.  Join the Group (for course purpose)  
3. Learn the features of Facebook  
 News feed  
 Post a comment  
 Upload photos and link  
 Leave a comment  
 Like  
 Share  
 Chat  
4. Private Issues  
 Private Setting of the Group 
 Only students of the course can join and see the postings in the group.  
 Keep Facebook page for your course purpose private and separate from the rest of your Facebook 
uses. 
 The instructor and your classmates will potentially be able to view your individual Facebook page. 
5. Course activities on Facebook 
 Course tasks and activities are carefully designed for students to be able to be actively involved in the 
online learning environment for the development of their communication skills and intercultural 
competence by interacting and collaborating with other participants. 
 IMPORTANT!!  
 For the weekly tasks, participants will be asked to write more than one entry per assigned topic as 
well as more than two responses to other participants’ entries on Facebook in order to facilitate 
students’ interactions. This will amount to a total of a minimum of three entries every week, each of 
which will be graded. Students will be encouraged to write more entries than those assigned; for 
example, they can post entries related to personal interests, class assignments, or any subjects related 
to intercultural topics. They will also be encouraged to ask questions of the L1 speakers of English 
participants, with whom they will interact. 
 Students will be required to use certain Facebook tools at least once. 
Phase  I. (Weeks 3–7). Discussion with diverse cultural topics 
 Participants can read entries posted by a researcher on Facebook and discuss the intercultural topics 
and issues with other participants on Facebook through the use of various tools and functions that 
Facebook offers. 
Phase  II. Choose your own topics 
 In phase II, students will be divided into small groups, and each group will take a turn choosing an 
appropriate intercultural topic for discussion, which will be posted on Facebook. 
Phase III. Interviews with partners in the U.S. 
 In phase III, students will be assigned the task of conducting interviews with their partners in the U.S. 
For this task, students will be grouped with their L1-speaking partners and prepare interview 
questions in a group. They will then conduct the interview with their partners on Facebook; in this 
case, students will be also encouraged to use various Facebook tools (video links, images, etc.). This 
will give students opportunities to reflect on their intercultural experiences and interests with their 
Seunghee Jin  Promoting Korean EFL learners’ Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
partners in the U.S.  
6. Questions and Help: 000@gmail.com 
APPENDIX B. Overview of Tasks and Their Topics and Aims 
Phase Week Topic Description Aim 
I 1 Introduction to 
using Facebook 
In-class discussion regarding the 
value of intercultural competence, 
the purpose of Facebook, and how 
it would be used throughout the 
course. 
Reflection on intercultural 
competence and the value of 
Facebook for learning. Students 
learned about becoming accustomed 
to using Facebook during the 
course. 
2 Introductions Participants introduced themselves 
to each other and expressed their 
expectations of the course. 
Getting to know their partners and 
becoming familiar with 
communicating via Facebook. 
3 East vs. West 
cultural 
differences 
Participants read Yang Liu’s (2007) 
work, “East meets West,” which 
depicts the differences in ways of 
thinking and handling daily affairs; 
Students discussed the reading with 
their peers.  
Opportunities to reflect on cultural 
differences (East vs. West) and 
shared their opinions on this 
particular material (bias, 
stereotypes, etc.) Students were 
asked to compare the reading with 
their own cultures. 
4 Pop Culture Participants read information from 
various sources such as journals, 
newspapers, and websites about 
each topic, reflected on the cultural 
differences between Korea and the 
US, and discussed topics with their 
peers. 
Opportunities to reflect on various 
topics in which cultural differences 
exist between Korea and the U.S. 
Students had time to share their 
opinions and discussed their 
perceptions and stereotypes. 
5 Marriage 
6 Parenting 
7 Communication 
styles 
 8 Mid-term exam 
II 9 Learners choose 
their own topics 
Participants chose several 
appropriate intercultural topics 
based on their own interests for the 
next three weeks of the course (e.g., 
Education and Entertainment, 
Smoking, Alcohol in 
Advertisement.). They discussed 
each weekly topic with their peers.   
Exploration, analysis, and reflection 
on intercultural topics of their own 
choosing. 
10 
11 
12 Thanksgiving Break 
III 13 Ethnographic 
interview  
Participants conducted an 
ethnographic interview (online) 
with their L1 partners to support 
intercultural learning. The interview 
was targeted based on students’ 
curiosity toward the target culture. 
Fostering of intercultural interaction 
to help students understand cultural 
differences and awareness more 
effectively.  
14 Interviews and 
survey  
 Face-to-face interviews and an 
online survey were conducted only 
with Korean Students.  
Opportunity to reflect on learning 
and course activities. 
15 Final term exam 
Seunghee Jin  Promoting Korean EFL learners’ Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
 
APPENDIX C. Interview Questions 
General information 
1) Before taking this course, did you use Facebook? If not, are there any social networking sites you 
used frequently before taking this course? 
2) How often did you use Facebook for the purposes of this course?  
3) In what ways did you use Facebook (e.g., smartphone, computer, etc.)? 
4) Please describe your overall thoughts, experiences, and impressions about this course in terms of 
using Facebook for intercultural learning with your L1-speaking partners. 
Intercultural competence related to Byram’s (1997) categories: Adopting the adapted interview 
questions of O’Neil (2008) and Stickler and Emke (2011) 
Knowledge  
5) What have you learned in this course? What do you think you learned most?  
6) Has your knowledge about American culture and its people increased?  
Attitudes 
7) How do you feel about learning about American culture and its people?  
8) How did you feel or think when you found differences?  
9) Has your attitude toward the U.S. culture changed based on your experiences in this course?  
10) What aspects of the culture from the US still pique your curiosity? 
Skills of discovery and interaction 
11) Have you developed any new strategies or skills to improve and expand your cultural knowledge 
or understanding of American culture and people during this course?   
(For example, what efforts have you made to understand more about new aspects of American 
culture and your L1-speaking partners?) 
12) How do you think you can deal with people from the U.S.?  
(For example, do you feel more confident that you can communicate with people from the U.S. 
without offending them?) 
Skills of interpreting and relating 
13) Has your awareness of cultural differences and similarities between your own culture and the US 
increased?  
Critical cultural awareness 
14) Have your previous behaviors or ways of thinking about America and its people changed now 
that you talked to your Facebook partners? If so, can you tell me about the differences?  
15) Did you start questioning your own perceptions of other people and your usual ways of thinking 
about other people? 
16) Did you become more critical toward your perspective of your own culture and try to understand 
other cultures from a different point of view?  
Seunghee Jin  Promoting Korean EFL learners’ Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
Perspective on using Facebook and its effectiveness for intercultural learning 
17) How did you feel about the use of Facebook in this course (e.g., motivation, difficulty, etc.)?  
18) Was Facebook an effective tool for communicating and interacting with L1 speakers of English 
and peers? Why or why not?  
19) What do you think about the assignments (posting, discussing, and interviewing)? Were these 
activities relevant for intercultural learning?  
20) Do you think this course helped you to enhance intercultural competence?  
Practical information 
21) What do you think about the benefits and difficulties of using Facebook for this class? 
22) Might you be interested in taking this type of course in the future? Why or why not? 
23) Can you suggest ways to provide more effective learning experiences for this course? 
24) If you have any other thoughts, please feel free to tell me. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Seunghee Jin received her PhD in Language and Literacy Education at Pennsylvania State University. 
Her research interest includes technology-mediated language learning, telecollaboration, and the 
development and assessment of intercultural competence. 
E-mail: sydneyjin@gmail.com 
 
REFERENCES 
Belz, J. A. (2003). Linguistic perspective on the development of intercultural competence in 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 68–99. Retrived from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/pdf/belz.pdf 
Belz, J. A. (2007). The development of intercultural communicative competence in telecollaborative 
partnerships. In R. O' Dowd (Ed.), Online intercultural exchange: An introduction for foreign language 
teacher (pp. 127–166). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Bosch, T. E. (2009). Using online social networking for teaching and learning: Facebook use at the 
University of Cape Town. Communication, 35(2), 185–200.  
Byram, M. (1997). Teaching and assesing intercultural communicative competence. Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters. 
Byram, M. (2000). Assessing intercultural competence in language teaching. Sprogforum, 18(6), 8–13.  
Byram, M. (2009). Intercultural competence in foreign languages: the intercultural speaker and the 
pedagogy of foreign language education. In D. K. Deardorff (Ed.), The Sage handbook of intercultural 
competence. Los Angeles, CA: Sage. 
Byram, M., Gribkova, B., & Starkey, H. (2002). Developing the intercultural dimension in language 
teaching: A practical introduction for teachers. Strasbourg, France: Council of Europe. 
Byram, M., Nichols, A., & Stevens, D. (Eds.). (2001). Developing intercultural competence in practice. 
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Seunghee Jin  Promoting Korean EFL learners’ Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
Chun, D. M. (2011). Developing intercultural communicative competence through online exchanges. 
CALICO Journal, 28(2), 392–419. 
Eaton, S. E. (2010). Global trends in language learning in the 21st century. Calgary, Canada: Onate. 
Elola, I., & Oskoz, A. (2008). Blogging: Fostering intercultural competence development in foreign 
langauge and study abroad context. Foreign Langauge Annals, 41(3), 454–474.  
Evans, L. (2010). Authenticity online: Using webnography to address phenomenological concerns. In A. 
Mousoutzanis & D. Riha (Eds.), New media and the politics of online communities (pp. 11–17). Oxford, 
UK: Inter-Disciplinary. Retrieved from http://www.inter-disciplinary.net/wp-
content/uploads/2010/08/cyber5ever119082010.pdf 
Fantini, A. E. (2009). Assessing intercultural competence: Issues and tools. In D. K. Deardorff (Ed.), The 
Sage handbook of intercultural competence. Los Angeles, CA: Sage. 
Firat, M., & Kabakci Yurdakul, I. (2011). Virtual ethnography research on second life virtual 
communities. Turkish Online Journal of Distance Education, 12(3), 108–117. Retrieved from 
http://tojde.anadolu.edu.tr/yonetim/icerik/makaleler/1088-published.pdf 
Glesne, C. (2006). Becoming qualitative rearchers: An introduction (3rd ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson 
Education. 
Guth, S., & Helm, F. (2010). Telecollaboration 2.0: Language, literacies and intercultural learning in the 
21st century. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Helm, F. (2009). Language and culture in an online context: What can learner diaries tell use about 
intercultural competence? Language and Intercultural Commnication, 9(2), 91–104.  
Hine, C. (2000). Virtual ethnography. London, UK: Sage. 
Kramsch, C., & Thorne, S. (2002). Foreign language learning as global communicative practice. In D. 
Block & D. Cameron (Eds.), Language learning and teaching in the age of globalization (pp. 83–100). 
London, UK: Routledge. 
Lázár, I. (2015). EFL learners' intercultural competence development in an international web 
collaborarion project. The Language Learning Journal, 43(2), 208–221.  
Lee, L. (2009). Promoting intecultural exchanges with Blogs and Podcasting: A study of Spanish-
American telecollaboration. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 22(5), 425–443.  
Lee, L. (2011). Blogging: Promoting learner autonomy and intercultural competence through study 
abroad. Language Learning & Technology, 15(3), 87–109. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/lee.pdf 
O'Dowd, R. (2003). Understanding the "Other Side": Intercultural learning in a Spanish-English E-Mail 
exchange. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 118–144. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/pdf/odowd.pdf 
O'Dowd, R. (2007). Evaluating the outcomes of online intercultural exchange. ELT Journal, 61(2), 144–
152.  
O'Neill, E. J. (2008). Intercultural competence development: Implementing international virtual 
elementary classroom activities into public schools in the U.S. and Korea. Unpublished doctoral 
disseration. Department of Leadership, Foundations, and Policy, Curry School of Education, University 
of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA. 
 
Seunghee Jin  Promoting Korean EFL learners’ Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
O'Reilly, T. (2007). What is Web 2.0: Design patterns and business models for the next generation of 
software. International Journal of Digital Economics, 65, 17–37. Retrieved from http://mpra.ub.uni-
muenchen.de/4580/ 
Schuetze, U. (2008). Exchanging second language messages online: Developing an intercultural 
communicative competence. Foreign Langauge Annals, 41(4), 660–672.  
Schulz, R. A. (2007). The challenge of assessing cultural understanding in the context of foreign language 
instruction. Foreign Language Annals, 40(1), 9–26.  
Sercu, L. (2004). Assessing intercultural competence: A framework for systematic test development in 
foreign language education and beyond. Intercultural Eudcation, 15(1), 73–89.  
Shinn, D. H. (2008). Understanding purchasing behaviors in a virtual economy: Consumer behavior 
involving virtual currency in Web 2.0 communities. Interacting with Computers, 20(45), 433–446.  
Stickler, U., & Emke, M. (2011). Literalia: Towards developing intercultural maturity online. Language 
Learning & Technology, 15(1), 147–168. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/stickleremke.pdf 
Sykes, J. M., Oskoz, A., & Thorne, S. M. (2008). Web 2.0, synthetic immersive environments, and 
mobile resources for language education. Calico Journal, 25(3), 528–546.  
Ware, P. D., & Kramsch, C. (2005). Toward an intercultural stance: Teaching German and English 
through telecollaboration. The Modern Language Journal, 89(2), 190–205.  
