Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/news.pdf 
February 2015, Volume 19, Number 1 
pp. 46–50 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 46 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
University of Hawai‘i Center for Language and Technology (CLT) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC) 
 
 
 
 
 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
FUNDAMENTALS OF PROJECT-BASED LANGUAGE LEARNING (PBLL) ONLINE 
INSTITUTE 
Project-based learning has had a rich and productive history extending for over 100 years. Embark on a 
journey of discovery to better understand project-based language learning (PBLL) and explore its 
connections with 21st Century Skills, content-based instruction, performance assessment and your own 
instructional context. Experts in the field guide you through the creation of a project blueprint. Connect 
with colleagues who have a common interest in quality PBLL implementation.  
Complete Option 1 as part of a facilitated cohort or Option 2 via self-paced study. Successfully complete 
all assigned tasks and earn an NFLRC digital badge, which qualifies you to apply to the NFLRC 2015 
Intensive Summer Institute in Honolulu (see next entry). The online institute is free, but space is limited, 
so sign up today. 
PROJECT-BASED LANGUAGE LEARNING (PBLL) IN ACTION  
INTENSIVE SUMMER INSTITUTE 
JULY 27–31, 2015 • Honolulu, HI 
 
How can I integrate Project-Based Language Learning (PBLL) in my existing curriculum? How do I 
design PBLL projects to incorporate 21st Century Skills? The NFLRC 2015 Intensive Summer Institute 
(ISI) will help you answer these questions with guidance from experts in the field through a dynamic, 
technology-rich professional development experience. You will work on project design for your own 
language classroom assisted by colleagues and guided by a group of language professionals with 
background in project-based learning, language pedagogy, instructional technology and assessment. 
We invite practicing K-16 world language educators to apply to participate. The NFLRC 2015 Intensive 
Summer Institute is not a beginner's workshop. In order to join, applicants will need to first earn a digital 
badge from the Fundamentals of Project-Based Language Learning Online Institute (see above) as 
a prerequisite. Seats are limited and applications will be competitive. Accepted participants will need to 
pay a $100 registration fee for the Intensive Summer Institute. Stipends to defray travel expenses will be 
available to selected participants traveling to Honolulu for the ISI. Preference will be given to participants 
currently working in community college contexts, but all practicing world language educators K-16 are 
invited to apply. District supervisors and world language curriculum specialists are ineligible to apply.  
Badge Requirement Deadline:  March 15, 2015 
Application Deadline: March 31, 2015 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology      47 
4TH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON LANGUAGE DOCUMENTATION & 
CONSERVATION (ICLDC) 
February 26–March 1, 2015 • Honolulu, HI 
The Department of Linguistics and the National Foreign Language Resource Center at the University of 
Hawaiʻi at Mānoa are pleased to host the 4th ICLDC. The conference program will feature keynote talks 
by Dr. Lenore Grenoble (University of Chicago) and Dr. Anthony Woodbury (University of Texas at 
Austin), an integrated series of Master Class workshops, and four Special Sessions on Pedagogy in 
Language Conservation. An optional Hilo Field Study (on the Big Island of Hawaiʻi) to visit Hawaiian 
language revitalization programs in action will immediately follow the conference (March 2-3). 
The theme of the 4th ICLDC, “Enriching Theory, Practice, and Application,” highlights the need to 
strengthen the links between language documentation (practice), deep understanding of grammatical 
structure (theory), and methods for teaching endangered languages (application). At this conference, we 
intend to focus on language documentation as the investigation of grammar and linguistic structure, on the 
one hand, and the development of that investigation into sound pedagogy for endangered languages, on 
the other. 
We aim to build on the strong momentum created by the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd ICLDCs to discuss research 
and revitalization approaches yielding rich records that can benefit both the field of language 
documentation and speech communities. We hope you will join us. 
Online registration now open (early registration deadline: January 15). See the conference website for 
more information: http://icldc4.icldc-hawaii.org 
STAY IN TOUCH WITH SOCIAL MEDIA 
Did you know that the NFLRC has its own Facebook page with over 2,300 fans? It’s one of the best 
ways to hear about the latest news, publications, conferences, workshops, and resources we offer. Just 
click on the “Like” button to become a fan. For those who prefer getting up-to-the-minute “tweets,” you 
can follow us on our Twitter page. Finally, NFLRC has its own YouTube channel with a growing 
collection of free language learning and teaching videos for your perusal. Subscribe today! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology      48 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
  
 
Published in  
September 2014 
Cultura-inspired intercultural exchanges: Focus on Asian and Pacific 
languages 
by  Dorothy M. Chun (Ed.) (2014) 183pp | ISBN: 978–0–9835816–6–6  
Browse contents, read editor’s intro. 
Although many online intercultural exchanges have been conducted based 
on the groundbreaking Cultura model, most to date have been between and 
among European languages. This volume presents several chapters with a 
focus on exchanges involving Asian and Pacific languages. Many of the 
benefits and challenges of these exchanges are similar to those reported 
for European languages; however, some of the difficulties reported in the 
Chinese and Japanese exchanges might be due to the significant linguistic 
differences between English and East Asian languages. This volume adds 
to the body of emerging studies of telecollaboration among learners of 
Asian and Pacific languages. 
 
Project-Based Language Learning (PBLL) in Action  
Intensive Summer Institute | July 27-31, 2015  
We invite practicing K-16 world language educators to apply to 
participate. The NFLRC 2015 Intensive Summer Institute is not a 
beginner's workshop. In order to join, applicants will need to first earn a 
digital badge from the Fundamentals of Project-Based Language Learning 
Online Institute as a prerequisite. Seats are limited and applications will be 
competitive. Accepted participants will need to pay a $100 registration 
fee. Stipends to defray travel expenses will be available to selected 
participants traveling to Honolulu. Preference will be given to participants 
currently working in community college contexts, but all practicing world 
language educators K-16 are invited to apply. District supervisors and 
world language curriculum specialists are ineligible to apply.  
 
NFLRC maintains a large searchable archive of  free language research 
and teaching materials which currently contains over 350 items. These 
items include foreign language teaching materials —print, audio, and 
video,—language acquisition research papers, and collections of 
conference materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology      49 
  
Language Documentation & Conservation is a 
refereed, open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC 
and published by University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to 
language documentation and conservation, as well 
as book reviews, hardware and software reviews, 
and notes from the field. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed 
international journal of issues in foreign language 
reading and literacy, published twice yearly on the 
World Wide Web and sponsored by NFLRC and 
the University of Hawai‘i College of Languages, 
Linguistics, and Literature. 
 
View all NFLRC Publications 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology      50 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
  
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language research. 
GRANT COMPETITION SUCCESSFUL 
CLEAR’s directors and staff are delighted to announce that CLEAR has been granted Title VI Language 
Resource Center (LRC) funding from the US Department of Education for a sixth funding cycle, which 
will run through September 2018. CLEAR is one of sixteen LRCs nationwide. 
In this cycle CLEAR welcomes a new co-director, Dr. Charlene Polio, joining co-director Dr. Susan Gass, 
who has been with CLEAR since its inception in 1996. Learn more about CLEAR's personnel here. 
In its grant application, CLEAR envisioned a new set of projects that will take advantage of the 
experience gained in the last eighteen years of its existence. The projects are based on CLEAR’s principle 
of collaboration across institutional and disciplinary boundaries, which allows CLEAR to bring together a 
wide variety of second language acquisition and language professionals to work on nationally significant 
projects. Focusing on strategic national language needs, CLEAR’s main activities in this proposal include: 
1) Materials Development, 2) Professional Development & Outreach, 3) Research, and 4) Collaboration. 
In addition, a large number of the projects will utilize the innovative technologies for which CLEAR has 
earned a national reputation. Learn more about CLEAR's upcoming projects here. 
CLEAR will continue to operate as a national center by taking the lead in identifying and meeting 
strategic language needs, evaluating the effectiveness of its products and activities, and providing access 
to its programs and materials by broad dissemination efforts through its website, publications, conference 
presentations, and workshops. 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We enjoyed seeing many of you at ACTFL 
in San Antonio in November, and look forward to seeing more at the Computer-Assisted Language 
Instruction Consortium (CALICO) conference in Boulder, Colorado this spring. Please stop by our booth 
to say hello! 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/. 
