Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/review3.pdf 
February 2015, Volume 19, Number 1 
pp. 59–62 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501                                                                                                                                                  59 
REVIEW OF TECHNOLOGY ENHANCED LANGUAGE LEARNING: 
CONNECTING THEORY AND PRACTICE 
Technology Enhanced Language Learning: 
Connecting Theory and Practice 
Aisha Walker and Goodith White 
2013 
ISBN: 978-0194423687 (paperback) 
US $33.88 (paperback) 
208 pp. 
Oxford University Press 
Oxford, England 
 
 
Review by Jeffrey S. Moore, Bowling Green State University 
As the title suggests, Walker and White’s book, Technology Enhanced Language Learning: Connecting 
Theory and Practice, sets out to bridge the gap the authors believe exists in theoretical work on how 
technology can function within the context of second language instruction, and how instructors can use 
technology to enliven and engage their students. They believe one of the primary reasons the gap exists is 
because instructors may feel intimidated by changes in technology, or more accurately, that instructors are 
unable to keep up with the changes in technology as quickly as their students can, and thus are not 
comfortable integrating as wide a range of technologies into their lessons (e.g., YouTube videos or audio 
recording and editing programs). To this end, the book functions more as a how-to guide for instructors 
who are not accustomed to using technology in their classrooms than it does as a reference guide for 
research about Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL). 
The majority of the book’s twelve chapters are structured the same, with each addressing a different topic 
of language learning. The book begins with an introductory section with suggestions on how and why to 
integrate technology that speaks directly to instructors who are unaccustomed to having technology play a 
major role in their classroom. Each chapter is further divided into summaries of relevant research into 
how technology assists in the learning of the given topic area, sections describing technologies that can 
aid in the learning process, and suggestions for how to integrate those technologies into classroom 
instruction. This structure is useful as it allows instructors to draw from sections that are most relevant to 
their classes, though it gives the impression that there is an inherent separation between skill sets--that 
one cannot, for example, use technology to strengthen oral or aural fluency while also making gestures 
towards reading comprehension or vocabulary building. The authors make clear in the introduction that 
they do not see this as being the case, but this point could have been made clearer throughout, as a portion 
of Walker and White’s target audience – someone who is unfamiliar or uncomfortable with technology – 
Jeffrey S. Moore                           Review of Technology Enhanced Language Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology                                                                                                                                                      60
may only be using the book in a piecemeal way to enhance classroom activities, and may not immediately 
see connections between topic areas. 
Chapter 1 sets the tone for the book by discussing how people learn a second language and how 
technology can enhance this process. More so than any other, this chapter makes the case that instructors 
should not be afraid to use or experiment with technology, despite any personal shortcomings they may 
feel regarding the use of any given piece of technology, because it can only help to advance their 
students’ understanding of English. The authors discuss technology through the lens of the tutor, tutee, 
tool model, as developed by Taylor (1980), which posits that technology serves different roles at different 
points in the learning process, and that students can move between these roles as needed. The authors 
discuss authoring software as an example of the tutor role, as this type of software allows instructors to 
create customized exercises or drills that can be reused by multiple students at multiple proficiency levels, 
and can be accessed from home or in an institutional setting. The tool role, broadly defined by the 
authors, is any interaction through which technology is used to accomplish a task. This can be using a 
computer to check spelling errors in a written assignment, using a vocabulary drill game on a smartphone 
or tablet, or using audio or video editing equipment to create a class presentation. The tutee role – in 
which the student “teaches” something to the technology – is not as well defined or explained as the tutor 
or tool roles, though the authors suggest this may be a more effective method of learning as it requires the 
student to construct knowledge through trial and error. The authors see the tutor, tutee, tool model as an 
example of Technology Enhanced Language Learning (TELL), which they see as preferable to CALL 
because TELL allows for multiple teaching approaches to be used, which leads to the creation of a 
learning environment where technology helps boost student performance without students becoming 
wholly reliant upon technology to create language. 
Chapter 3 is a typical example of how most of the chapters in this book function. The chapter sticks to a 
given topic area, listening and speaking in this case, and lays out a series of skills students need to acquire 
to improve their language proficiency, along with a series of technology-enhanced lesson ideas designed 
to help students improve those skills. One of the real strengths of the book is that many of the class 
exercise suggestions make use of existing Internet technologies; that is, the class exercises are based upon 
tools that can be found for free online. This is an especially important note since Walker and White are 
targeting an audience they perceive as less familiar and/or comfortable with technology in the classroom. 
The authors realize that an instructor who can quickly and easily access a new piece of technology is 
going to be much more likely to learn how to use that technology, and will feel more comfortable 
teaching others how to use that technology. An example of this is the authors’ suggestion to use 
chatterbots, also known as chatter robots or chatbots, as a means of language practice and improvement. 
Chatterbots are computer programs designed to analyze text and formulate responses similar to those 
people would give during a casual conversation. Numerous free chatterbot programs and websites can be 
found online, and users often need only a few basic pieces of equipment such as an Internet enabled 
computer and a microphone to use them. Though more complex speech recognition and response 
programs undoubtedly exist on the commercial market, these free Internet-based programs allow users 
without the benefit of a technology-rich institution to practice English and give instructors an outlet for 
students to practice outside the classroom with technology they may already possess. The goal here is to 
acclimate users to new ideas and new ways of learning, and suggestions like chatterbots provide a means 
for exploration across language proficiency and technology comfort levels. 
Perhaps the two most important chapters in the book are Chapter 9: Assessment, and Chapter 10: 
Teachers Using Technology. As the titles suggest, these two chapters deal with how to evaluate and 
assign grades for assignments built around or completed using new forms of technology, and deciding 
what skills an instructor needs to acquire in order to comfortably use technology in their classroom. In 
addition to suggestions for class exercises enhanced by technology, Chapter 9 examines the benefits and 
disadvantages of using technology in language learning. The authors suggest that technology has much to 
Jeffrey S. Moore                           Review of Technology Enhanced Language Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology                                                                                                                                                        61 
lend to the field of assessment in terms of diagnostics, course placements, quality assurance and 
determining future learning opportunities based on these qualities. Though the tone and topic of the book 
show they fall on the side of technology as a benefit to both instructors and students, Walker and White 
do acknowledge that technology in the language learning classroom has its drawbacks, such as the 
inability to judge student progress and skill holistically, or errors that may commence from program 
spelling and grammar checks that a human would be more attuned to. To those for whom technology is a 
new tool among the many used to teach a new language, this chapter is indispensable as it provides a 
framework for deciding what technologies are the most beneficial. What the chapter does not do, 
however, is provide teachers with information about how to assess the quality of assignments completed 
with new technologies. The authors do not spend sufficient time discussing how to evaluate an 
assignment completed using audio editing software, for example. Those instructors who may be looking 
for guidance on how to judge the performance of their more technologically adept students may be 
disappointed by this omission.  
It may seem like overstating the obvious, but Chapter 10 focuses on the need for instructors to have basic 
competence in computer usage and function, and more than a cursory understanding of any software 
programs, websites, or hardware being used in a classroom or lab setting. Walker and White advocate a 
method of technology acquisition based on a skills pyramid, in which instructors build on skills as they 
acquire them in order to achieve a level of mastery that allows them to develop their own creative way of 
using and teaching students how to use technology. This emphasis on developing skills is not unlike the 
way many students acquire a new language, building on skills to create more fluency and comprehension, 
and it serves as a good analogy for those looking to improve their technological proficiency. Given, 
however, that the book is aimed at an audience that is reluctant to learn or adopt new technologies as part 
of their pedagogy, it seems strange that this chapter would be reserved until so late in the book. In terms 
of establishing the relevance of the work within the field, it may have been more prudent to lead with this 
section rather than saving it for those who, presumably, have acquired some level of knowledge by 
reading through the proceeding chapters.  
Ultimately, Walker and White’s book succeeds at being what it was written to be – a self-help guide for 
instructors who want to incorporate more technology into their language learning classrooms but are 
unsure how to proceed – and those who may be interested in the book would be wise to keep this in 
perspective. For those to whom technology is not seen as a burden or cause for fear, or those who already 
have more than a passing knowledge of the Internet, Technology Enhanced Language Learning: 
Connecting Theory and Practice is unlikely to be of substantial assistance. Similarly, instructors looking 
for ready-made lesson plans that take advantage of technology may find the book wanting, for while there 
are suggestions made throughout, the book devotes more space to providing a theoretical background for 
technology inclusion than it does to offering exemplar lesson plans. The book can be useful if placed in 
the right hands and within the right context, but those looking for a more general use handbook should 
look elsewhere. 
 
REFERENCES 
Taylor, R. P. (1980). Introduction. In R. P. Taylor (Ed.), The computer in school: Tutor, tool, tutee. 1–10. 
New York, NY: Teachers College Press. Retrieved from 
http://www.citejournal.org/vol3/iss2/seinal/article1.cfm 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Jeffrey S. Moore is a doctoral student in the rhetoric and writing program at Bowling Green State 
Jeffrey S. Moore                           Review of Technology Enhanced Language Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology                                                                                                                                                   62 
University in Bowling Green, OH. He previously taught English as a Second Language at the University 
of Dayton in Dayton, OH. His research interests include second language composition, multimodal 
composition, cultural rhetoric, and religious rhetoric. 
E-mail: jsmoore@bgsu.edu 
