Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/liukleinsasser.pdf 
February 2015, Volume 19, Number 1 
pp. 119–138 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 119 
EXPLORING EFL TEACHERS’ CALL KNOWLEDGE AND 
COMPETENCIES: IN-SERVICE PROGRAM PERSPECTIVES 
Mei-Hui Liu, Tunghai University 
Robert C. Kleinsasser, Arizona State University 
This article describes quantitative and qualitative data providing perspectives on how six 
English as a Foreign Language (EFL) vocational high school teachers perceived CALL 
knowledge and competencies in a yearlong technology-enriched professional development 
program. The teachers’ developing technological pedagogical content knowledge 
(TPACK) and perceived computer self-efficacy are examined from their use of technology 
while participating in online project-based EFL instruction. Data analysis reveals these 
participants’ TPACK and self-efficacy of using computer technology development, their 
application and infusion of technology in English instruction, and factors that facilitated or 
hampered their (technology) professional development. Such understandings are briefly 
buttressed with additional perspectives from three university professionals and these 
teachers’ vocational high school students. The multiple perspectives and perceptions 
render meaning-making potential for professionals promoting and developing technology 
integration into EFL classrooms. 
Keywords: Teacher Training, Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Technological 
Pedagogical Content Knowledge (TPACK), Computer Self-Efficacy, EFL Teachers 
APA Citation: Liu, M. H., & Kleinsasser, R. C. (2015). Exploring EFL teachers’ CALL 
knowledge and competencies: In-service program perspectives. Language Learning & 
Technology, 19(1), 119–138. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/liukleinsasser.pdf 
Received: October 30, 2013; Accepted: October 1, 2014; Published: February 1, 2015 
Copyright: © Mei-Hui Liu & Robert C. Kleinsasser 
INTRODUCTION 
There is wide agreement that it is often the teachers who make decisions as to whether and how to use 
Information Computer Technology (ICT) in their teaching (Haydn & Barton, 2008; Sang, Valcke, Braak, 
& Tondeur, 2010), and that when they do, they can act as change agents for technology integration. 
Scholars and researchers have argued to transform teacher education to better prepare tomorrow’s 
teachers to understand how technology impacts student learning (e.g., Ertmer, 2005; Polly, Mims, 
Shepherd, & Inan, 2010; Sang et al., 2010). Second language teacher educators have similarly urged for 
the preparation and education of pre- and in-service language teachers to develop computer-assisted 
language learning (CALL) in the 21st Century (e.g., Hong, 2010; Hubbard, 2008; Hubbard & Levy, 
2006). To this end, we examined English as a Foreign Language (EFL) in-service teachers’ year-long 
CALL professional development seeking to prepare teachers for technology-enriched language education 
and explored EFL teachers’ learning to integrate technology into classroom instruction. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
TPACK and Computer Self-Efficacy 
Teacher professional development receives attention and promotes improvement in general and second 
language education (e.g., Avalos, 2011; Kleinsasser, 2013), including professional development in CALL 
(e.g., Hong, 2010). The technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPACK) framework (Mishra & 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 120 
Koehler, 2006) that builds on Shulman’s (1987) Pedagogical Content Knowledge is of particular interest 
in this study of online EFL teacher professional development. Mishra and Koehler (2006) emphasized 
teachers need to integrate technology with content in meaningful ways to enhance student learning. The 
TPACK core consists of dynamic relationships between content, pedagogy, and technology for teachers 
to develop (Koehler, Mishra, & Yahya, 2007; Mishra & Koehler, 2006). Hughes and Scharber (2008) 
further highlighted that all language teachers need to become more meta-cognitively aware of their 
knowledge base in terms of technological content knowledge (TCK), technological pedagogical 
knowledge (TPK), and TPACK (which may assist teachers to exploit different technology applications 
and tools as a source for ICT conceptualization, development, and assessment). Heeding Hughes and 
Scharber’s advice, this study focuses on the following three constructs: 
• TCK: knowing about selecting appropriate CALL tools to present English learning materials. 
• TPK: knowing about implementing teaching methods and project-based pedagogy with 
appropriate CALL tools.  
• TPACK: knowing about integrating appropriate pedagogy and CALL technology into 
presenting English learning materials and project-based content.  
Additionally, the construct of self-efficacy plays a role with TCK, TPK, and TPACK. Compeau and 
Higgins (1995) described computer self-efficacy specifically as one’s perceived ability to accomplish a 
task with computers (citing Bandura’s [1986] social cognitive theory); individuals with higher computer 
self-efficacy beliefs see themselves as computer technology users. Performance accomplishments and 
vicarious learning experiences are generally considered major sources of increasing one’s self-efficacy 
(Wang, Ertmer, & Newby, 2004). In other words, viewing others’ successful task accomplishments may 
increase individual’s perceptions of others’ efficacy as well as one’s own efficacy when performing 
similar tasks. Having briefly sketched the four theoretical constructs of our study, we turn now to 
empirical work that further clarifies these ideas, concepts, and insights. 
LITERATURE REVIEW  
Some researchers contended that many teachers do not infuse ICT into their instruction even in high-tech 
schools (e.g., Lin & Lu, 2010; Teo, 2009; Wang et al., 2004). Still other researchers found teachers’ 
TPACK and computer self-efficacy increased with instruction in technology integration, pedagogy, and 
content (Mishra & Koehler, 2006; Thompson & Mishra, 2008) and some specific teachers’ competencies 
were further developed using technology with instructional practices (Ertmer, 2005; Ropp, 1999). A 
majority of studies focusing on technology professional development has relied on quantitative surveys 
describing the effects of TPACK and various teacher competencies on developing teachers’ TPACK (e.g., 
Doering, Veletsianos, Scharber, & Miller, 2009; Jang, 2010) or enhancing their perceived computer self-
efficacy (e.g., Koh & Frick, 2009; Overbaugh & Lu, 2008). One example is Lee and Tsai (2010), who 
investigated elementary and high school teachers’ self-efficacy for TPACK in Taiwanese schools utilizing 
surveys. However, Polly et al. (2010) highlighted the need for multiple data sources and various 
stakeholders’ perspectives to provide “a more robust view” of how teachers learn to teach with 
technology. Nonetheless, few researchers have examined both issues (i.e., TPACK and computer self-
efficacy) in one investigation as done in the current study. 
Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge (TPACK) 
Using various scales, researchers have investigated pre-service teachers’ TPACK development during 
semester-long courses in educational technology, mathematics, or science (e.g., Chai, Koh, Tsai, & Tan, 
2011; Sahin, 2011; Schmidt, Baran, Thompson, Mishra, Koehler, & Shin, 2009; So & Kim, 2009). In 
these studies, pre-service teachers designed teaching projects after receiving instructional modules related 
to technology professional development. Some studies examined the development of teacher candidates’ 
TPACK subcomponents by solely administering pre- and post- surveys, and others further analyzed the 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 121 
project tasks designed by pre-service teachers. These investigators tended to find pre-service teachers’ 
TPACK limited by a lack of pedagogical, technological, and/or content knowledge.  
Researchers have further documented the static nature of in-service practitioners’ TPACK (e.g., 
Archambault & Barnett, 2010; Benson & Ward, 2013; Jang & Tsai, 2012; Lin, Tsai, Chai, & Lee, 2013). 
Findings included high levels of technology knowledge that did not necessarily ensure TPACK, more 
experienced teachers perceived having more TPACK, and a significant negative correlation between age 
and TPACK domains. In two professional training contexts, Doering et al. (2009) and Jang (2010) found 
that it was a challenge for in-service teachers to develop and employ appropriate teaching content and 
pedagogical approaches while TCK and TPK were not sufficiently developed for real classroom 
instruction. However, few researchers have examined the nature of in-service teachers’ technology 
infusion in classroom practice compared to pre-service teacher preparation as in the study presented here.  
Computer Self-Efficacy 
Extensive research has investigated pre-service teachers’ intention or confidence integrating technology 
in future instructional practices in terms of computer self-efficacy (e.g., Celik & Yesilyurt, 2013; 
Demiralay & Karadeniz, 2010; Sang et al., 2010). A few studies considered in-service teachers’ points of 
view. For instance, researchers found that teachers’ perceived self-efficacy had significant correlations 
with their effort and commitment to using technology in classroom instruction (Lin & Liu, 2010). 
Teachers with more access to the Web for instructional purposes had higher levels of self-efficacy (Lee & 
Tsai, 2010), and EFL teachers with better computer access had lower computer anxiety and more 
computer self-efficacy (Chen, 2012). Yet, studies that tap into in-service teachers’ perspectives and 
actions are rare; both interest and need to further study in-service TPACK and computer self-efficacy 
remain. This is no less true in second language education, which we take up next.  
Language Teacher Preparation in CALL  
The lack of adequate teacher preparation restricts technology-enhanced instruction in language 
classrooms (Egbert, Paulus, & Nakamichi, 2002; Kessler, 2006; Oxford & Jung, 2007). Aydin (2013) 
noted that the research depicting the process of language teachers’ learning to teach with technology 
receives even less attention. There persists a dearth of related empirical studies on how (foreign) language 
teachers learn to integrate technology into their instructional practice (McNeil, 2013; Olphen, 2008). 
Most researchers have tended to promote CALL teacher preparation by having pre-service teachers use 
technological tools or media (e.g., blogs, podcasting, e-portfolios, online learning communities) in 
technology or [Teaching English as a Second Language (TESL)] methodology courses (e.g., Debski, 
2006; Desjardins & Peters, 2007; Egbert et al., 2002; Kim, 2011; Meskill, Anthony, Hilliker-
VanStrander, Tseng, & You, 2006; Sun, 2010). These researchers found that pre-service teachers 
developed technological competences but were not at ease applying CALL in future classes. Meskill et al. 
(2006) documented that both in-service and pre-service language teachers in an online learning 
community appreciated expert-novice interactions and increased their positive attitudes toward CALL and 
confidence in CALL integration, whereas Kim (2011) and Sun (2010) showed that pre-service teachers 
held positive attitudes toward podcasting and/or blogging to support their professional development. 
These last three studies did not offer evidence as to how TESL professionals were capable of 
transforming these learning experiences and attitudes in real instructional settings.  
Most recently, McNeil (2013) suggested that CALL professional development include situated learning 
activities. A few studies have already provided some initial insights that such opportunities encouraged 
participants to apply CALL theories into practices as well as to scaffold students’ language learning 
(Chao, 2006; Debski, 2006). McNeil (2013) specifically explored Korean in-service teachers’ learning 
experiences and contended that a situated learning training course had a positive effect on teachers’ 
CALL skills. Nonetheless, McNeil acknowledged that the participating teachers’ computer literacy 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 122 
neither necessarily assisted nor reflected technology use in language education. 
PROBLEM STATEMENT AND RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
As illustrated above, there is limited research regarding in-service language teachers’ CALL professional 
development and the process(es) of how practitioners implement technology in actual classroom settings. 
The extant literature shows that few researchers rely specifically on theories and utilize multiple 
stakeholders’ perspectives to assess language teachers’ CALL knowledge and competencies in situated 
learning contexts. We investigate EFL teachers’ learning to teach with technology during a yearlong 
technology-enriched in-service program that used the theoretical lenses of TPACK and computer self-
efficacy to understand and address the following research questions. 
1. How do in-service EFL teachers perceive their development of CALL knowledge and 
competencies; how do university professionals and these EFL teachers' students perceive the 
teachers' professional development? 
2. What benefits do in-service EFL teachers perceive when participating in online professional 
development? 
3. What factors facilitate or hamper these EFL teachers’ professional learning and classroom 
implementation of technology?   
METHODOLOGY 
Settings 
This study was conducted at two private vocational schools located in a city in central Taiwan. The 
schools from which potential participants were recruited shared similarities in terms of historical 
reputation, curriculum design, and initiatives to create online learning environments. The major 
specialized subjects offered at both schools were Applied English, Cosmetology, Tourism, Nursing, 
Information Science, Business Administration, and International Trade. These two schools (School 
A=2,700 students; School B=3,400 students) were both ranked as “Top-rated Private Vocational 
School[s]” receiving extra finances from the Ministry of Education (MOE) in Taiwan during the 2009 and 
2010 school years; one requested mission was to pioneer integrating technology into all instruction. Both 
schools promoted the use of school-based Moodle platforms and personal weblogs by organizing short-
term technology workshops for teachers who volunteered to participate. Online learning was mainly used 
for class announcements or posting learning materials.  
Participants 
The main participants were six full-time EFL teachers (four in School A and two in School B). These 
female teachers were recruited based on their availability and willingness to join this technology 
professional development program (see Table 1 for demographic information). Amy, Bella, Cindy, and 
Dora were expected by the Director of Teaching Affairs to break new ground for technology-based 
English education (School A). Emily and Flora did not receive any pressure from their administrator 
(School B), yet they both had strong motivation to make changes to their current teaching practices. These 
teachers taught a general English course to students majoring in Applied English, Information Science, 
Nursing, or Cosmetology in order to improve their English language proficiency. Before taking part in the 
year-long professional development program, Amy, Bella, and Dora attended short-term technology 
workshops offered by their schools, while Cindy, Emily, and Flora learned how to use instructional 
technology from friends or colleagues. Their previous technology application covered PPT, emails, 
YouTube, and online resources. None were familiar with integrating online learning platforms or project-
based instruction with their English curriculum. 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 123 
Additionally, three university professionals and students in one class taught by each teacher (grade 10 or 
11) offered additional perspectives on these English teachers’ development with technology. These 
female professionals had taught 7–18 years at two private universities before their involvement in this 
research project. Two of them had expertise in English language education and the other in computer-
assisted learning and project-based instruction. In total, 238 students consented to participate in the six 
English teachers’ online language instruction. These six classes of 16–18 year-old students majored in 
different subject areas (Applied English [n=47, 49, and 42], Information Science [n =37], Cosmetology  
[n =45], or Nursing [n =18]). According to school exam scores, these students had either intermediate-low 
or intermediate levels of English proficiency. As shown in the student profile surveys, most of these 
students reported not being familiar with technology-enhanced language learning because less than 10% 
reported ever accessing online learning platforms, and none had engaged in project-based language 
learning before this study. 
Table 1. Demographic Information of the Participating Teachers 
Name Age Degree Years 
Teaching 
Class Previous Technology 
Application 
Previous 
Technology 
Professional 
Development 
Amy 35 M.A. (TEFL) 6  A Applied 
English  
PPT, Email, YouTube, 
Online resources a 
Short-term 
workshops b 
Bella 28 B.A. (English) 2 B Applied 
English  
PPT, YouTube, Online 
resources 
Short-term 
workshops 
Cindy 47 B.A. (English) 17 C Information 
Science 
PPT 
Online resources 
N/A c 
Dora 45 B.A. (Economics) 20 D Nursing  PPT, YouTube, Online 
resources 
Short-term 
workshops 
Emily 30 M.A. (Linguistics) 2 E Applied 
English  
PPT, Online resources N/A 
Flora 50 B.A. (Commerce) 15 F Cosmetology  PPT, Online resources N/A 
Notes. All teachers’ names are pseudonyms. a Online resources include pictures, short essay, travel information, or simplified 
news report. b Short-term workshops include two-hour, half a day, or one-day professional trainings. c N/A= not available from 
information received 
The Technology-Enriched In-service Program 
The main objectives of this in-service program were to enhance teachers’ digital literacy and to promote 
the integration of online (project-based) instruction into English education. Table 2 summarizes the 
timelines of four learning components. First, six 90-minute training sessions were scheduled to help the 
six participating teachers learn how to design and manage course interfaces on Moodle. This open-source 
platform was employed due to its free access in this yearlong professional training. Also included were 
trainings of using Internet tools or media (e.g., Icon Gallery and Video Converter) and the Hot Potatoes 
program to design online multiple-choice or fill-in-blank test items. Specifically, the WebQuest program 
was selected and embedded on the platform to meet the pedagogy objective of project-based instruction 
investigated in this study. Five elements are included in each inquiry-based project: 1) introduction, 2) 
task, 3) process, 4) evaluation, and 5) conclusion, which aimed to help these teachers scaffold and create 
an online “meaningful and contextualized language experience” (Chao, 2006, p. 221) for students. 
Second, two face-to-face half-day workshops mainly based on transmission-oriented pedagogy were 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 124 
offered by three university professionals to train these teachers on how to apply CALL. The teachers 
received lectures and joined hands-on activities pertaining to WebQuest project design, instruction, and 
evaluation rubrics. They were also encouraged to share and discuss possible solutions to difficulties they 
may encounter in the project implementation. Third, the teachers designed two WebQuest projects by 
referring to their textbook content. The first project was implemented in individual classes with varying 
topics such as “Why Einstein is a Genius” and “New Year Celebrations in Different Countries.” The 
second project was a collaborative task designed by the six teachers who selected their project team 
members based on the attributes of students’ majors across classes or schools. The three classes of 
Applied English completed a project “Showing Off Yourself in the Readers’ Theater” as the students had 
more motivation to perform in English. The others with a major in Information Science, Nursing, or 
Cosmetology completed the project “Daily English Advertisement Around You” due to their need to learn 
how to promote services (or products) via advertisements in the future. Fourth, both the teachers and 
university professionals joined online discussion forums where they shared, discussed, and reflected on 
the process of learning to teach project-based English with technology. 
Table 2. The Timelines of Learning Components in the Professional Development Program 
Components Teacher Activities Timeline 
Moodle platform 
training 
Design course interfaces for individual classes September ~ October 2011 
Learn major functions and the WebQuest interface 
embedded on the Moodle platform  
Learn the Internet tools or media related to the 
management of Moodle  
Mid October ~ late 
November 2011 
Face-to-face 
workshops  
Learn theory and design of online project-based 
instruction 
Early December 2011 
Discuss the implementation of online projects, rubrics 
of evaluating students’ project performance, and 
difficulties encountered  
Early May 2012 
Design and 
implementation of 
WebQuest projects 
Introduce project-based learning and the Moodle 
platform to students and create accounts for students 
Late November ~           
Mid December 2011 
Instruct students to complete the first project and 
offer suggestions/comments at each class 
February ~ April 2012 
Instruct students to complete the second project and 
offer suggestions/comments across classes or schools 
July ~ August 2012 
Online discussion 
forums 
Join online discussions with participating English 
teachers and university professionals 
December 2011 ~  
August 2012 
Data Collection and Analysis 
Data collection lasted from September 2011 to August 2012 (see Table 3). The English teachers 
completed pre- and post-surveys and three individual interviews. A Teacher Technology Integration (TTI) 
Survey was employed to assess the English teachers’ CALL knowledge and competencies (see Appendix 
for sample items). This five-point Likert-type survey was adapted from previous studies regarding 
teachers’ TPACK knowledge and computer self-efficacy when engaged in web-based instructional 
practices (Archambault & Barnett, 2010; Lee & Tsai, 2010; Sang et al., 2010). This research instrument 
underwent expert review and two rounds of piloting with four English teachers at a senior high school to 
establish construct validity and internal reliability. Some difficult wordings and unclear statements were 
revised after the first pilot. The revised instrument improved the Cronbach α value from .58 to .76 in the 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 125 
second pilot (an acceptable index of internal consistency; see George & Mallery, 2003). This survey was 
administered at the beginning and at the end of this study to investigate the differences between these 
teachers’ perceived knowledge development (including TPK, TCK, and TPACK) and computer self-
efficacy. Also, the teachers were interviewed at the beginning, middle, and end of this study to depict the 
process of infusing technology into instructional practices. The university professionals were interviewed 
at the middle and at the end of this study to portray how they saw the teachers’ learning to teach with 
technology. Individual face-to-face semi-structured interviews (Doering et al. 2009; Jang, 2010; Koh & 
Frick, 2009; Overbaugh & Lu, 2008) were conducted in Chinese to elicit the data without the interference 
of language performance. The teachers and university professionals in online discussions used the 
language (Chinese or English) with which they felt most comfortable. Additionally, the recruited students 
completed a Student Profile Survey and two feedback sheets to reflect on the instruction they received 
from the English teachers. Each feedback sheet contained two rating items in addition to written 
reflections, which revealed students’ involvement in and satisfaction with these English teachers’ CALL 
instruction. Any data collected in Chinese were translated by the first author and reviewed by a native 
English speaker. 
Table 3. Data Collection Procedures 
Timeline English Teachers Students University Professionals 
September 2011 Pre-TTI survey 
Interview (1) 
  
December ~ January 2011 [Design Project 1] Profile survey  
January 2012   Interview (1) 
(Winter Vacation)  [Complete Project 1]  
February 2012 Interview (2) Feedback sheet (1)  
May ~ June 2012 [Design Project 2]   
July 2012 Post-TTI survey [Complete Project 2] 
Feedback sheet (2) 
 
August 2012 Interview (3)  Interview (2) 
Note: Online discussion messages posted by English teachers and university professionals were collected from December 2011 to 
August 2012. 
Data were analyzed and compared continuously until theories or patterns emerged (Glaser & Strauss, 
1967; Silverman, 2006). First, descriptive analysis was performed on the data collected from the pre- and 
post-Teacher Technology Integration Surveys completed by the six teachers. It revealed individual 
teacher’s TPACK and self-efficacy for technology integration before and after taking this professional 
development program (α =.97 and .75 respectively). Also included was an analysis of 238 students’ rating 
scores from the feedback sheet items describing their CALL learning experiences. Kolmogorov-Smirnova 
and Shapiro-Wilk’s test revealed that students’ responses to the feedback sheets were not normally 
distributed as a whole nor in each class (p=0.00 <0.05). We accordingly used a non-parametric method 
(i.e., Wilcoxon signed-rank test) to investigate whether there was a significant difference between these 
students’ involvement in and satisfaction with teachers’ online instruction after completing the first and 
the second projects. Second, the data described in the Student Profile Survey outlined an overview of the 
participating students’ English learning experience(s) and learning expectation(s). Third, the qualitative 
data collected from interviews, written reflections on feedback sheets, and online posted messages were 
analyzed using Nvivo 8.0 and open/axial coding techniques (Corbin & Strauss, 2008) that helped to 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 126 
organize groups of data within particular themes or issues being investigated. The inclusion criteria of the 
themes emerging from students’ written reflections were based on more than 50% of participants’ 
opinions or comments in each class. Finally, all data were triangulated to document the participating EFL 
teachers’ professional development at two participating schools.  
FINDINGS 
Teachers’ Development of CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
Data analysis revealed that all the EFL teachers increased their self-efficacy for technology integration 
step by step. As shown in Table 4, the mean scores of the first survey scale range from 2.33 to 3.60 and 
the second from 3.73 to 4.20 (highest possible score= 5.00). When interviewed near the end of this study, 
almost all teachers reported high increases in the computer self-efficacy question. As Flora commented, “I 
now could rate myself at least 4 out of 5 scores in self-efficacy, while I only had 2 or at most 3 at the 
beginning of this study.” 
Table 4. Teacher Technology Professional Development 
Teacher Survey TCK TPK TPACK Self-Efficacy 
Amy 1st 4.00 4.00 3.80 3.60 
2nd 4.40 4.00 3.80 3.87 
Bella 1st 3.40 3.20 3.80 3.33 
2nd 4.60 3.80 4.40 4.00 
Cindy 1st 1.80 1.80 1.40 2.33 
2nd 3.00 3.60 3.60 3.73 
Dora 1st 2.00 2.00 2.20 3.00 
2nd 4.00 4.00 4.00 4.20 
Emily 1st 1.20 1.80 1.40 3.13 
2nd 4.20 4.00 3.40 3.87 
Flora  1st 1.60 1.40 1.40 2.13 
2nd 3.80 4.00 4.40 3.93 
Average Gain Scores 1.67 1.54 1.60 1.01 
Note. Likert Scale (1= strongly disagree, 2= disagree, 3= neutral, 4= agree, 5= strongly agree) 
The findings derived from various data sources show that all teachers except for Amy reported great 
improvement in building their TPACK as a whole after attending this yearlong program. This is shown in 
the gain scores of three survey scales (TCK= 1.67, TPK= 1.54, TPACK= 1.60; see Table 4). The 
following sections extend these quantitative findings and depict individual teachers’ CALL development 
and the challenges, if any, they encountered when using newly acquired knowledge in their language 
classrooms. 
As a third-year teacher, Bella had been familiar with applying online resources into English instruction 
(first survey report mean =  3.40, 3.20, and 3.80 in the TPACK elements). She felt this professional 
development program fostered how to integrate technology into teaching content and classroom pedagogy 
(Mean = 4.60, 3.80, and 4.40 in survey categories). When invited to join the professional development 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 127 
program, she looked forward to learning more about online instructional tools to improve her reading and 
writing instruction. After participating in the training for one semester, Bella felt excited to “become 
familiar with all the useful websites recommended by professors in the workshop. It helped a lot in my 
project design.” When the first WebQuest project was completed, the largest percentage of Bella’s 
discussion forum posts projected her confidence in teaching language—these were different from her 
previous instructional experiences: “the second [website] is authentic pronunciation by foreigners which 
helps students imitate them.” When discussing with peers how to design the second project on the online 
forums, Bella displayed CALL knowledge integrating pedagogy, content, and technology:  
We could have students practice their speaking by the puppet show. Students have to refer to the 
script we offered online and videotape their 3-5 minute show…. They could…convert files by the 
Format Factory software, and then upload assignments to our Moodle. 
At the end of this study, Bella explained how she had changed students’ language learning via technology 
infusion. “I created a project for students to join a peer discussion and collectively complete the 
assignment on a platform outside the class sessions.” Comparing her two implemented projects, she noted 
that, “It’s amazing to evaluate student learning outcomes totally online. This is what I didn’t accomplish 
in the first project.” 
By contrast, Cindy, Dora, Emily, and Flora seemed uncertain about whether they had enough technology 
knowledge to implement the requested online teaching project at the beginning of this study. For 
example, Flora confessed that, “mostly, I am only using the teaching DVD offered by textbook 
publishers. I am not quite sure whether I could have students learn English on the Internet.” Dora echoed 
that uncertainty by saying “I don’t know what WebQuest is and how such technology could be used in my 
teaching. So, I don’t know what I expect myself to achieve.” This may explain why most of them rated 
themselves with very limited TCK, TPK, and TPACK (the mean scores ranging from 1.20 to 2.20) at this 
stage. When interviewed after completing the first project, only Emily expressed an improvement in 
technology infusion because she could use the Hot Potatoes and Video Converter software “to give 
students several online interactive quizzes outside class” or “to teach students how to convert videotaped 
files for the WebQuest project in classroom.” The other three teachers were concerned with falling behind 
on implementing what was promoted in the in-service program. Cindy reported her challenges, “I am 
overwhelmed by the new technology stuff suddenly instilled into my brain… I need more time to match 
the use of technology to students’ language levels.” She revealed feeling the pressure of completing the 
project-based instruction in a posted message, stressing, “Due to the tight course schedule, I really don’t 
have the brainpower to think about the second project.” Similarly, Dora admitted, “I have learned a lot but 
still don’t know how to apply the techniques to my own teaching. I don’t think I could finish the first 
project without following the professors’ advice step by step.” She frequently showed her reliance on the 
university professionals’ instruction in posted messages such as, “Prof. Lee’s previous suggestions did 
help me relieve my worries of using Internet resources.” Yet, Dora acknowledged her professional growth 
in the second interview, “Definitely, I have enhanced my self-efficacy up to the percentage of 30 or even 
50, compared to what I had before.” As to Flora, her struggle with completing the first project was 
evident by stating “I was pushed by you and the other professors to complete the project. Though I know 
how to set up the WebQuest on the platform, I am still not familiar with how to design the project by 
myself.” On the discussion forum, Flora addressed her challenges in designing the second project as she 
had to figure out “appropriate lesson units, related Internet resources or multimedia teaching materials, 
students’ learning schedules, students’ application of information technology, and the effects of applying 
information technology on teaching and learning in lesson units.”  
Near the end of this study, however, these teachers increased their CALL knowledge, as all reported 
improvement in terms of TCK, TPK, and overall TPACK (the mean scores ranging from 3.00 to 4.40). 
For instance, Cindy said, “I now grasp the essence of project-based instruction and apply those useful 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 128 
online resources and techniques taught by Prof. Lee.” Compared to the first project, Flora described that, 
“It sounded scary when I first learned a lot from the program. Now, after more practice, it’s much easier 
than what I thought before.” Cindy, Dora and Flora revealed their collaborative potential in developing 
their overall TPACK in the second WebQuest project. They instructed students to 1) search for the online 
English advertisements they liked most; 2) use the Screen Capture software to record target 
advertisements; 3) research the origin, meaning, and related slogan of these advertisements on websites; 
and 4) submit a group report about the impact of selected advertisements on general customers to the 
Moodle platform. 
Yet, as reported by the four teachers, more effort was still needed to enhance pedagogical knowledge in 
relation to technology integration (i.e., TPK) in their language classrooms. Emily’s sentiment was typical 
among the others’ perspectives, “I am still learning how to make students closely follow me in this kind 
of online teaching and project-based pedagogy because sometimes they still got lost; especially, some 
language usages are beyond low-level students’ comprehension.” Similar online pedagogical concerns 
were reported by Cindy and Flora in their third interviews, which implies a lack of well-developed TPK 
in their CALL competencies: “The most challenging part was to create a cooperative learning online 
environment for my students”; “It’s not easy to evaluate students’ technology performance because I am 
still a novice in technology application.”  
Amy, on the other hand, described herself as part of the “young hi-tech generation” who always applied 
Internet technology (e.g., Facebook and YouTube) into classroom instruction. Accordingly, she regarded 
herself in the pre-survey as a teacher equipped with the TCK, TPK, and TPACK (mean = 4.00, 4.00, and 
3.80) before receiving any professional training. When first interviewed, Amy expected this professional 
training program might help her with “teaching in a more efficient and easier way.” During the study, she 
was puzzled at her own technology knowledge growth because she had not figured out how to make the 
platform the best language-learning environment. “We need more exact examples to follow, such as what 
has been going on in a project or how student learning outcomes are evaluated online.” In the end, 
however, Amy appeared not to perceive improvement in these knowledge domains (mean = 4.40, 4.00, 
and 3.80). She shared her puzzlement, “I haven’t applied a lot from what I learned into my practice, 
especially about how to design online tests.”  
Teachers’ Benefits of CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
These six EFL teachers overall perceived professional growth after participating in most components of 
this CALL training program. They stressed the significance of improving various technological skills, 
such as designing the course interface, uploading teaching materials, and employing the Hot Potatoes 
online tests. This promoted their in-class teaching to online learning activities, which continued to help 
students improve their vocabulary, reading, or writing outside classrooms. They found that students could 
practice online activities or quizzes in a repetitive or self-contained way, different from traditional paper-
and-and pencil worksheets or tests completed during limited classroom time. In the face-to-face 
workshops, most teachers learned to design WebQuest projects, to set up project evaluation rubrics, and to 
search for related website information. They highlighted their achievement in raising students’ learning 
motivation when implementing online project-based instruction. For instance, Bella reported in the third 
interview, “Students are more willing to speak English when involved in the online Readers’ Theater 
activity while they were too shy to open their mouths on the classroom podium before.” However, these 
teachers tended not to favor participation in online discussion forums themselves and seldom visited the 
forums unless there was a need to refer to the project design examples or evaluation rubrics. Accordingly, 
four out of the six teachers suggested that more workshops or informal face-to-face meetings be 
organized. 
The teachers appeared to increase TPACK and to improve computer self-efficacy because of their 
professional development, while acknowledging a need to further enhance their TPK with future 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 129 
technology infusion; they perceived both growth and benefits. In the following sections, we seek to 
explore further these teachers’ readiness and performance in CALL instruction through other 
stakeholders’ perspectives.  
Additional Perspectives on Teachers’ Professional Development 
University Professionals’ Observations  
The university professionals found it quite praiseworthy how these English teachers integrated technology 
into instructional content and pedagogy during this yearlong CALL training process. For instance, Prof. 
Su complimented, “This professional development program makes it a reform for these teachers to teach 
online project-based English in old and traditional schools where exam-oriented teaching was prevalent 
among most teachers.” As Prof. Ma maintained during this study, “[These teachers] definitely did 
improve technology knowledge, compared to their really unfamiliar application at the beginning of this 
professional development program.” Near the end of this study, Prof. Lee remarked, “More or less these 
teachers have used each element of TPACK in their teaching despite that they are not so familiar with 
integrating all the elements together.”  
These three university professionals commented that all the teachers improved their technology literacy 
but not enough of their TCK. Though they were highly impressed by the class projects, there was concern 
that students should not just recite the same content but use their own imagination and creativity when 
involved in the Readers’ Theatre project or explore the underlying meaning of advertisements (i.e., not 
just record and explain advertisement vocabulary). The university professionals also observed that four of 
these teachers implemented online platform instruction or the WebQuest projects without solid TPK, 
mainly due to unclear ideas about how to involve students in collaboratively completing assignments. 
There were also concerns about clear assessment rubrics, attainment of questionable language skills, and 
the lack of guiding peer interactions and promoting critical peer comments. Prof. Ma explained that, “As 
green-horn teachers using online platforms or the WebQuest, their design was still confined by traditional 
teaching methods.” 
Students’ Online Learning Experiences 
The development of these participating teachers’ CALL knowledge and competencies could be further 
understood from students’ CALL learning experiences. Table 5 shows that these six teachers, as a whole, 
significantly improved all of the 238 recruited students’ involvement in the second online learning 
project, compared to the implementation of the first WebQuest (z = -2.650, p = .008). Yet, there is no 
significant difference in terms of students’ satisfaction throughout the study (z = -1.394, p = .163).  
When further investigated, individual teachers’ technology professional development had a different 
impact on their students’ language learning. Above all, Cindy’s CALL instruction significantly made her 
students become both more involved in and satisfied with online learning after completing the second 
project (z = -3.380, p = .001; z = -3.322, p = .001). As noted by 84% of the students on the second 
feedback sheet, Cindy clearly explained to them all the steps involved in how to complete the cross-class 
WebQuest project. 
Bella and Emily significantly increased Class B and E students’ learning involvement (z = -2.003, p = 
.045; z = -2.491, p = .013). On average the former class was slightly satisfied with Bella’s instruction in 
both projects (mean = 3.41 and 3.43), while the latter showed great satisfaction with Emily’s teaching 
practices (mean = 3.62 and 3.88). Near the end of this study, 65% of the Class B and 83% of the Class E 
students reported they became more involved in the cross-school project because Bella and Emily had 
introduced more useful technology tools and showed them how to discuss project performance on the 
platform. By contrast, Class D was much more satisfied with Dora’s online instructional practice in the 
second project (z = -2.309, p = .021), but had similar involvement in both learning projects (mean = 3.39 
and 3.33). Interestingly, Dora satisfied 78% of the students in the second project by referring the design to 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 130 
daily topics, yet Dora’s online teaching materials, similar to what she usually covered in classroom 
instruction, appeared to make 67% of these learners less involved in online learning near the end of this 
study.  
Table 5. Average Rating Scores from Feedback Sheets and Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test Results 
   Learning Involvement  Learning Satisfaction 
   1st a  2nd  Wilcoxon-test 1st  2nd  Wilcoxon-test 
Class Teacher N M SD M SD z-value p-value c M SD M SD z-value p-value 
A Amy 47 3.18 b 0.82 3.17 0.89 -0.166 0.868 3.28 1.06 3.02 0.92 -1.137 0.255 
B Bella 49 2.79 0.91 3.18 0.97 -2.003 0.045* 3.41 0.84 3.43 1 -0.016 0.873 
C Cindy 37 2.38 1.06 3.22 0.79 -3.38 0.001** 2.32 1.13 3.22 0.79 -3.322 0.001** 
D Dora 18 3.39 0.78 3.33 0.77 -0.277 0.782 3.06 0.72 3.5 0.71 -2.309 0.021* 
E Emily 42 3.38 0.91 3.86 0.78 -2.491 0.013* 3.62 0.88 3.88 0.77 -1.434 0.152 
F Flora 45 2.56 0.99 2.27 1.07 -1.681 0.093 2.4 0.89 2.16 1.11 -1.386 0.166 
All   238 2.91 0.99 3.14 1.02 -2.65 0.008** 3.03 1.06 3.16 1.07 -1.394 0.163 
Notes.  a  The 1st and 2nd feedback sheets were completed at the end of their first and second online project-based learning.   
b Scores rated from 1= never/strongly unsatisfactory to 5 = always/strongly satisfactory. c * p < .05; ** p < .01 
The other two teachers (Amy and Flora) appeared not to significantly foster students’ online learning 
experiences, despite Flora’s self-reported professional growth in technology integration. Amy involved 
her students in Class A quite evenly in the two projects (mean = 3.18 and 3.17) and slightly decreased 
their satisfaction with the second project (mean = 3.28 and 3.02). According to 74% and 63% of the 
students’ reflection in the two feedback sheets, Amy’s delivery of online project-based instruction was 
too fast to be followed. As to Flora’s CALL instruction, 82% and 66% of the students complained that 
Flora seldom explained to them how to complete the first and second projects with clear instruction.  
Teachers’ and University Professionals’ Perspectives on Other Factors in Teacher Technology 
Professional Development 
Government and school administration support positively triggered these EFL teachers’ intent to pursue 
professional growth. As Cindy elaborated, “Our school was promoted by the Ministry of Education 
(MOE) sponsorship to create an online learning environment for students. That’s why we are in great 
need to improve our technology competence.” The university professionals, such as Prof. Lee, also 
proposed that, “the direct push from the MOE is always useful for teachers to move forward.” 
Additionally, partnerships between secondary schools and universities fostered these English teachers’ 
learning to teach. Emily stressed that, “with university professionals’ guidance and instruction, we spent 
less time sorting out the clues of technology use in English classes.” Furthermore, peer collaboration 
across classes and schools brought both “pressure and pleasure” to these teachers. For instance, when 
others’ project instruction was better prepared than hers, Bella felt stressed but reiterated that, “it’s a great 
pleasure to work together with colleagues either inside or outside my school.” Prof. Su commented that 
such peer pressure among the teachers could serve as motivators “to reflect on their own teaching.”  
By contrast, several perceived concerns appeared to hinder these English teachers’ technology integration 
during this study. First, keeping pace with the tight curriculum schedule and the pressure of improving 
students’ test scores resulted in limited time for these teachers to practice CALL application in class. Amy 
mentioned that, “My technology instruction was influenced by my colleagues who kept asking me 
whether I could catch up with the teaching schedules and improve my students’ test scores via online 
learning.” Additionally, these teachers worried about online safety and ethical issues when assigning 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 131 
students to complete language assignments on the learning platform. Flora questioned if her students 
“were playing online games or surfing unhealthy websites when requested to complete online 
assignments.” Dora lamented a challenge of online plagiarism, “We are really not prepared to prevent 
students from copying the content of similar project examples they could find online.” 
DISCUSSION  
The data analysis depicted how EFL teachers perceived their development of CALL knowledge and 
competencies in light of the theoretical lenses of TPACK and computer self-efficacy. Five of the six 
teachers increased their ratings of TPK, TCK, TPACK, and computer self-efficacy items in the survey 
after receiving CALL training courses. In the interviews and posted messages, all the teachers reported 
the benefits and their professional growth for joining this in-service program and were confident about 
improving students’ learning motivation by means of Internet technology. Yet, at the same time, four 
teachers acknowledged challenges with their TPK development when implementing online language 
instruction and 1) matching students’ language levels; 2) evaluating students’ project performance; or 3) 
creating an online cooperative learning environment among students.  
The qualitative data analysis further revealed these teachers’ perceived computer self-efficacy as mainly 
relevant to their technological knowledge development rather than TPACK as a whole. Kessler and 
Plakans (2008) already noted that teachers’ high CALL confidence does not necessarily equal innovative 
and integrated technology and subject matter use. In line with existing literature, teachers who improve 
their technology literacy do not necessarily enhance TPK or TCK unless simultaneously revisiting their 
pedagogical knowledge or subject matter content knowledge (Benson & Ward, 2013; Doering et al., 
2009; Jang, 2010). 
Further evidence shows that age might not necessarily be a confounding factor. Amy (who was younger) 
did not improve her TCK, TPK, or TPACK during this teacher-training program while Cindy and Dora 
(who were older) did benefit a great deal in professional growth and evolution. Accordingly, such a 
finding may echo a significance of teaching experience, which is more positively related to TPACK 
development (Jang & Tsai, 2012). The multiple perspectives from this investigation reveal that age is not 
detrimental to CALL knowledge development and technology infusion, especially in comparison with Lin 
et al. (2013) who only relied on surveys. As for Amy’s professional growth, in-service professional 
development might consider the ceiling effect constraining this young hi-tech’s generation in enhancing 
overall CALL competencies. Perhaps by contextualizing Amy’s technological skills in daily classroom 
instruction via offering scaffolding and building partnerships with experts in language learning 
technology (Kariuki, Franklin, & Duran, 2001), she would have more chances in crossing the barrier(s) of 
her TPACK development. 
The additional stakeholders’ perspectives further enlighten (if not confound) the participating EFL 
teachers’ professional development. The university professionals’ perspectives complimented these 
teachers’ improvement in technology knowledge and acknowledged a promising start to infuse 
technology into online language instruction. They reflected, however, that these teachers’ project-based 
instruction was still confined by traditional teaching methods as well as a focus on how to evaluate 
student performance due to the influence of exam-driven curriculum. They noted a necessity for all these 
teachers to continue developing and reinforcing pedagogical and content knowledge aligned with 
technology instruction (i.e., TPK, TCK, and TPACK). In general, all six teachers significantly improved 
their students’ involvement in online projects; nonetheless, students as a whole still lacked total 
satisfaction with such learning experiences. These students appeared uncertain about accessing their 
online learning environments and learning from their teachers in completing technology-enriched 
projects. On the one hand, this may be attributed to the influence of traditional transmission of teaching 
modes on students’ language learning habits (Wang, 2009; Zhang, Peng, & Hung, 2009). On the other 
hand, these English teachers with developing TPC or TCK might need to redefine language learning 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 132 
outcomes with technology and develop learners’ understandings simultaneously. Researchers caution that 
language teachers without well developed CALL knowledge and competencies may have difficulties 
making a difference with the infusion of technology in language classrooms (Hong, 2010; Hubbard & 
Levy, 2006). 
We hence recommend that “individual TPACK profiles” promoting reflective processes (Benson & 
Ward, 2013) be used as professional training tools to help teachers who struggle to implement CALL and 
new pedagogy simultaneously. Teachers might keep track of the degree and manner “in which their 
individual knowledge areas overlap and integrate” (p. 170) via individual profiles when coming across 
different processes of developing TPK or TCK among peers in an in-service program. Moreover, teacher 
educators could highlight the positive experiences teachers have in the process of transition to new modes 
of teaching with technology (Wong & Benson, 2006), which may assist teachers to re-conceptualize their 
instructional beliefs and fine-tune their design of future technology-enhanced learning practices (Rienties, 
Brouwer, & Lygo-Baker, 2013). 
Furthermore, attention to factors facilitating or hampering these EFL teachers’ professional learning and 
classroom technology implementation was filtered throughout the findings. Echoing Richard, Blin, and 
Appel (2006), our teachers and professors recognized the empowerment of administration support, 
partnerships with universities, and the role of peer collaboration in these EFL teachers’ learning to teach 
with technology. Yet, the teachers’ awareness and concern of limited time deriving from tight curriculum 
scheduling and exam pressures cautioned how such things may hinder teacher professional technology 
growth (see also Mumtaz, 2000). These practitioners were aware of the concerns of online safety and 
ethical issues, reminding the profession of the importance of cyberwellness knowledge for teacher 
training programs (Chai, Koh, Ho, & Tsai, 2012). These teachers also tended to disregard online 
asynchronous discussion forums, instead preferring to get more involved in face-to-face workshops (see 
also Chao, 2006). This finding suggests teacher educators might use real-time interaction tools (e.g., 
instant messaging or Skype) for “building relationship[s] and seeking one-on-one support” (Trust, 2012, 
p. 134), in case teachers and university professionals are not available for frequent face-to-face meetings.  
Our findings encourage further examination of additional questions related to teacher technology 
professional development. For example, how would these teachers develop their CALL knowledge and 
competencies in a longer teacher-training program or in a school context where curriculum is less driven 
by exams? How would the students’ feedback stimulate these teachers’ reflection on their technology 
infusion? How would the university professionals foster these teachers’ professional growth by means of 
more face-to-face workshops or online discussion? How would the school administration support these 
teachers with more available time to practice integrating technology into classroom instruction? How 
would continuing in-service training enhance teachers’ willingness to apply CALL in classroom 
instruction? These inquiries would provide additional foci into future research on CALL teacher 
development.  
CONCLUSION  
The limitations of this study recommend the following directions for future research. First, this 
investigation involved a small number of multiple stakeholders in in-service teachers’ CALL professional 
development. We relied on self-report data and the perceptions of teachers, university professionals, and 
students to investigate the quality of the technology tasks implemented by EFL teachers to TPACK. 
Future researchers may recruit a larger sample of participants to offer additional perspectives. In addition 
to self-assessment, EFL teachers might conduct peer assessment on each other’s TPACK development. 
Second, the current investigation reported EFL teachers’ CALL knowledge and competence solely at two 
vocational high schools in Taiwan. We encourage related studies conducted in various educational 
contexts and echo Hofer and Grandgenett’s (2012) suggestion to encourage and support studies of various 
knowledge development and technology integration. Third, paramount to improving CALL preparation is 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 133 
keeping track of the process depicting teachers’ performance in technology integration at different stages 
of their careers (Wong & Benson, 2006). Finally, a follow-up inquiry may be conducted to document in-
service language teachers’ continuing process of technology professional growth after they preliminarily 
apply formal CALL training into short-term classroom instruction. 
This study contributes to the field of teacher training and CALL in three major aspects. Our designed in-
service program and data collection covered the transfer of CALL training to real classroom instruction, 
which remains less investigated in the literature (McNeil, 2013). Additionally, this study investigated 
EFL teachers’ professional growth by examining both their TPACK and computer self-efficacy 
development, which is a pioneering exploration in the CALL field. Specifically, the current investigation 
offers teacher educators to be aware of researching and evaluating teacher (technology) professional 
development programs through various perspectives. Our findings provide discerning evidence that 
teachers’ CALL knowledge and competence development is not solely determined by teachers’ own 
perceptions. The whole observation becomes more complex viewed through the additional lenses of 
university professionals and students. What additionally matters is student learning experiences and 
outcomes as teachers infuse technology into language education; this requires additional data sources and 
future mixed methods research projects.  
 
APPENDIX. SAMPLE SURVEY ITEMS 
1. TPACK Scale Items 
 *** I know how to… 
 1. Select proper content for Web resources for teaching. (TCK) 
 2. Use Web technology to predict students’ skill/understanding of a particular learning topic. 
(TCK) 
 3. Apply teaching modules on the Web into practices. (TPK) 
 4. Encourage the interactivity among students in a Web-based learning environment. (TPK) 
 5. Guide students to use Web resources to study certain learning units. (TPACK) 
 6. Apply Web technology to using multiple teaching strategies on a particular teaching unit. 
(TPACK) 
2. Computer Self-Efficacy Scale Items 
 ** I feel confident that… 
 1. I can successfully teach relevant subject content with appropriate use of Web-technology. 
 2. I can motivate my students to participate in technology-based projects on the Web. 
 ** I believe that… 
 3. Web-related resources can enrich teaching and learning content. 
 4. Web-based teaching is a future trend in English education. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research was sponsored by the Ministry of Science and Technology in the Republic of China under 
grant number of NSC 100-2410-H-029-048. We would like to express our sincere gratitude to anonymous 
reviewers and the editors for their valuable comments on earlier drafts. 
 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 134 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Mei-Hui Liu is an associate professor in the Department of Foreign Languages and Literature at Tunghai 
University, Taiwan. Her research interests include EFL teacher professional development, technology-
enhanced language learning, and online learning community.  
E-mail: mliu@thu.edu.tw 
Robert Kleinsasser’s research and teaching interests include the social organization of (second language) 
teaching and learning and second language teacher professional development. He is currently interested in 
narrative inquiry, mixed-methods research, and teacher educators dealing with evolving and/or changing 
landscapes of accountability, testing, and evaluation. 
E-mail: Robert.Kleinsasser@asu.edu 
 
REFERENCES  
Archambault, L. M., & Barnett, J. H. (2010). Revisiting technological pedagogical content knowledge: 
Exploring the TPACK framework. Computers & Education, 55, 1656–1662.    
Avalos, B. (2011). Teacher professional development in Teaching and Teacher Education over ten years. 
Teaching and Teacher Education, 27, 10–20. 
Aydin, S. (2013). Teachers’ perceptions about the use of computers in EFL teaching and learning: the 
case of Turkey. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 26(3), 214–233.  
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.  
Benson, S. N. K., & Ward, C. L. (2013). Teaching with technology: Using TPACK to understand 
teaching expertise in online higher education. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 48(2), 153–
172. 
Celik, V., & Yesilyurt, E. (2013). Attitudes to technology, perceived computer self-E\efficacy and 
computer anxiety as predictors of computer supported education. Computers & Education, 60, 148–158. 
Chai, C. S., Koh, J. H. L., Tsai, C. C., & Tan, L. L. W. (2011). Modeling primary school pre-service 
teachers’ technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPACK) for meaningful learning with 
information and communication technology (ICT). Computers & Education, 57, 1184–1193.  
Chai, C., Koh, J., Ho, H., & Tsai, C. C. (2012). Examining pre-service teachers' perceived knowledge of 
TPACK and cyberwellness through structural equation modeling. Australasian Journal of Educational 
Technology, 28(6), 1000–1019. 
Chao, C.-C. (2006). How WebQuests send technology to the background. In P. Hubbard & M. Levy 
(Eds.), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 221–234). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Chen, K. (2012). Elementary EFL teachers' computer phobia and computer self-efficacy in Taiwan. 
Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, 11(2), 100–107. 
Compeau, D. R., & Higgins, C. A. (1995). Computer self-efficacy: Development of a measure and initial 
test. MIS Quarterly, 19(2), 189–211. 
Corbin, J., & Strauss, A. (2008). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for 
developing grounded theory (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Debski, R. (2006). Theory and practice in teaching project-oriented CALL. In P. Hubbard & M. Levy 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 135 
(Eds.), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 99–114). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Demiralay, R., & Karadeniz, S. (2010). The effect of use of information and communication technologies 
on elementary student teachers’ perceived information literacy self-efficacy. Educational Sciences: 
Theory & Practice, 10(2), 841–851. 
Desjardins, F., & Peters, M. (2007). Single-course approach versus a program approach to develop 
technological competencies in pre-service language teachers. In M. A. Kessen, R. Z. Lavine, K. Murphy-
Judy & M. Peters (Eds.), Preparing and developing technology-proficient L2 teachers (pp. 3–21). San 
Marco, TX: CALICO. 
Doering, A., Veletsianos, G., Scharber, C., & Miller, C. (2009). Using the technological, pedagogical and 
content knowledge framework to design online learning environments and professional development. 
Journal of Educational Computing Research, 41(3), 319–346. 
Egbert, J., Paulus, T. M., Nakamichi, Y. (2002). The impact of CALL instruction on classroom computer 
use: A foundation for rethinking technology in teacher education. Language Learning & Technology, 
6(3), 108–126. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num3/egbert/default.html 
Ertmer, P. (2005). Teacher pedagogical beliefs: The final frontier in our quest for technology integration? 
Educational Technology, Research and Development, 53(4), 25–39. 
Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of ground theory: Strategies for qualitative research. 
Chicago, IL: Adline. 
George, D., & Mallery, P. (2003). SPSS for Windows step by step: A simple guide and reference. 11.0 
update (4th ed.). Boston, Ma: Allyn & Bacon. 
Haydn, T., & Barton, R. (2008). ‘First do no harm’: Factors influencing teachers’ ability and willingness 
to use ICT in their subject teaching. Computers & Education, 51, 439–447. 
Hofer, M., & Grandgenett, N. (2012). TPACK Development in teacher education: A longitudinal study of 
pre-service teachers in a secondary M.A. Ed. Program. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 
45(1), 83–106. 
Hong, K. H. (2010). CALL teacher education as an impetus for L2 teachers in integrating technology. 
ReCALL, 22(1), 53–69. 
Hubbard, P. (2008). CALL and the future of language teacher education. CALICO Journal, 25(2), 175–
188. 
Hubbard, P. & Levy, M. (Eds.). (2006). Teacher education in CALL. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John 
Benjamins. 
Hughes, J. E., & Scharber, C. (2008). Leveraging the development of English-technology pedagogical 
content knowledge within the deictic nature of literacy. In AACTE’s Committee on Innovation and 
Technology (Eds.), Handbook of technological pedagogical content knowledge for educators (pp. 87–
106). Mahwah, NJ: Routledge 
Jang, S.-J. (2010). Integrating the interactive whiteboard and peer coaching to develop the TPACK of 
secondary science teachers. Computers & Education, 55, 1744–1751. 
Jang, S., & Tsai, M. (2012). Exploring the TPACK of Taiwanese elementary mathematics and science 
teachers with respect to use of interactive whiteboards. Computers & Education, 59, 327–338. 
Kariuki, M. Franklin, T., & Duran, M. (2001). A technology partnership: Lessons learned by mentors. 
Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 9(3), 407–420. 
Kessler, G. (2006). Assessing CALL teacher training. In P. Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 136 
education in CALL (pp. 23–42). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Kessler, G., & Plakans, L. (2008). Does teachers’ confidence with CALL equal innovative and integrated 
use? Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(3), 269–282.  
Kim, D. (2011). Incorporating podcasting and blogging into a core task for ESOL teacher candidates. 
Computers & Education, 39, 283–297. 
Kleinsasser, R. C. (2013). Language teachers: Research and studies in language(s) education, teaching, 
and learning in Teaching and Teacher Education, 1985-2012. Teaching and Teacher Education, 29, 86–
96. 
Koehler, M. J., Mishra, P., & Yahya, K. (2007). Tracing the development of teacher knowledge in a 
design seminar: Integrating content, pedagogy and technology. Computers & Education, 49, 740–762.  
Koh, J. L., & Frick, T. W. (2009). Instructor and student classroom interactions during technology skills 
instruction for facilitating pre-service teachers’ computer self-efficacy. Journal of Educational 
Computing Research, 40(2), 211–228. 
Lee, M. -H., & Tsai, C.-C. (2010). Exploring teachers’ perceived self-efficacy and technological 
pedagogical content knowledge with respect to educational use of the world wide web. Instructional 
Science: An International Journal of the Learning Sciences, 38(1), 1–21.  
Lin, C. J., & Lu, M. Y. (2010). The study of teachers’ task values and self-efficacy on their commitment 
and effectiveness for technology-instruction integration. US-China Education Review, 7(5), 1–11. 
Lin, T., Tsai, C., Chai, C., & Lee, M. (2013). Identifying science teachers' perceptions of technological 
pedagogical and content knowledge (TPACK). Journal of Science Education and Technology, 22(3), 
325–336. 
McNeil, L. (2013). Exploring the relationship between situated activity and CALL learning in teacher 
education. ReCALL, 25(2), 215–232. 
Meskill, C., Anthony, N., Hilliker-VanStrander, S., Tseng, C., & You, J. (2006). Expert-novice teacher 
mentoring in language learning technology. In P. Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher education in CALL 
(pp. 283–298). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Mishra, P., & Koehler, M. J. (2006). Technological pedagogical content knowledge: A framework for 
teacher knowledge. Teachers College Record, 108(6), 1017–1054. 
Mumtaz, S. (2000). Factors affecting teachers’ use of information and communications technology: A 
review of the literature. Journal of Information Technology for Teacher Education, 9(3), 319–342.  
Olphen, M. V. (2008). TPCK: An integrated framework for educating world language teachers. In 
AACTE Committee on Innovation and Technology (Eds.), The handbook of technological pedagogical 
content knowledge for educators (pp. 107–128). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Overbaugh, R., & Lu, R. (2008). The impact of a NCLB-EETT funded professional development program 
on teacher self-efficacy and resultant implementation. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 
41(1), 43–61. 
Oxford, R. L., & Jung, S. H. (2007). National guidelines for technology integration in TESOL programs: 
Factors affecting (non)implementation. In M. A. Kessen, R. Z. Lavine, K. Murphy-Judy & M. Peters 
(Eds.), Preparing and developing technology-proficient L2 teachers (pp. 23–48). San Marco, TX: 
CALICO.  
Polly, D., Mims, C., Shepherd, C. E., & Inan, F. (2010). Evidence of impact: Transforming teacher 
education with preparing tomorrow’s teachers to teach with technology (PT3) grants. Teaching and 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 137 
Teacher Education, 26, 863–870.  
Richard, A., Blin, F., & Appel, C. (2006). Training for trainers: Challenges, outcomes, and principles of 
in-service training across the Irish education system. In P. Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher education 
in CALL (pp. 203–218). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Rienties, B., Brouwer, N., & Lygo-Baker, S. (2013). The effects of online professional development on 
higher education teachers' beliefs and intentions towards learning facilitation and technology. Teaching 
and Teacher Education, 29, 122–131. 
Ropp, M. (1999). Exploring individual characteristics associated with learning to use computers in pre-
service teacher preparation. Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 31(4), 402–424. 
Sahin, I. (2011). Development of survey of technological pedagogical and content knowledge (TPACK). 
The Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, 10(1), 97–105. 
Sang, G., Valcke, M., Braak, J. V. & Tondeur, J. (2010). Student teachers’ thinking processes and ICT 
integration: Predictors of prospective teaching behaviors with educational technology. Computers & 
Education, 54, 103–112. 
Schmidt, D. A., Baran, E., Thompson, A. D., Mishra, P., Koehler, M. J., & Shin, M. J. (2009). 
Technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPACK): The development and validation of an 
assessment instrument for pre-service teachers. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 42(2), 
123–149. 
Shulman, L. (1987). Knowledge and teaching: Foundations of the new reform. Harvard Educational 
Review, 57, 1–22. 
Silverman, D. (2006). Interpreting qualitative data: Methods for analyzing talk, text, and interaction (3rd 
ed.). London, UK: SAGE.  
So, H. J., & Kim, B. (2009). Learning about problem based learning: Student teachers integrating 
technology, pedagogy and content knowledge. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 25(1), 
101–116.  
Sun, Y. C. (2010). Developing reflective cyber communities in the Blogsphere: A case study in Taiwan 
higher education. Teaching in Higher Education, 15(4), 369–381.  
Teo, T. (2009). Examining the relationship between student teachers’ self-efficacy beliefs and their 
intended uses of technology for teaching: A structural equation modeling approach. The Turkish Online 
Journal of Educational Technology, 8(4), 7–16. 
Thompson, A. D., & Mishra, P. (2008). Breaking news: TPCK becomes TPACK! Journal of Computing 
in Teacher Education, 24(2), 38.   
Trust, T. (2012). Professional learning networks designed for teacher learning. Journal of Digital 
Learning in Teacher Education, 28(4), 133–138. 
Wang, L., Ertmer, P. A., & Newby, T. J. (2004). Increasing pre-service teachers’ self-efficacy beliefs for 
technology integration. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 36(3), 231–250. 
Wang, M.-J. (2009). Web based projects enhancing English language and generic skills development for 
Asian hospitality industry students. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 25(5), 611–626. 
Wong, L., & Benson, P. (2006). In-service CALL education: What happens after the course is over? In P. 
Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 251–264). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: 
John Benjamins. 
 
Mei-Hui Liu and Robert C. Kleinsasser Exploring EFL Teachers’ CALL Knowledge and Competencies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 138 
Zhang, K., Peng, S. W., & Hung, J. -L. (2009). Online collaborative learning in a project-based learning 
environment in Taiwan: A case study on undergraduate students’ perspectives. Educational Media 
International, 46(2), 123–135. 
 
