Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/odowd.pdf 
February 2015, Volume 19, Number 1 
pp. 63–82 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 63 
SUPPORTING IN-SERVICE LANGUAGE EDUCATORS IN LEARNING 
TO TELECOLLABORATE 
Robert O’Dowd, Universidad de León 
The importance of teachers’ capacity to integrate and exploit computer mediated 
communication (CMC) in the foreign language classroom has been recognised by many of 
the leading publications in foreign language teacher education, including the European 
Profile for Language Teacher Education (2004) and the European portfolio for student 
teachers of foreign languages (EPOSTL) (2007). One of the essential CMC activities in 
foreign language education is undoubtedly telecollaboration. This is the application of 
online communication tools to connect classes of language learners in geographically 
distant locations with the aim of developing their foreign language skills and intercultural 
competence through collaborative tasks and project work (O’Dowd, 2007).  
This paper begins by presenting a model of competences for the telecollaborative teacher, 
which has been developed and verified by this author (2013) using the Delphi technique. 
The paper then presents UNICollaboration (www.unicollaboration.eu), an online platform, 
which has been developed reflecting these competences and a sociocultural approach to 
teacher education. Following that, the findings of four qualitative case studies of novice 
telecollaborators are used to inform the design of tools and training courses for educators 
in this complex activity of online foreign language education.  
Keywords: Collaborative Learning, Teacher Education, Telecollaboration 
APA Citation: O’Dowd, R. (2015). Supporting in-service language educators in learning 
to telecollaborate. Language Learning & Technology, 19(1), 64–83. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/odowd.pdf 
Received: November 11, 2013; Accepted: July 2, 2014; Published: February 1, 2015 
Copyright: © Robert O’Dowd 
INTRODUCTION 
The educational activity of engaging foreign language learners in online intercultural collaboration with 
partners in distant locations has gone under many different terms including Online Intercultural 
Exchange, Virtual Exchange, Collaborative Online International Learning and telecollaboration. In the 
literature on CALL, the term telecollaboration has been prevalent since the publication of Mark 
Warschauer’s “Telecollaboration and the language learner” almost two decades ago (1996). This term 
was further defined by Belz in a special edition of Language Learning & Technology (2003) when she 
outlined the main characteristics of foreign language telecollaboration as being “…institutionalized, 
electronically mediated intercultural communication under the guidance of a languacultural expert (i.e., 
teacher) for the purposes of foreign language learning and the development of intercultural competence” 
(p. 2).  
Since its origins in the 1990’s, telecollaboration has gone on to become one of key tools in the repertoire 
of CALL activities available to foreign language educators (Guth & Helm, 2010; O’Dowd, 2011). 
Telecollaboration has also received a great deal of attention in the academic literature and in research 
circles. For example, there have been several book publications exclusively on the theme (Belz & Thorne, 
2006; Guth & Helm, 2010; O’Dowd, 2006, 2007; Warschauer, 1996), as well as two special editions of 
the journal Language Learning & Technology:  7(2) and 15(1). There has also been significant funding 
made available for research projects dedicated to the area as the European Commission and other 
organisations involved in educational reform and innovation have clearly recognised the potential of 
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
virtual exchange projects for the development of foreign language skills, intercultural awareness and 
skills related to the global workplace (see examples of funded projects in Belz, 2003; Kohn & Warth, 
2011; and O’Dowd, 2013). Telecollaborative learning is also considered as an important way of providing 
intercultural learning experiences to those students who are unable or unwilling to engage in physical 
mobility and as a manner of enhancing ‘internationalisation at home’ initiatives (High Level Expert 
Forum on Mobility, 2008).   
However, telecollaboration is undoubtedly one of the most complex aspects of CALL for in-service 
teachers to master due to the combination of organisational and pedagogical competences and 
technological skills, which are required to successfully set up, run, and integrate a telecollaborative 
project (Dooly, 2010). While basic technological skills may be acquired in once-off training courses, 
Meskill, Anthony, Hilliker-Van Strander, Tseng and You (2006, p. 283) accurately reflect the challenges 
of training teachers in telecollaboration when they argue that: 
it [a training course] does not prepare educators to integrate technology into everyday teaching 
and learning in ways that are supportive of learning. …What educators need to know when it 
comes to effective integration is in large part developed experientially in real institutional 
contexts 
With this in mind, this paper sets out to identify the challenges that in-service foreign language educators 
encounter when they undertake telecollaborative exchange projects with their learners. It also presents the 
elaboration of a series of telecollaboration training tools and resources for teachers and teacher trainers 
which reflect the context-specific nature of telecollaborative learning and the important role which peer- 
and mentor-based learning has to play in this area of CALL teacher education. 
These aims will be achieved in the following way: first, the paper carries out a review of sociocultural 
approaches to CALL teacher education and presents a model of telecollaborative competence which has 
been developed by this author (O’Dowd, 2013) to outline which competences teachers need in order to 
carry out telecollaborative exchanges. Following that, the paper looks at how this model of 
telecollaborative competence has been reflected in the UNICollaboration platform—an online platform 
designed to support telecollaboration at university level. The paper then goes on to identify the principal 
challenges and problems which in-service foreign language educators face when they engage in 
telecollaboration for the first time. This is achieved by presenting the outcomes of online qualitative 
interviews with four novice telecollaborative practitioners from universities around the world. These case 
studies not only serve to illustrate the intricacies and challenges of setting up and running an online 
intercultural exchange, but they also provide insights into how online platforms such as 
UNICollaboration and future training initiatives for in-service teachers could be designed in order to 
provide more effective support for practitioners. 
DEVELOPING TEACHERS’ TELECOLLABORATIVE COMPETENCE 
In general, the literature and tools related to teacher training and CALL have not paid great attention to 
the challenges of establishing and running telecollaborative exchange projects in the foreign language 
classroom. The European Profile for Language Teacher Education: A Frame of Reference (Kelly, 
Grenfell, Allan, Kriza, & McEvoy, 2004) proposes that foreign language teacher education should 
prepare trainee-teachers for “…[p]articipation in links with partners abroad, including visits, exchanges or 
ICT links” (p. 5) but no concrete suggestions are made as to how this should be done. Similarly, the 
European portfolio for student teachers of foreign languages (E-POSTL) (Newby, Allan, Fenner, Jones, 
Komorowska, & Soghikyan, 2007) also recognises that “…ICTs play an increasingly central role in 
foreign language learning and require teachers to be familiar with information systems and computer-
mediated communication” (p. 44), but no explicit mention is made of telecollaborative exchange nor how 
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
it should be carried out. 
A review of the literature on telecollaborative language learning in particular, however, does reveal some 
insights into the complex array of skills, knowledge, and attitudes that teachers are expected to bring to 
online intercultural exchange projects. For example, Belz (2003) states that “…the importance (but not 
necessarily the prominence) of the teacher and, ultimately, teacher education programs …increases rather 
than diminishes in Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language education precisely because of the 
electronic nature of the discourse” (p. 92). Similarly, Müeller-Hartmann (2012) suggests that 
…[t]he role of the teacher is crucial in initiating, developing and monitoring telecollaborative 
exchanges for language learning. …They need to develop competences in the central areas of 
multiliteracy or multimodal competence…intercultural communicative competence and task-
based language teaching…to effectively implement technology into their teaching. (p. 172)  
Many authors have also emphasised the necessity to be able to design, implement, and assess tasks for 
their students’ online intercultural interactions (Lewis, Chanier & Youngs, 2011; Dooly, 2010, p. 293), 
while Belz (2002, p.76) highlights another important aspect of teaching in telecollaborative exchange 
when she refers to the need for educators to find ways to integrate students’ online interactions into 
classroom discussion and thereby sensitize their learners to the cultural and institutional differences which 
may lead to misunderstandings and the formation of stereotypes. 
In order to develop such competences in using online technologies, various studies have highlighted the 
value of sociocultural approaches to foreign language teacher education. Sociocultural approaches are 
based on the principle that “…learning to teach is a long-term, complex developmental process that 
operates through participation in the social practices and contexts associated with learning and teaching” 
(Freeman & Johnson, 1998, p. 402). Such approaches reject transmission models of teacher training and 
propose that teachers learn by being actively engaged in educational activity, forming part of 
communities of practice and having opportunities to reflect and theorize based on their own learning 
(Johnson, 2006, 2009; Wright, 2010). When applied to CALL training, sociocultural approaches to 
teacher education have also put great emphasis on facilitating collaboration and interaction between the 
content of training periods at university and the realities of language classrooms.  
Meskill et. al. (2006), for example, report on a project which brought together novice pre-service teachers 
in collaboration with veteran in-service educators and doctoral students in collaborative CALL project 
work. Both the new and experienced teachers worked together in classes, combining the practical up-to-
date technology skills of the former with the pedagogical expertise of the latter in order to integrate 
innovative technology-enhanced activities into their classes. The doctoral students served as mentors to 
both these groups during the project work. In a similar project, also based on sociocultural approaches to 
teacher education, Schocker-von Ditfurth and Legutke (2002) strove to combine the work student-
teachers do in their university classrooms with the work of real foreign language classrooms. While 
participating in their university course, student-teachers liaised with an in-service teacher to prepare 
online projects for their students and then accompanied the in-service teacher to class in order to carry out 
the projects. They then returned to the university to share and reflect on their experiences in their teacher 
training course.  
Hanson-Smith (2006) underlines the importance of peer mentoring and teacher-to-teacher collaboration in 
CALL teacher education and laments the lack of networks and teacher-support programmes which have 
been able to “…create teacher-to-teacher collaborations that would serve  as apprenticeships in the 
practice of new technological knowledge and skills” (p. 304). As a successful example of such an 
approach, she puts forward Webheads in Action, which acts as an online community of practice where 
educators learning to use new technologies in their classroom mentor each other, share information, 
reflect on their learning experiences through online presentations, and engage in technology-based 
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
learning projects with colleagues and their students. 
While these studies point to approaches for developing telecollaborative competences in CALL education 
and training initiatives, the question remains:  What does telecollaborative activity actually involve for 
foreign language educators? 
In order to have a more comprehensive and detailed overview of the competences of the telecollaborative 
teacher, I developed a model (see Tables 1–4) of the different competences which teachers need in order 
to organise and employ telecollaborative exchanges in their classrooms (O’Dowd, 2013). Using a version 
of the Delphi technique that combined a review of the literature and the insights and feedback of over 60 
practitioners and experts in the area, I drew up a model which contained four sections described in more 
detail below. The competences were generally defined in terms of ‘can-do’ statements. However this was 
not possible in the cases of knowledge (e.g. “the telecollaborative teacher…has knowledge of the 
common causes of organisational and intercultural problems in online exchanges”) and attitudes (e.g. “the 
telecollaborative teacher displays… openness to partner teachers’ alternative pedagogical beliefs and 
aims”).   
The model attempts to capture the four characteristics of telecollaborative exchange which differentiates 
this activity from many other CALL activities. First, telecollaboration is, unlike many other online 
learning activities, innately intercultural, both in practice and in its underlying pedagogical principles. The 
purpose of telecollaboration is to use online technologies to engage students in intercultural exchange 
with members of other cultures. This implies that teachers are necessarily obliged to be open to 
intercultural approaches to foreign language education and to be interested in exploring in their own 
classes the beliefs and attitudes of their partner classes. 
Second, the telecollaborative teacher is inevitably obliged to work in collaboration with one or more 
teachers or online collaborators who are located in different cultural and institutional contexts. This 
means that telecollaborative teachers are required to develop and hone their intercultural skills and 
attitudes in order to be able to successfully collaborate with their colleagues as well as to coordinate the 
exchange in a manner that is beneficial to all parties.   
Third, while many online tasks can be relatively short in nature and isolated from other aspects of 
classwork, successful telecollaboration is ideally a long-term, complex activity, which permeates the 
whole course of study. It should also be closely integrated with the classroom’s other themes, tasks, and 
day-to-day interaction. This was identified as one of the key characteristics of successful telecollaboration 
by one of its pioneers, Bruce Roberts (1994): “…when the email classroom connection processes are truly 
integrated into the ongoing structure of homework and student classroom interaction, then the results can 
be educationally transforming” (n.p.).  
Finally, while in many online educational activities the teacher is required to play an active role in the 
interaction with his or her students, in many telecollaborative set-ups the active participation of the 
teacher is not essential as students usually interact online exclusively with their distant partners. It is the 
teachers’ role to prepare students’ for their online interaction, to debrief following contact with their 
partners and to integrate the themes of the interaction into their classes (Furstenberg & Levet, 2010).  
The 40 descriptors developed for the model aim at reflecting these realities of telecollaborative exchange. 
They are divided into four sections: (a) organisational, (b) pedagogical, (c) digital competences, and (d) 
attitudes and beliefs.  These are presented in Tables 1–4, below. 
 
 
 
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
 
Table 1. Organisational Competences of the Telecollaborative Teacher 
The Telecollaborative Teacher can… 
A1 use online networks and his/her own professional contacts to locate possible partner-teachers in 
distant locations 
A2 explain clearly to possible partner-teachers his/her plans and expectations related to a possible 
exchange  
A3 design the structure of an exchange (i.e. aims, minimum participation requirements, language use) 
which reflects the interests, L2 proficiency, and level of electronic literacy of his/her own 
students 
A4 negotiate effectively with the partner-teacher the structure and organisational technicalities of the 
exchange which take into account both institutional contexts (calendars, etc.) as well as the needs 
and interests of both sets of participants 
A5 employ various strategies to ‘match’ learners from the different institutions and to create effective 
partnerships and exchange groups 
A6 maintain a good working relationship with the partner-teacher throughout the exchange, 
identifying problems as they arise  
A7 alter the logistics of the exchange to adapt to developments and problems as they arise (e.g., low 
levels of participation, access to technology problems, etc.) 
A8 articulate to his/her virtual partner teachers the learning objectives and pedagogical beliefs that lie 
behind his/her proposed tasks 
A9 apply his/her experiences of previous online exchanges in order to avoid repeating mistakes and 
to innovate his/her practice  
A10 apply his/her knowledge of the educational context in which the partner class is working in order 
to structure the exchange and avoid problems. 
A11 use knowledge of the common causes of organisational and intercultural problems in online 
exchanges and can apply a series of techniques and strategies to deal with these problems   
A12 evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of his/her online exchange based on  awareness of  action 
research methodology 
A13 ensure that the exchange receives appropriate academic recognition within the home institution 
A14 articulate the relevance and the added pedagogical value of telecollaborative exchanges to 
colleagues and superiors in order to support their use throughout the institution 
Table 2. Pedagogical Competences of the Telecollaborative Teacher 
The Telecollaborative Teacher can… 
B1 identify tasks for the online exchange which meet at least some of the objectives of the 
participating classes’ curricula  
B2 support students in discerning and reflecting upon culturally-contingent patterns of interaction in 
follow-up classroom discussions  
B3 apply his/her knowledge of the culture and language of the partner class to organise culturally and 
linguistically rich tasks for the exchange  
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
B4 design tasks which are attractive and relevant for students and which develop culturally and 
linguistically rich interaction 
B5 design tasks which support the activities of collaborative inquiry and the construction of 
knowledge  
B6 integrate appropriate assessment procedures and rubrics which accurately reflect the activities 
which students carried out during their exchange  
B7 explain clearly to students what is expected from them during an exchange: deadlines, performance 
objectives, learning outcomes, etc. 
B8 integrate seamlessly and effectively the content and themes of the telecollaborative exchange into 
his/her contact classes (when they exist) before, during and after the exchange itself. 
B9 provide learning support for learners either through scaffolded guidance (in the classroom or in 
online tutorials) or through the provision of reflective tools, such as learning logs or journals. 
Table 3. Digital Competences of the Telecollaborative Teacher 
The Telecollaborative Teacher can… 
C1 choose the appropriate online communication tools (e.g. email, blogs, wikis, skype) to fit both 
the everyday online practices of the students as well as the project’s aims 
C2 demonstrate a basic working knowledge of current (e.g. Web 2.0) communication tools and 
their  pedagogic affordances and constraints 
C3 explain the use of the chosen tools to his/her students or can provide them with online or third-
party support for learning how to use them 
C4 locate and run his/her online exchanges based on basic working knowledge of web management 
systems (e.g. Moodle) or exchange platforms (e.g. ePals, e-Twinning) 
C5 organise and structure real-time student interaction taking into account the particular 
affordances and technicalities of synchronous tools such as videoconferencing, chat etc. 
C6 interact appropriately online with his/her partner-teacher and, if necessary, with the 
participating students, attending to online communication norms (e.g. responding to emails in a 
timely manner, using appropriate register, etc.) 
C7 organise the online exchange in a manner which protects students’ safety and respects privacy 
issues related to students’ work 
C8 model social presence and online identity for his/her students and help to create an online 
community of trust and learning   
C9 instruct learners on how to use online tools autonomously—tools which help them resolve 
language difficulties (e.g. online dictionaries, Google translator, multimedia authoring tools) 
C10 develop in students a critical understanding of online tools such as the interests the tools serve, 
the type of communication they promote, etc.  
Table 4. Attitudes and Beliefs of the Telecollaborative Teacher 
The Telecollaborative Teacher has… 
D1 a belief that culture plays an intrinsic role in foreign language education and online 
communication 
D2 an openness to partner teachers’ alternative pedagogical beliefs and aims   
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
D3 a willingness to look for compromise with the partner-teacher in relation to task design, 
exchange structure, and other issues 
D4 an interest in trying new telecollaborative tasks and new online tools which may be proposed 
by students or partner-teachers  
D5 a willingness to deal with new messages, texts, and questions in contact classes or tutorials as 
they emerge during the online exchange  
D6 a willingness to accept that the teacher is not the sole authority on the target culture and 
language  
D7 an interest in learning with students about new aspects of L2 language use and cultural 
products and practices from their exchange partners 
DEVELOPING A PLATFORM FOR UNIVERSITY TELECOLLABORATORS 
In primary and secondary education (i.e. pre-university) contexts, organisations and platforms such as the 
European Commission’s e-Twinning (www.etwinning.net) have contributed greatly to training teachers in 
telecollaborative exchange by providing workshops and conferences around Europe along with a platform 
containing partner-search tools, project scenarios and communication tools which enable students to 
engage in online interactions with their peers in the relative safety of a closed environment. Similarly, in 
the US, the ePals platform (www.epals.com) has provided educators with a similar set of tools and 
resources and the Cultura platform (http://cultura.mit.edu/) has provided a rich set of resources for one 
specific model of telecollaboration (Furstenberg, Levet, English & Maillet, 2001). 
To date, however, there has been no organisation or platform that has specifically aimed at supporting and 
training university educators who are interested in engaging their learners in telecollaborative activity. In 
this context, the INTENT project (Integrating Telecollaborative NeTworks in University Foreign 
Language Education) received funding from the European Commission’s Lifelong Learning Programme 
in 2011 to develop a platform, www.unicollaboration.eu, where university educators and student mobility 
coordinators can find the resources and training materials necessary to learn about and to set up 
telecollaborative exchanges. The platform includes a partner-finding tool, a task databank, an e-portfolio 
for evaluating telecollaborative projects, a databank of sample projects, a project-planning tool, as well as 
text- and video-based training materials. In addition, the project team organised an international 
conference on university telecollaboration and held training workshops in universities and at conferences 
around Europe to inform and support the teaching and learning community, related stakeholders, as well 
as decision makers.  
The UNICollaboration platform is intended to reflect a sociocultural approach as it is non-prescriptivist in 
nature and does not aim to provide a comprehensive set of rules which are to guide all telecollaborative 
exchanges. Instead, the tools and resources on the platform reflect the realities and complexities of 
telecollaboration being carried out in real university classrooms and aim to acknowledge the uniqueness 
of each classroom context. Sociocultural approaches to teacher education argue that it is not plausible to 
imagine that all teachers can apply methodological content unproblematically to all teaching contexts in 
the same manner and UNICollaboration strives to reflect this belief by providing highly-contextualised 
examples of sample projects, tasks and good telecollaborative practice.  
The UNICollaboration platform also aims to follow an inquiry-based model of professional development, 
which has become widespread in sociocultural teacher education in the form of practices such as critical 
friend groups and peer coaching as described by Johnson (2009). According to the author, these practices 
reflect a sociocultural perspective “…in that they define professional development as learning 
systematically in, from and for practice. They recognize that participation and context are essential to 
teacher learning” (p. 112). In the platform, this approach has been put into practice in several ways. First, 
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
practitioners are allowed to add their own sample projects and tasks to the different databases of the 
platform, thereby sharing their own experiences and examples of good practice. These contributions can 
then be commented on and rated by fellow practitioners. Second, the design of the sample project 
database is deliberately context-rich in nature, encouraging users through a list of question prompts to add 
as much detail as possible to their descriptions of their projects. Third, the platform also includes an 
online community of forums where telecollaborative practitioners can post problems and receive help and 
feedback from experienced peers. Finally, the training section of the platform offers practitioners a 
collection of videos where experienced practitioners speak of their own experiences and opinions related 
to issues such as finding a good telecollaborative teaching partner, developing effective tasks, etc. The 
emphasis here, as elsewhere, is on sharing experiences and contextualised examples as opposed to 
providing simplistic rules to be followed in all cases (see Figures 1–4). 
 
Figure 1. The homepage of the UNICollaboration platform includes an interactive map of universities 
looking for telecollaborative exchange projects.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. The Class databank provides detailed profiles of the classes looking for partner classes for their 
telecollaborative exchanges. 
 
Figure 3. The Training modules contain a large collection of texts and video resources for teachers who 
wish to learn more about telecollaboration. 
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
 
Figure 4. The database of sample projects provides examples of how different models of telecollaborative 
exchanges are being integrated into university education.  
The platform also attends to the different competences of the telecollaborative teacher as have been 
outlined in the model in the previous section. In the training section, materials are divided into 
organizational, pedagogical, and digital competencies as in the model, and the different sections of the 
platform attempt to bring a practitioner through the different stages of setting up and running a 
telecollaborative exchange which are identified in the model (Figures 2 & 3). The platform moves from 
the opening tasks of finding a partner and negotiating an exchange (in the class finding database and 
collaboration tools), to the development of tasks and in-class integration of the exchange (in the task, task 
sequence and sample projects databases) (Figure 4) and finally to the evaluation of the exchange (in the e-
portfolio tool).  
Having now established the competences which teachers need to run telecollaborative exchanges and 
having seen how an online platform has been developed to reflect these competences and a sociocultural 
approach to teacher education in this area, it is useful at this stage to look at specific cases of practitioners 
who are relatively new to telecollaboration. These case studies will make it possible to identify the 
competences which may be particularly difficult to develop and which therefore require most attention in 
future training initiatives and also the areas which need to receive most attention in the UNICollaboration 
platform.  
THE PERSPECTIVES OF NOVICE TELECOLLABORATORS 
Method 
In order to identify the aspects of telecollaboration that novice practitioners find most challenging, 
various teachers were e-mailed using the contact tool in the UNICollaboration database. In order to 
establish the group for study, purposeful sampling (Nunan & Bailey, 2009) was used (i.e. participants in 
the study were chosen because they met predetermined criteria). In this case, the participants had to be 
teachers of foreign languages who had recently begun to use telecollaboration in their classes or who were 
in the process of planning and carrying out their first exchanges.  
E-mail requests were sent to 15 practitioners who appeared to reflect this profile on their 
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
UNICollaboration platform presentations or who were known to the author through his own professional 
network. A total of four practitioners responded positively and agreed to be interviewed in English via    
e-mail in regard to their first experiences of setting up and running an exchange and, in particular, the 
challenges they encountered during this process. Each of the teachers exchanged between six and ten      
e-mails with the author. The author initially sent a list of open questions to identify the practitioners’ 
experiences of telecollaboration and the problems they had encountered (see Appendix). The teachers’ 
responses to these questions were then categorised in relation to the competences of the telecollaborative 
teacher and a series of follow-up e-mails asked the teachers to go into more detail and expand on certain 
responses. Following this exchange of e-mails, the author drew up a list of possible findings and 
conclusions relating the teachers’ responses to the categories of telecollaborative competences. These 
initial conclusions and a list of possible “contradictions” were presented to the interviewees via e-mail 
and they were asked to react to and elaborate on these data and findings. This form of “member checking” 
allowed the author to confirm findings and to look for alternative interpretations (Cowie, 2011, p. 238). In 
a later round of correspondence, the informants were also asked to provide their reactions to the model of 
telecollaborative competences.  
Participant Background 
The four novice practitioners were foreign language teachers at public universities. The first informant, 
Melina, (all names used are pseudonyms) was a teacher of English as a Foreign Language at an institution 
which she herself describes as “…a prestigious, state, access-for-all university” in Argentina. Her students 
were enrolled in their second years of an undergraduate programme to either become teachers or 
translators of English. Melina had been teaching this course in English since 1994, first as an assistant 
teacher and most recently as the teacher in charge. According to Melina, she was consequently in a 
position to make the decision to engage in a telecollaboration project of this kind for the first time in 
2012. She also reported holding a position at a prestigious national research institution in Argentina, and 
because of this, she had also taken a research perspective to her work on telecollaboration. She explained: 
“This means that I’ve planned the projects with a research perspective in mind, looking at options for data 
collection and analysis, and how the projects can be improved from this perspective as well.” 
The second informant, Marta, was a 50-year-old teacher of French at a public research university in the 
US in Southern California. Although she was born in France, she had been living in the US for 28 years 
and teaching French at her institution for 15 years as a professor. Before that, she taught French as a 
teaching assistant when in graduate school.  At the time of the interviews she was also the academic 
coordinator for the French language program at her institution.  There, she trained teaching assistants 
where all new teachers also played an important role in curriculum development. The students involved in 
her first exchanges were low intermediate students who had three to four years of high school French and 
ranged from college freshmen to seniors.  Most of them had a foreign language requirement as part of the 
university’s general education requirement but Marta believed they chose French because they enjoyed 
the language and the culture. She reported that “…all were very open to the idea of an online intercultural 
exchange”.   
The third informant, Barbara, taught German at two different Italian public universities and had been 
working at university level for a little more than six years. She felt that the advanced training on the job, 
the constant exchanges with other teachers’ experiences, and a growing awareness of students’ needs had 
influenced her teaching methodology which she described as “…still not really ‘defined’ but a kind of 
‘work in progress’ on the basis of what I realize the students need”.  Barbara had discovered 
telecollaboration at two different workshops and believed that  
…it could be an interesting and useful experience for the students (and for me as a teacher as 
well). Many students cannot participate in traditional exchanges, but also the students who are 
going to take part in an exchange would benefit from a telecollaboration exchange. I just think it 
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
could be a great opportunity 
The final informant, Francesca, taught English as a foreign language and courses in Translation Studies at 
another Italian university. She had been lecturing at university since 1998 and her research interests had 
always revolved around the use of new technologies in language teaching and linguistic research. Before 
engaging in telecollaboration, she had explored areas of CALL such as hypertexts and corpora and online 
platforms such as Moodle. She therefore reported being a compent user of  computers in the classroom. 
All four informants reported having chosen to engage in telecollaboration due to its potential for authentic 
communication in their classrooms and for raising awareness of the cultural aspects of language learning.  
For example, Francesca explained that she saw telecollaboration exchanges as: “…a great opportunity to 
make the students understand that language is first and foremost a means to communicate and to discover 
foreign worlds and habits” while Marta wrote “I am interested in telecollaboration as a way for students 
to apply what they learn in the classroom to a ‘real life’ situation in which they have to use French.” 
Melina highlighted her association between telecollaboration and prestige, explaining “…I’ve always 
been interested in offering the students the best quality in their education and so for example we have 
made changes not only in this front but also in others such as writing for instance.” 
The practitioners had come across telecollaboration in different ways. Francesca, a university lecturer 
with over 15 years’ experience, had recently been invited by a colleague to take part in a telecollaborative 
project. Marta had discovered the activity while carrying out research for a qualification in Educational 
Technology. Barbara had attended workshops at her university on the topic. And, Melina had encountered 
the activity when taking part in an international project on intercultural citizenship.  
Interview Analysis 
An analysis of the common problems that emerged as the four practitioners planned and/or ran their first 
exchanges can help to identify the different competences which telecollaborative teachers need to develop 
as quickly as possible. For example, Barbara and Francesca’s experiences highlight the importance of 
organisational competences (Table 1) in the initial stage of organising an exchange. Barbara wrote  the 
following about the obstacles that were holding her back in setting up her first telecollaborative exchange:  
…I feel kind of puzzled about how to organize it. The most important problem is TIME (sounds 
as an excuse, I know). Another problem is that up to a few days before lessons start I don’t know 
how many students will attend my courses, how many students will be in every single class and - 
a part from the complete beginners - what level of knowledge they have, etc…  
Here the importance of organisational competence A7 is evident—the ability to alter the logistics of the 
exchange to adapt to developments and problems as they arise (e.g. low levels of participation, access to 
technology problems, etc.). Similarly, Francesca spoke  of the problems of  
…finding partner institutions in English speaking countries that have classes of Italian as a 
Foreign Language. Once the partner institution is found, it is not always easy to find time slots 
which fit the timetables of both institutions. The result is that the exchange eventually only goes 
on for a limited number of weeks.  
This is a clear reference to A1, the ability to use online networks and his/her own professional contacts to 
locate possible partner-teachers in distant locations as well as A4, the ability to negotiate effectively with 
the partner-teacher the structure and organisational technicalities of the exchange, which take into 
account both institutional contexts (calendars, etc.) …of both sets of participants. Francesca also 
described how she developed one of the competencies as she strove to integrate the exchange and make it 
a success in her own institution. She explained:  
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
…it is difficult to get the students seriously engaged in telecollaborative activities, at least at the 
beginning: in fact, in order to find the students for the project we had to ‘offer’ extra credits for 
taking part in the TeleTandem session. This method actually worked, and our students 
participated in a very devoted way. On the other hand, the students in our partner’s institution – 
who had not been promised any specific reward for the project – were less diligent and frequently 
missed the appointments, thus creating a lot of confusion. 
Here, Francesca is clearly learning from initial problems to develop competence A13, the ability to ensure 
that the exchange receives appropriate academic recognition within the home institution.  
While Barbara and Francesca reported mainly organisational problems, both Marta and Melina mainly 
mentioned issues related to the digital competences of the telecollaborative teacher (Table 3). Marta 
wrote: 
I am planning an exchange for the fall quarter... My questions and doubts have to do with 
technology at this point. I am still debating what platform is best for the asynchronous exchange. 
I am not familiar with blogs so I am nervous about using it. 
This is a clear reference to competence C2, the ability to demonstrate a basic working knowledge of 
current (e.g., Web 2.0) communication tools and their pedagogic affordances and constraints. The 
following anecdote by Melina also reflects this competence as well as C7, the ability to organise the 
online exchange in a manner which…respects privacy issues related to students’ work. Melina wrote:  
We had a case of plagiarism and we couldn’t in the end figure out how we could attest that the 
student had uploaded somebody else’s task. The help from [the online platform administrator] 
was fine, but we couldn’t really solve the doubt. 
However, as the practitioners continued their accounts, it becomes clear how competences from the 
different sections of the model often blur together in the day-to-day challenges of telecollaborative 
exchange.  In this extract from her online interviews, it becomes evident how technical competencies are 
intertwined with organisational competences as Marta strove to find ways of dealing with the issue of 
grading while taking into account the technical limitations of the synchronous communication tool she 
was using in the exchange. She wrote:  
…The other difficulty for me is to keep track of the synchronous communication since there is no 
log. My students get an oral participation grade for this part of the exchange and I am still trying 
to figure out how to do that. Integrating the exchange in my curriculum was difficult. I had to 
make sure that students were not getting a lot more work than they would have with the existing 
curriculum and that I would still have time to cover other aspects of foreign language teaching 
such as grammar and reading. 
For Marta, the challenge of finding tools which would effectively allow her to record and check and grade 
her students’ online interactions was evidently connected to how well she would be able to integrate the 
telecollaborative exchange into her study programme.   
The interviews also reveal that teachers are quick to learn from previous experiences in other 
telecollaborative exchanges. Melina is now on her second year of telecollaborative practice and she 
confirmed that 
….we (the teachers involved) have learned many things. For instance, that it is hard for students 
to get familiar with the wiki, skype and Elluminate Live!; that they need some extra time to 
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
become familiar (so now we will allow an extra week before we ask them to communicate 
online)… 
When the four teachers were asked to comment on how novice telecollaborators can best be prepared for 
this activity, the practitioners highlighted the need for two principal factors: preparation and collaboration 
with more-experienced peers. Marta suggested that having time to prepare the exchange was key and that 
she  
…was able to overcome many of the potential problems and plan a rather successful exchange 
because this is part of a study and I did extensive research before planning the exchange. Without 
research or training, I don’t think it is possible to plan and implement a successful exchange. 
Similarly, Melina warned: “…telecollaboration…is also incredibly time-consuming. So perhaps an 
additional element has to be the willingness to devote a long time to preparing the exchange, channelling 
students’ difficulties, etc”.  
Other practitioners emphasised the benefit of having partner-teachers who had organised exchanges 
before or who were more comfortable working with online tools. Marta reported that she had not needed 
to use the UNICollaboration platform to prepare the exchange because “…the project had already been 
sketched out by my colleague, based on her previous years’ experience”, while Francesca explained that  
my partner teacher for the exchange has been a great resource for technology. She has set up the 
blog for our classes and I’ve been learning how to use it. So technology has become a lesser issue 
for me… It would have been a big issue had my teacher not been familiar with blogs. 
Member-Checking Analysis 
Finally, the interviewees were asked to review and offer their comments on the model of telecollaborative 
competence presented in the digital competences section. I was particularly interested in establishing what 
aspects of the model they considered to be most important for novice telecollaborators and also the 
aspects which would be the most difficult to develop. Melina considered the last section of the model on 
attitudes and beliefs (Table 4) as “crucial”, especially, it would appear, competence D7: an interest in 
learning with students about new aspects of L2 language use and cultural products and practices from 
their exchange partners. She wrote: 
…I’ve worked with other teachers [in telecollaborative exchanges], …and it’s really so hard for 
them to see what the aims of telecollaboration really are. I can say that their preconceptions are so 
strong that they have remained in a fixed place. For instance, I worked this year with a group of 
university students, who had to interact with another group of secondary school students. Both the 
university students and their teachers held the strong preconception that the secondary school 
students were immature, irresponsible, uncommitted, etc. This project failed because of these 
resistances… 
Marta, on the other hand, suggested that it was other areas of the model that were likely to prove most 
challenging to new practitioners. She told me that “…[f]rom my experience as a novice in 
telecollaboration, I found that the organizational and pedagogical aspects of the exchange were the most 
challenging.” She went on to explain: 
… [t]he planning phase is the most difficult in my opinion for a novice teacher.  You really have 
to understand all aspects of the exchange including potential problems. Personally, I couldn’t 
have done it without doing extensive research first. 
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
Significantly, she also highlighted the pedagogical competence B7, the ability to explain to students what 
is expected from them during an exchange – deadlines, performance objectives, learning outcomes, etc. as 
being particularly difficult for novice telecollaborators. She justified this in the following way: 
This is very difficult when you are a novice because you don’t know what to expect yourself. You 
have to convey to students that they have to be flexible and open-minded because you cannot 
control every detail of the exchange. I found it very difficult to answer questions on details... I 
found that it was best to not give too many details at once and adapt as we went on with the 
exchange. This is not always easy to do for novice teachers. 
Finally, she underlined the importance of organisational competence A10, the ability to apply his/her 
knowledge of the educational context in which the partner class is working in order to structure the 
exchange and avoid problems. She warned: 
…[t]his can be difficult if the teacher is not completely familiar with the culture/educational 
system of the partner country.  …For example, it was very helpful for me to know the French 
educational system and the fact, for example, that French students and teachers take their 
weekends and vacation time seriously, and don’t work 24/7 like the Americans. Therefore I didn’t 
expect French students to be doing the exchange during their time off. 
In summary, it would appear that each of the interviewees identified different competences from the four 
parts of the model to be the most important and challenging for novice telecollaborators. However, when 
referring to their own experiences in telecollaboration, the four informants clearly referenced mostly the 
organisational and the digital competences as having been the most demanding. With this in mind, it 
would appear that teachers need opportunities to develop as many of the different aspects of the model as 
possible in their training courses. This should happen in an integrated manner which provides teachers 
with authentic experiences of telecollaborative practice.  Based on the insights of these novice 
telecollaborators, in the following section I propose how workshops and training programmes could be 
designed for in-service teachers interested in preparing to enter the world of telecollaboration.  
APPLICATION OF FINDINGS: STRUCTURING TRAINING FOR NOVICE 
TELECOLLABORATORS 
It is clear from the model of telecollaborative competences presented earlier in this paper and from the 
experiences and perspectives of the novice telecollaborators that it is unrealistic to attempt to train 
educators in the intricacies of telecollaborative exchange through the simple transmission of facts and 
guidelines in instructor-driven set ups. Instead, possibly the ideal approach to training will reflect an 
experiential modelling approach (Guichon & Hauck, 2011) which involves engaging future practitioners 
in online intercultural exchanges themselves so they can experience first-hand, the challenges and benefits 
of such an activity. However, the reality is that a large majority of in-service teachers are likely to have 
neither the time nor the funding to take part in long-term training programmes, necessary to organise and 
take part in a telecollaborative project. Instead, in-service teachers are more likely to attend short one- or 
two-day training workshops or events where they expect to learn the basic skills and knowledge to engage 
in such learning activities. This has been the case for almost 200 university educators who, from 2011 to 
2013, attended seven half- and full-day training workshops organised by the INTENT project team.  
The comments and suggestions of the practitioners provide various insights into how future workshops 
and training courses on telecollaboration for in-service teachers could be structured. First, the 
interviewees referred regularly to the context-specific nature of telecollaborative projects and how 
teachers need to be able to react quickly to unexpected problems and emerging issues. This can best be 
achieved by giving trainees the opportunity to read or hear about previous exchanges in the form of 
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
detailed case studies. These case studies should place particular emphasis on the problems and learning 
opportunities that emerged in the exchanges. Trainees could then discuss how to overcome or react to 
these situations. Case studies such as these can be extracted from the literature on telecollaborative 
projects (Guth & Helm, 2010, O’Dowd, 2007) or can be found on the ‘Sample Projects’ database on the 
UNICollaboration platform. Belz and Müller-Hartmann (2003) provide a particularly useful “self-
reflective case study” of two teachers carrying out a telecollaborative exchange and simultaneously 
reflecting on the challenges of the process.  
Second, comments made by the informants  also highlighted the importance which novice 
telecollaborators attribute to experienced peers who  are willing to pass on their advice and insights about 
telecollaboration to colleagues. If such peers are not available to attend workshops locally, these 
experienced colleagues can be invited to make virtual guest appearances in workshops by being included 
in short Skype/videochat interview sessions. Trainees can prepare questions for the guest beforehand and 
the guest can then respond to these questions during the online video chat.  Extended video recordings of 
interviews with experienced telecollaborators are also available on the UNICollaboration training 
modules. 
Third, one of the practitioners highlighted in section 4 the need for information on the educational 
cultures of different countries. By understanding how academic timetables work in different countries, 
how assessment procedures are organised, and what attitudes exist towards, for example, teacher- and 
student-centred learning approaches, teachers will be better prepared to understand why their 
telecollaborative partners participate in certain ways during their exchange. Such information can be 
integrated into exchanges by inviting trainees from different cultural backgrounds to talk about their home 
countries’ educational culture or by encouraging trainees to predict how their partners may behave 
differently based on what they know about the target culture. In the UNICollaboration platform, the 
developers have tried to attend to this need by requiring collaborating teachers to provide a good deal of 
background information on their classes and institutions when using the collaboration tool to plan their 
exchange together.  
Fourth, it emerged from the interviews with Marta and Melina that technical issues remain an important 
concern for novice telecollaborators and, as such, workshops and training programmes should continue to 
dedicate time to discussing the latest online communication tools available to educators and their 
affordances for telecollaborative exchange. Web 2.0 technologies are developing at a very fast rate and 
teachers are likely to appreciate some hands-on opportunities with the most recent communication tools.  
Finally, novice telecollaborative practitioners evidently need opportunities to develop online exchange 
projects and the inherent issues of tasks, assessment procedures, language use, et cetera. Trainees can be 
provided with guiding questions and asked to plan and then present a possible exchange with either a 
fictitious ideal partner class or with possible partner classes that they find presented on the 
UNICollaboration database of classes. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper I have attempted to attend to the challenging but very relevant issue of how to prepare in-
service teachers for the challenges of establishing and running telecollaborative exchanges at university 
level. I began by looking at sociocultural approaches to foreign language teacher education and by 
presenting a model of competences for the telecollaborative teacher that has been developed and verified 
by this author elsewhere (2013) using the Delphi technique. I then described the UNICollaboration 
platform (www.unicollaboration.eu), designed for telecollaborative practitioners which reflects both the 
competencies of the telecollaborative teachers as well as a sociocultural approach to teacher education in 
many ways. Following that, I presented the findings of four extensive online interviews to explore how 
this model of competences and the platform could further be refined to reflect the needs and problems of 
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
novice telecollaboration practitioners.  Finally, I made various proposals for training educators in this 
complex activity of online foreign language education.  
As stated at the outset of the paper, short training courses are clearly not ideal for training teachers how to 
set up and run telecollaborative exchanges. However, in-service teachers often do not have other 
opportunities available to them to learn how to engage in new pedagogical practices such as this one. For 
this reason, in this paper, I have proposed a form of training course which gives centre place to both 
context and practice—the key principles of sociocultural approaches to language teacher education. The 
proposal describes a highly-practical practitioner-centred model of training which gives trainees the 
opportunity to read and reflect on case studies, listen to experienced practitioners, have hands-on time 
with new Web 2.0 communication technologies, and develop models of possible exchanges which reflect 
their and their future-partners’ particular educational contexts.   
It is, of course, important to recognise at this stage the limitations in generalizability of this study due to 
the small number of participants. This is a common issue with case studies based on qualitative interviews 
such as those presented here and it would be recommendable to complement the findings of this study in 
the future with more quantitative-based surveys of novice telecollaborators.  
 
APPENDIX.  Questions from first round of online interviews. 
1.  Tell me about your institution and the type of students you teach. What are your students studying? 
What is their level of electronic literacy? 
2. How long have you been teaching? Tell me a little about your teaching beliefs. How would you 
describe your methodology?  
3. How did you ‘discover’ this type of learning activity?  
4. Why are you interested in doing telecollaboration? In your opinion, what benefits does it hold for 
you and for your students?  
5. You mentioned you are planning an exchange to begin this term. As you plan it, what questions or 
doubts have come to your mind? What problems are you encountering? Are there certain aspects of 
the exchange you are not sure how to set up? Tell me in detail about this if you can. 
6. Finally for now, you are looking for a partner on the UNICollaboration platform. Can you tell me 
how you find this platform? How useful have you found it? Did you find some parts more useful 
than others? As a new telecollaborator, what would you like to see on UNICollaboration?  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The author would like to express his gratefulness to the four practitioners who invested a great deal of 
their valuable time in the elaboration of this study. He would also like to thank the three anonymous 
reviewers who provided valuable insight and suggestions in their reviews of earlier drafts of this paper. 
Finally, he would like to acknowledge the hard work and commitment of the members of the INTENT 
project team who worked together on the design and creation of the UNICollaboration platform described 
in this publication.  
The INTENT project and the UNICollaboration platform were co-funded by the European Commission’s 
Lifelong Learning Programme. However, the views reflected in this article are the author’s alone and the 
Commission cannot be held responsible for any use which may be made of the information contained 
therein. 
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Robert O’Dowd teaches EFL and applied linguistics and is Director for International Training at the 
University of León, Spain. He has taught English at universities in Ireland, Germany, and Spain and has 
published widely on the application of telecollaborative networks in foreign language education. He 
recently coordinated INTENT - a project financed by the European Commission which aimed to promote 
telecollaboration in European Higher Education (http://www.scoop.it/t/intent-project-news). His 
publications are available here: http://unileon.academia.edu/RobertODowd 
E-mail: robert.odowd@unileon.es 
 
REFERENCES 
Belz, J. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning & 
Technology, 6(1), 60–81. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/BELZ/default.html 
Belz, J. (2003). Linguistic perspectives on the development of intercultural competence in 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 68–99. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/BELZ/default.html 
Belz, J. A., & Müller-Hartmann, A. (2003). Teachers negotiating German-American telecollaboration: 
Between a rock and an institutional hard place. Modern Language Journal, 87(1), 71–89. 
Belz, J., & Thorne, S. (Eds.). (2006). Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language education. Boston, 
MA: Heinle & Heinle. 
Commission of the European Communities (2009). Green paper: Promoting the 
learning mobility of young people. Retrieved from http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2009:0329:FIN:EN:PDF 
Conference of European Ministers Responsible for Higher Education (2009). The Bologna process 2020:  
The European higher education area in the new decade. Retrieved from 
http://www.ond.vlaanderen.be/hogeronderwijs/bologna/conference/documents/leuven_louvain-la-
neuve_communiqu%C3%A9_april_2009.pdf 
Cowie, N. (2011). Emotions that experienced English as a foreign language (EFL) teachers feel about 
their students, their colleagues and their work. Teaching and Teacher Education, 27 (1), 235–242. 
 Dooly, M. (2010). Teacher 2.0. In S. Guth & F. Helm (Eds.), Telecollaboration 2.0: Language and 
intercultural learning in the 21st century (pp. 277–304). Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Furstenberg, G. & Levet, S. (2010). Integrating telecollaboration into the language classroom: Some 
insights. In S. Guth & F. Helm (Eds.), Telecollaboration 2.0: Language and intercultural learning in the 
21st century (pp. 305–336). Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Furstenberg, G., Levet, S., English, K., & Maillet, K. (2001). Giving a virtual voice to the silent language 
of culture: The culture project. Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 55-102. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num1/furstenberg/default.html 
Freeman, D., & Johnson, K. (1998). Reconceptualising the knowledge-base of language teacher 
education. TESOL Quarterly, 32(3), 397–417. 
Guichon, N., & Hauck, M. (2011). Teacher education research in CALL and CMC: more in demand than 
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
ever. ReCALL. 23(3), 187–199. 
Guth, S., & Helm, F. (Eds). (2010). Telecollaboration 2.0: Language, literacies and intercultural 
learning in the 21st Century. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Hanson-Smith, E. (2006). Expert-novice teacher mentoring in language learning technology. In P. 
Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher Education and CALL (pp. 301–317). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John 
Benjamins.   
High Level Expert Forum On Mobility (2008). Making learning mobility an opportunity for all. Retrieved 
from http://ec.europa.eu/education/doc/2008/mobilityreport_en.pdf 
Johnson, K. (2009). Second language teacher education. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Kelly, M., Grenfell, M., Allan, R., Kriza, C., & McEvoy, W. (2004). European profile for language 
teacher education:final report. Retrieved from 
http://ec.europa.eu/education/languages/pdf/doc477_en.pdf 
Kohn, K., & Warth, C. (2011). Web collaboration for intercultural language learning. Münster, 
Germany: MV-Wissenschaft. 
Lewis, T., Chanier, T., & Youngs, B. (2011). Special issue commentary. Language Learning & 
Technology, 15(1), 3–9. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/commentary.pdf 
Meskill, C., Anthony, N., Hilliker-Van Strander, S., Tseng, C.  & You, J.  (2006). Expert-novice teacher 
mentoring in language learning technology. In P. Hubbard and M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher education and 
CALL, (pp. 283–300). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Müller-Hartmann, A. (2007). Teacher role in telecollaboration: Setting up and managing exchanges. In R. 
O’Dowd (Ed.), Online intercultural exchange (pp. 167–193). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Müller-Hartmann, A. (2012). The classroom-based action research paradigm in telecollaboration. In M. 
Dooly & R. O’Dowd (Eds.), Research methods for online interaction and exchange (pp. 56–192). Bern, 
Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Newby, D., Allan, R., Fenner, A., Jones, B., Komorowska, H., Soghikyan, K. (2007). European portfolio 
for student teachers of languages. Retrieved from http://archive.ecml.at/mtp2/fte/pdf/STPExtract.pdf 
Nunan, D., & Bailey, K. (2009). Exploring second language classroom research. Boston, MA: Heinle.  
O’Dowd, R. (2006). Telecollaboration and the development of intercultural communicative competence. 
Berlin, Germany: Langenscheidt. 
O’Dowd, R. (Ed.). (2007). Online intercultural exchange: an introduction for foreign language teachers. 
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
O’Dowd, R. (2011). Online foreign language interaction: Moving from the periphery to the core of 
foreign language education? Language Teaching: Surveys and Studies, 44(3), 368–380. 
O’Dowd, R. (2013). The Competences of the telecollaborative teacher. The Language Learning Journal, 
DOI: 10.1080/ 09571736.2013.853374. 
Roberts, B. (1994). What works? Retrieved from http://www.iecc.org/discussion/what-works.html 
Schocker-von Ditfurth, M., & Legutke, M. K. (2002). Vision of what is possible in teacher education – or 
lost in complexity? ELT Journal, 56(2), 162–171.  
Warschauer, M. (Ed.). (1996). Telecollaboration in foreign language learning. Honolulu, HI: University 
of Hawai’i Second Language Teaching and Curriculum Center. 
Robert O’Dowd Teachers Learning to Telecollaborate 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
Wright, T. (2010). Second language teacher education: Review of recent research on practice. Language 
Teaching, 43(3), 259–296. 
