Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2015/action1.pdf 
October 2015, Volume 19, Number 2 
pp. 21–37 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 21 
ACTION RESEARCH 
THE INTERSECTION OF MULTIMODALITY AND CRITICAL 
PERSPECTIVE: MULTIMODALITY AS SUBVERSION 
Shin-ying Huang, National Taiwan University 
This study explores the relevance of multimodality to critical media literacy. It is based on 
the understanding that communication is intrinsically multimodal and multimodal 
communication is inherently social and ideological. By analysing two English-language 
learners’ multimodal ensembles, the study reports on how multimodality contributes to a 
critical perspective when engaging with media texts, and on the ways in which learners 
orchestrate multiple semiotic resources to demonstrate their analysis of the politics of 
representation and the resulting consequences. The findings reveal that, on the one hand, 
the students were able to identify the power relations between characters as well as how 
particular characters are marginalized in the media texts they viewed by paying attention 
to the multiple modes that make up the text’s representation. On the other hand, the 
students were able to articulate the ideological subtexts they identified through the 
orchestration of various modes rather than relying on the linguistic mode, making their 
message as persuasive and effective as those in the media texts viewed.  
Language(s) Learned in Current Study: English as a Foreign Language (EFL) 
Keywords: Multimodal texts, Critical media literacy. 
APA Citation: Huang, S.-y. (2015). The intersection of multimodality and critical 
perspective: Multimodality as subversion. Language Learning & Technology, 19(3), 21–
37. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2015/action1.pdf 
Received: February 28, 2015; Accepted: June 8, 2015; Published: October 1, 2015 
Copyright: © Shin-ying Huang 
INTRODUCTION 
Multimodality involves the orchestration of more than one mode of communication among the linguistic, 
visual, spatial, aural, and gestural modes (Arola, Sheppard, & Ball, 2014) to achieve purposes of meaning 
making. Even though human communication has never been monomodal, the development of information 
and communication technologies has resulted in new media that require the ability to navigate a wide 
repertoire of semiotic resources. Increasingly, as Kress (2003) observes, multimodality “is made easy, 
usual, ‘natural’ by these technologies” (p. 5).  
Despite the widely held belief that today’s youths are adroit at navigating all aspects of new technologies, 
it has been found that they “often lack the abilities to be able to critically assess the media” (Hammer, 
2011, p. 360). Indeed, it is the ideologies present in mass media, made powerful and effective through the 
subtle but skillful use of multiple modes, that students are most often unfamiliar with or even unaware of, 
that require the most attention in education. Machin and Mayr (2012) similarly contend that not only 
should we attend to how semiotic resources are adopted and adapted, but “crucially, we must think about 
these choices in terms of power relations. How do the choices we find serve the interests of authorities, 
ruling groups, institutions or even individuals in face-to-face situations?” (p. 29).  
Research Background 
In my own work as a critical English-language educator in Taiwan, it has been challenging to implement 
Shin-ying Huang Multimodality and Critical Perspective 
 
Language Learning & Technology 22 
a critical perspective towards media texts that questions rather than confirms their dominant ideologies of 
race, class, gender, and sexuality. In addition, I constantly encounter students’ works that suggest a lack 
of understanding of the power of multimodality as communication rather than as technological 
accessories. Thus, I have often struggled to make relevant for my students the identification of semiotic 
resources for ideological purposes in media texts as well as the ability to make intentional use of semiotic 
resources for their own aims.  
This paper, therefore, documents a qualitative teacher-inquiry conducted with the aim to address both of 
the aforementioned challenges that I have faced. By drawing from a critical perspective towards 
multimodality, I attempted to help my students reconsider the ideological and communicative potential of 
multiple semiotic resources both in relation to the media texts they view and in terms of the texts they 
compose. 
Purpose of Study 
The study focuses on the politics of representation in media texts and explores the relevance of 
multimodality to reading and writing from a critical perspective. The study is based on the understanding 
that communication is intrinsically multimodal and multimodal communication is inherently social and 
ideological (Djonov & Zhao, 2013). The paper addresses the following questions: 1) How do language 
learners negotiate the multiple modes of expression for purposes of critical media literacy in their 
multimodal ensembles? 2) How does multimodality contribute to a critical perspective when engaging 
with media texts? 
Critical Media Literacy 
The study is informed by critical media literacy (CML) in its focus on the politics of representation in 
media texts. Kellner and Share (2009) propose a critical perspective towards media literacy that “focuses 
on ideology critique and analyzing the politics of representation of crucial dimensions of gender, race, 
class, and sexuality” with the aim to exploring “how power, media, and information are linked” (p. 8). 
They further argue that CML “helps people to discriminate and evaluate media content, to critically 
dissect media forms, to investigate media effects and uses, to use media intelligently, and to construct 
alternative media” (p. 4). Thus, the CML perspective is not only concerned with identifying how the 
media delineate people of different race, class, gender, and sexuality, and the consequences of such 
depiction, but more importantly, it emphasizes the production of counternarratives, such as making one’s 
own videos that speak back to the “othering” that is often present in the media (Gainer, 2010), as that 
which illuminates how what appears to be innocent and neutral is very often the result of intentional 
framing and filtering, which plays a large part in media manipulation (Goodman, 2003). 
Multimodality and Social Semiotics 
Kress (2008) explains of the relationship between multimodality and social semiotics:  
Multimodality indicates what is to be attended to…. social semiotics provides the theoretical, 
descriptive and analytical tools for….focusing on the specificity of the differing potentials of 
modes for making meaning, describing and analyzing the interrelations among the modes…what 
meaning each brings and deals with, and describing the meanings formed in their interrelations. 
(p. 92) 
Thus, the notion of design (Bezemer & Kress, 2008; Kress, 2000) is also pertinent, as it focuses on the 
agency of both the text maker as well as the text user. On the one hand, it recognizes how the purposes of 
the designers intersect with their understanding of the affordances of modes at their disposal in navigating 
the semiotic resources for particular sets of audiences. For the reader, familiarity with the affordances of 
modes and their conventional and unconventional uses “allows them to form their hypotheses about the 
Shin-ying Huang Multimodality and Critical Perspective 
 
Language Learning & Technology 23 
purposes which may have given rise to this use of the resources” (Kress, 2003, p. 50).  
The goals of critical media literacy are therefore supported by a social semiotic approach to multimodality 
(Kress & van Leeuwen, 1996) in seeking to understand how media texts, such as films, are constructed 
and can be analyzed. On the one hand, such an approach allows the focus not only on the words and 
behaviors that characters in movies say and do (i.e. linguistic and gestural modes), but also how the words 
and the behaviors are undergird by sound and music (i.e. aural mode) and the composition of what is seen 
on the screen, including special effects, camera lens, and so forth (i.e. visual and spatial modes). On the 
other hand, a multimodal social semiotic lens enables the examination of how students make use of the 
multiple modes to demonstrate their critical analysis of the politics of representation. Thus, critical media 
literacy, multimodality, and social semiotics serve a “partnership in research” (Kress, 2011) for the 
purposes of this study. 
Literature Review 
Increasingly in recent years, studies have been conducted that focus on English-language learners’ (ELLs) 
multimodal composition process and product, most often of an autobiographical nature (e.g. McGinnis, 
Goodstein-Stolzenberg, & Saliani, 2007; Lee, 2014; Nelson, 2006, 2008; Yang, 2012). Indeed, even when 
not concerning ELLs, studies of multimodality often examine how the author constructs and/or 
deconstructs his/her identities through multiple semiotic resources, such as in the case of Hull and 
Nelson’s (2005) seminal work.  
Shin and Cimasko’s (2008) study represents a departure. Focusing on academic essays, they found a 
dominance of the linguistic mode in the students’ understanding and composition of the multimodal 
argumentative essay, even though non-linguistic resources were employed in order to reflect author 
identities and emotions. In Tardy’s (2005) study of four ELLs’ academic PowerPoint presentation slides, 
she found that the students did not hesitate to seek the assistance of the visual mode for academic and 
professional purposes. The present study continues to focus on how multimodality is used by ELLs to 
construct texts of an academic nature, in this case, a critique of the politics of representations of race, 
class, and gender in movies. 
METHODOLOGY 
In order to address both of the aforementioned challenges that I have faced as a tertiary EFL educator, a 
qualitative teacher-inquiry was conducted in a freshman English course I taught at a university in northern 
Taiwan. Classes met weekly for two consecutive hours over an 18-week semester. There were 26 students 
enrolled in the course, including 8 males. These students have had at least 9 years of EFL education, and 
were placed in this highest of the four level classes based on a proficiency test administered by the 
university at the beginning of their freshman year. Having been designated in this advanced level course 
also meant that the students were not eligible to waive freshman English, which required proof of a 
TOEFL score of 250 on the CBT or 100-117 on the iBT or a score of 7 on IELTS, or equivalent scores on 
other proficiency tests. Multiple types of data were collected as part of the course implementation, 
although the students’ multimodal reports are the focus of this study. 
Course Implementation 
Over the first half of the semester, the class watched three movies, Romeo Must Die (Silver, Van Wyck, 
& Bartkowiak, 2000), Maid in Manhattan (Goldsmith-Thomas, Schiff, & Schindler, 2002), and The Help 
(Columbus, Marnathan, & Green, 2011), through which we examined portrayals of stereotypes in relation 
to race, class, and gender as well as how discriminatory portrayals are achieved not only through plotlines 
and dialogues but also through images, sounds, gestures, and their spatial organization. I also discussed 
with the students basic film concepts using examples from Golden (2001) and van Leeuwen and Jewitt 
(2001), but took care to point out that the purpose was not film study but rather, to better identify how 
Shin-ying Huang Multimodality and Critical Perspective 
 
Language Learning & Technology 24 
films bring viewers into particular relations of power. As Kist (2008) proposes, film appreciation is 
conducive to “a criticism of existing power dynamics, whether it be a study of the way a film positions 
the viewer in terms of gender, race, or any number of categories” (p. 523).  
I chose to focus on movies because they represent a popular type of mass media wherein “discourses are 
communicated through different kinds of semiotic resources, different modes” and “many people most 
frequently experience these discourses as fun, as style, and simply as part of the taken for granted 
everyday world, even if on other more or less tangible levels they feel their power over them” (Machin, 
2013, p. 347). The genre of movies was also selected as the form of media text to be analyzed because 
movies have been “proven effective in teaching students about myriad topics” (Baines, 2008, p. 506). 
(Appendix A explains the choice of the three movies as well as the list of questions discussed.) After the 
viewing and discussion, the students wrote an analysis paper to demonstrate their understanding of the 
politics of representation in terms of race, class, and gender and also the multiple semiotic resources 
available to moving-image story-telling.  
In the second half of the semester, the students worked on their multimodal report, as a form of 
counternarrative emphasized in the CML framework that speak back to dominant discourses and 
ideologies on race, class, and gender that are often present in mass media texts. I first explained the five 
modes focusing on ways the modes might be navigated into “a process of braiding or orchestration” (Hull 
& Nelson, 2005, p. 225) by showing multimodal compositions given as examples in Miller and McVee 
(2012). The class discussed how these multimodal ensembles worked well and also how they might be 
further improved. Then, the students were instructed to analyze a movie of choice from the perspective of 
race, class, gender, and/or sexuality and present the results using the five modes in a conscientious 
manner. Their final work was required to have an auto-run function, as they had to show their work in 
class without the benefit of an oral presentation, because I wanted the multimodal ensembles to be self-
contained rather than being dependent on additional live presentations/explanations. The students were 
allowed to work individually, in pairs, or in groups of threes. Ten students worked individually while 
there were two pairs and four groups of three. At the end of the semester, the students reflected 
individually on their experiences in a reflection paper (see Appendix B for prompts). I further followed-
up on the reflection by conducting open-ended focus group interviews of the students, which were 
digitally recorded and transcribed immediately afterwards.  
Data Analysis 
As Hull and Nelson (2005) remind, there is “no one formula for transcribing multimodal texts; the 
timescale (if there is any at all), segmentation scheme, and so on, must be created in direct relation and 
response to the modes and questions with which one is concerned” (p. 236). In attempting to understand 
my students’ orchestration of the multiple semiotic resources, I drew from the concept of design as set 
forth by Kress (2010), that a multimodal ensemble is “prospective” and “transformative,” and “hence is 
inevitably innovative,” rather than “being a competent implementation of conventionally given practices” 
(p. 132). More specifically, Flewitt, Hampel, Hauck, and Lancaster’s (2009) notion of using “visual 
frames as units” (p. 46) was helpful in my analysis of the students’ multimodal ensembles.  
 
Shin-ying Huang Multimodality and Critical Perspective 
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
  
Slide 2 Slide 2–2 
  
Slide 2–3 Slide 3 
  
Slide 3–2 Slide 3–3 
Figure 1. Example of transcript of slide sets 2 and 3. 
I transcribed the ensembles by slide sets because this allowed me to draw attention to the components and 
composition of each slide set. For example, each new element added to a slide would be viewed as part of 
that particular slide set, and would be numbered, for example, as slide 2, slide 2–2, slide 2–3 and so on. 
When all of the elements are replaced, that would be considered the beginning of the next slide set, which 
would be numbered slide 3, slide 3–2, and so forth (Figure 1). However, if clips of segments of movies 
were included, that would be transcribed as “clip” with a description of the segment. One multimodal 
ensemble was accompanied by a student’s narration, which I also transcribed in relation to the slide sets 
(Figure 2), and the narration was analyzed as an additional linguistic mode. I went through an iterative 
coding process with each slide set and also made comparisons across slide sets. This process helped to 
illuminate how the students orchestrated various modes to show their analysis of representations of race, 
class, gender, and sexuality in the movies. 
Shin-ying Huang Multimodality and Critical Perspective 
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
  
and Nola was sent to the Mission Island. What’s worse, 
Slide 12 Slide 12–2 
  
she had a fight with Drover. In the end, they still find each other and Nola went on a 
Slide 12–3 Slide 13 
 
 
walkabout with his grandfather, King George.  
Slide 13-2  
Figure 2. Example of transcript of slide sets 12 and 13 with voice track. 
In the following sections, I present the results gleaned from two multimodal ensembles, both made by 
groups of three students. The first ensemble analyzed the movie Australia (Luhrmann, Knapman, Mac 
Brown, & Luhrmann, 2008) and the second ensemble analyzed the movie Captain Phillips (Rudin, 
Brunetti, DeLuca, & Greengrass, 2013). (The hyperlinked ensembles can be viewed in relation to the 
discussion in the next sections.) 
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION: AUSTRALIA 
Visual/Spatial Modes and Gender Relations 
In this multimodal ensemble, because it is accompanied by a voice track of a student’s narration, it would 
at first seem that the linguistic mode is dominant. But that is not the case. The students maneuvered the 
various modes and demonstrated that not only “the world told is a different world to the world shown,” 
but that “the world shown” highlights what is not said in “the world told” (Kress, 2003, p. 1).  
In slide set 22 (Figure 3), in which the students comment on how the movie often shows women as 
“powerless and ridiculous,” using a picture that has Lady Sarah Ashley (henceforth Sarah) in a vulnerable 
Shin-ying Huang Multimodality and Critical Perspective 
 
Language Learning & Technology 27 
posture, seemingly leaning away from something, and also covering her mouth with a handkerchief, as if 
in an attempt to block out the elements. These words are highlighted by the block arrow pointing towards 
them as well as by the color red, both visual methods to draw attention. In particular, the word ridiculous 
is further stressed, as it occupies two positions, on the one hand, as part of the linguistic mode, and on the 
other hand, inside the picture and beside the figure of Sarah.  
The ridiculousness of Sarah’s portrayal is reiterated a third time in the first of the two clips that follow 
this slide. The clip is of the scene in which Sarah marvels at kangaroos in an exaggerated manner, then 
screams and mourns their death when they are shot by aborigines. While Sarah screams, with the camera 
up close in front of her wide-open mouth, the students added the word “ridiculous” to the clip, placed 
over her mouth, underscoring their feeling of Sarah’s portrayal in this scene.  
  
Figure 3. Slide set 22. 
In clip 2 that immediately follows, Sarah states to Drover that she is “capable as any men.” But the 
students point out that in a scene in which Sarah asserts her own ability, she is paradoxically shot from a 
higher camera angle while Drover is shot from a relatively lower camera angle. In their annotation of the 
clip, the students point out that the camera angle through which the scene is shot places Sarah in a 
relatively lower position and Drover in a higher position, serving to undermine Sarah’s assertion rather 
than support her, as her looking up at Drover renders her words less potent than they could be. 
The students then commented on how “people only see her beauty rather than her ability, even though she 
claim [sic] that she is capable as any men,” in the voice track for slide set 23 (Figure 4). In this sentence 
in the voice track, people’s views of her and Sarah’s views of herself are compared. However, through the 
interaction of the visual and the spatial mode, such as by placing the quote (with the capitalized words in 
the speech bubble) in slide 23-4 on top of the beauty-versus-ability comparison in slide 23-3, the students 
were in essence erasing the comparison, suggestive of their agreement with Sarah’s own assessment of 
her ability, as they could have placed the speech bubble in a multitude of other places on this slide. In 
addition, the attribution of the source of the speech bubble also draws viewers’ attention to a picture of 
Sarah, who not only is presented in a frontal angle, suggesting engagement with the viewers (Jewitt & 
Oyama, 2001), but is also stepping forward, with her arms open by her side, a posture signifying her 
confidence and self-assurance, as if daring the viewers to challenge her assertion of her ability, unlike in 
slide 22, where she is looking away at a 45-degree angle, in a posture of offer and detachment, suggesting 
passivity (Jewitt & Oyama, 2001). 
Shin-ying Huang Multimodality and Critical Perspective 
 
Language Learning & Technology 28 
  
Slide 23–3 Slide 23–4 
Figure 4. Slide set 23. 
Much has been discussed about image-text relations, very often from the point of view of clarifying 
meaning (e.g. Unsworth & Cleirigh, 2009) or focusing on the expediency of each mode (e.g. Kress, 2010). 
The example above reveals another relation between the linguistic and the other modes, that what is not 
said using the linguistic mode can be effectively “said” using other modes, visually and spatially, such as 
the students’ agreement with Sarah’s assessment of herself. 
Modality and Gender Relations 
It is important to view this work as a multimodal “ensemble” not only because of how the various “modes 
interact to construct the integrated meanings” (Unsworth & Cleirigh, 2009, p. 151), but also to understand 
the integrated meanings across the slides. Together, slide set 22 (Figure 3) and slides 7 (Figure 5) and 12–
3 (Figure 6) reveal the students’ views of gender relations.  
In slide set 22, the cartoon-picture on the top right corner shows that men, as expressed both through the 
male symbol and the cartoon faces, are heavier on the scale, showing that they carry more weight than 
women in this movie. It seems to represent the resulting consequence of the portrayal of women as 
“powerless and ridiculous” discussed in this slide. 
A similar case of using cartoon figures to show gender relations can be found in two other slides. In the 
slides preceding slide 7 (Figure 5) that introduce the plot and characters, the students narrated that, “Sarah 
found out that [Fletcher] is a very bad guy who not only stole their cattle but killed her husband. Finding 
out Mr. Fletcher was a bad guy, Sarah fired him.” Sarah firing Fletcher is expressed first and foremost 
through the cartoon of her kicking him forcefully, as it occupies the central position of salience (Jewitt & 
Oyama, 2001) in the slide, complemented by the speech bubble in the top right corner. 
 
Figure 5. Slide 7. 
 
Shin-ying Huang Multimodality and Critical Perspective 
 
Language Learning & Technology 29 
In slide 12–3 (Figure 6), the students narrated that “and Nola was sent to the Mission Island. What’s 
worse, she had a fight with Drover.” The couple’s fight is visually represented on the bottom right corner 
of the slide, also through cartoon figures.  
 
Figure 6. Slide 12-3. 
In these three cases, men and women are in situations of conflict or conflicting power relations (with the 
female having the upper hand in slide 7, the female being outweighed by the male in slide set 22, and then 
both on equal footing in slide 12–3). All three cases are represented through cartoon rendering. In contrast, 
in slide 13 (Figure 7), narrated as “in the end, they still find each other,” a photograph, which is “the 
contemporary standard of high naturalistic modality” (Jewitt & Oyama, 2001, p. 151) was used to 
represent a harmonious situation between Sarah and Drover.  
Based on the lens of modality, that is, the level of congruence between what something looks like in an 
image and in real life, cartoons would have lower modality compared to photographs. Using a method 
that suggests a lower level of reality to present gender conflict may be a way that the students distanced 
themselves from such situations of tension. The cartoons in slides 7 and 12–3 also add an element of 
humor to a situation that the students perhaps felt is undesirable, unlike situations of harmony, which can 
be represented as they are, in the real-life rendering of a photo. Thus, “the world shown” is not only 
“different” but reveals more than “the world told” (Kress, 2003, p. 1) in the voice track in this ensemble. 
 
Figure 7. Slide 13. 
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION: CAPTAIN PHILLIPS 
Visual/Spatial Lens and Race/Gender Relations 
The second case of multimodal ensemble orchestrates the modes in different ways to express unequal 
power relations. Slide set 3 (Figure 8) introduces the four pirates through the framing of binoculars. The 
ingenuity of this approach lies in its revelation that this story is told through the perspective of the person 
holding the binoculars: Captain Phillips. The students not only identified the point of view of the movie 
but also strategically used the binoculars in this slide set to show that the Somali pirates’ storyline is 
Shin-ying Huang Multimodality and Critical Perspective 
 
Language Learning & Technology 30 
presented from an American perspective. 
  
Slide 3 Slide 3–2 
 
 
Slide 3–3  
Figure 8. Slide set 3. 
In slide set 7 (Figure 9), the screenshot of Phillips’ email to his wife, Andrea, was used as the background 
image for the discussion of females in the movie, suggesting female existence as in relation to men; that is, 
Andrea existed in this movie mainly through Phillips’ thoughts and words. In addition, Admiral Howard, 
a female, did not even receive screen time, despite being in a position of authority. It is the male captain’s 
response to her in their communication through which she is brought to exist in the movie. In slide 7–5, in 
the bottom right corner, is a photo of the captain in communication with the female admiral, highlighting 
her non-existence. These two examples demonstrate that “non-linguistic elements are never semiotically 
innocent” (Flewitt et al., 2009, p. 41), nor ideologically neutral, both in the movie’s representation of the 
pirates and women, as well as in the students’ presentation of their analysis.  
  
Slide 7 Slide 7-5 
Figure 9. Slide set 7. 
Visual/Spatial Layering as Shifting Power Relations 
Slide set 10 (Figure 10) analyzes the shift of power relations between Phillips and the pirates using the 
Shin-ying Huang Multimodality and Critical Perspective 
 
Language Learning & Technology 31 
spatial mode (i.e. the camera angle) as frame of analysis, from when Phillips looks downward at the 
pirates failing to catch up with him (slide 10–2), to when they are in negotiations after the pirates first 
board his ship (slide 10–3), to when they are in the lifeboat, where Phillips is forced to sit and look up at 
Muse (slide 10–4). The pictures are positioned vertically, with Phillips on the top half of the slide 
regardless of whether he is looking downward or upward. In discussions of the US and the Somali 
characters throughout this ensemble, the US characters are consistently placed at the top while the Somali 
ones are placed at the bottom, suggestive of the overall power relations. In addition, the three sets of 
juxtaposed pictures appear one after another and on top of another, suggesting the progression of the shift 
in power relations. Having the pictures layered halfway on top of the previous ones but not completely 
obscuring the previous ones also shows that these three relations of power co-exist and vary at different 
points in the movie.  
  
Slide 10 Slide 10–2 
  
Slide 10–3 Slide 10–4 
Figure 10. Slide set 10. 
A similar strategy with the spatial mode is used, in slide set 18 (Figure 11), when the power relations 
among the Somali pirates are discussed, particularly between Muse and the leader of the other skiff. In 
this case though, the second picture, featured in slide 18–3, overrides and mostly obscures the first one, 
suggesting the previous power relations have ceased to exist. The third picture, featured in slide 18–4, 
overrides but only partially obscures the second one, suggesting the co-existence of power relations 
represented in these screenshots. In 18–5, when at last Muse kills the other man, the picture overrides the 
previous ones, with the man lying flat looking upward at Muse at an almost 90-degree angle. This picture 
again overrides the others, suggesting that the power relations portrayed are final.  
Shin-ying Huang Multimodality and Critical Perspective 
 
Language Learning & Technology 32 
  
Slide 18–2 Slide 18–3 
  
Slide 18–4 Slide 18–5 
Figure 11. Slide set 18. 
Modes “differ in their affordances” and “offer different and distinct potential for presenting the world” 
(Kress, 2010, p. 96), and “can also have an ideological dimension” (Machin, 2013, p. 350). By creatively 
coordinating the visual mode through the spatial mode, the placement of photos (top vs. down and 
layering) reveals the students’ analysis of the power relations between the characters in the movie and the 
students’ representation of these relations as either temporary or perpetual.  
The Linguistic Mode of Punctuation as Gender Imbalance 
The previously discussed spatial representation is not used in the other slides in this ensemble, in which 
pictures are usually placed in different corners on a slide rather than overlapping, except in one other case 
in slide set 23 (Figure 12), but with a twist. In these slides, we first see one white male and a black male 
(slide 23), then another white male and a black male (slide 23–2), then two more white males (slide 23–3), 
and finally four white males (slide 23–4), with increasing emphasis in the linguistic commentaries of 
“male” (slide 23), “male” (slide 23–2), “still…male” (slide 23–3), and “male, AGAIN!!!!!!!” (slide 23–4). 
The spatial mode is used somewhat differently from the previously described two instances as a result of 
its braiding with the linguistic mode.  
 
 
Shin-ying Huang Multimodality and Critical Perspective 
 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
  
Slide 23 Slide 23–2 
  
Slide 23–3 Slide 23–4 
Figure 12. Slide set 23. 
In comparing the male and female representations of the crew, the visuals take on less importance than in 
the previously discussed slide sets, as there are no pictures of female crewmembers available. In this set 
of slides, a different kind of power relations is discussed, not between existing characters, but between 
male and non-existent female crewmembers. As a result, the visual and spatial modes of layering (for 
slide sets 10 and 18) are substituted by the linguistic mode of punctuation (i.e., ellipses, capitalization, 
exclamation marks) in order to relay a different message. In slides 23–3 and 23–4, the linguistic mode 
takes precedence over the visual through the use of punctuation, (i.e., with ellipses highlighting the word 
still in 23–3 and the exclamation marks underscoring the word AGAIN, which is also capitalized, adding a 
second form of punctuation to the word), evoking an escalating urgency in the realization that there are 
only males on the crew, and most of them featured are white. The linguistic mode of punctuation thus 
takes the place of female crew photos to highlight gender imbalance. Thus, in this case, the world “shown” 
can be made to serve different purposes when it is also “told,” with appropriate punctuation. 
CONCLUSION: BETWEEN WHAT IS SAID AND WHAT IS NOT SAID 
Various studies have confirmed the communicative potential of multimodal semiotics, but there has been 
“little critical work done on the way that discourses are communicated, naturalized, and legitimized 
beyond the linguistic level” (Machin, 2013, p. 347). Thus, this study has addressed how multimodality is 
relevant to a critical perspective, and underscores that often, the most important message in a text, print or 
multimedia, is not stated explicitly (McLaughlin & DeVoogd, 2004), but requires reading across multiple 
modes in order to read between the lines and identify its presence. However, it is these between-the-lines 
messages that can have the most powerful influence on readers, as they are often presented as natural, 
commonsensical, or already agreed upon and taken for granted.  
The effort to help my students reconsider the ideological and communicative potential of multiple 
semiotic resources, in relation to the media texts they view and also in terms of the texts they compose, 
has yielded fruitful results. On the one hand, the students were able to identify the power relations 
Shin-ying Huang Multimodality and Critical Perspective 
 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
between characters as well as how particular characters are marginalized in the media texts they viewed 
by paying attention to the multiple modes that make up the text’s representation. Thus, what the students 
have revealed is that multimodality can serve as a subversive act that facilitates critical media literacy, 
bringing to light “what is not said” but is nevertheless effectively expressed. On the other hand, they were 
able to articulate “what is not said” through the orchestration of various modes rather than relying on the 
linguistic mode, making their message as persuasive and effective as those in the media texts viewed. The 
students’ design of their multimodal reports demonstrated the “realization of their interest in their world” 
(Kress, 2010, p. 6, emphasis in the original). 
 
APPENDIX A. Rationale of Movies Selected and Discussion Questions 
Romeo Must Die 
This movie allows the focus on race and gender as a result of the protagonists, an Asian male and an 
African-American female. 
• How are Asians portrayed in this movie? 
• How are African Americans portrayed in this movie? 
• What does it mean to be feminine as portrayed in this movie? 
• What does it mean to be masculine as portrayed in this movie? 
• How has what you noticed above been reflected through visual, spatial, aural, gestural, and linguistic 
modes? 
Maid in Manhattan 
This movie provides the simultaneous focus on race, class, and gender as a result of the Latina and white 
protagonists. 
• In what ways are the relationship between a white senatorial candidate and a Latina maid unrealistic 
and realistic? 
• What does the film say about the intersection between class, race, and gender, as well as social 
mobility? 
• How has what you noticed above been reflected through visual, spatial, aural, gestural, and linguistic 
modes? 
The Help 
This movie provides the simultaneous focus on race, class, and gender as it centers on African-American 
maids and the white families they serve. 
1. How does the movie portray the following: 
• black men 
• black women 
• white women (such as Eugenia “Skeeter” Phelan and Celia Foote)  
• white women (such as Hilly Holbrook) 
2. And what does this imply about racism? 
3. This movie has many positive aspects. But in relation to the focus on race, class, gender, and their 
intersection, what are some negative aspects of this movie?  
4. How has what you noticed above been reflected through visual, spatial, aural, gestural, and linguistic 
modes? 
 
 
Shin-ying Huang Multimodality and Critical Perspective 
 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
APPENDIX B. Reflection Paper Prompts 
1. In addition to words and plot, how else is power relations related to race, class, gender, and sexuality 
in movies? In your discussion, if you use examples from movies NOT watched in class, then be sure 
to give their correct titles! 
2. After working on the multimodal report, what is your understanding of EACH of the FIVE multiple 
modes of communication? 
3. And more importantly, in what ways do they relate to one another? Please discuss this in general.  
4. Specifically in relation to your report, in what ways did you make use of the five multiple modes in 
relation to one another to construct your report? 
5. Just as importantly, how do you feel the experience of a multimodal report to be different from 
writing a traditional report, such as this one? 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to express my gratitude to the LLT editors and the anonymous reviewers for their insightful 
comments and suggestions. I would also like to acknowledge my students, whose multimodal ensembles 
have been such an inspiration to me. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Shin-ying Huang is an associate professor in the Department of Foreign Languages and Literatures at 
National Taiwan University in Taiwan. Her research interests include critical media literacies and 
multimodality. 
E-mail: syhg@ntu.edu.tw  
 
REFERENCES 
Arola, K. L., Sheppard, J., & Ball, C. E. (2014). Writer/designer: A guide to making multimodal projects. 
New York, NY: Bedford/St. Martins. 
Baines, L. (2008). Film, literature, and language. In J. Flood, S. B. Heath, & D. Lapp (Eds.). Handbook of 
research on teaching literacy through the communicative and visual arts (pp. 503–512). New York, NY: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Bezemer, J., & Kress, G. (2008). Writing in multimodal texts: A social semiotic account of designs for 
learning. Written Communication, 25(2), 166–195. 
Columbus, C., Barnathan, M., & Green, B. (Producers), & Taylor, T. (Director). (2011). The Help 
[Motion Picture]. United States: Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures. 
Djonov, E., & Zhao, S. (2013). From multimodal to critical multimodal studies through popular discourse. 
In E. Djonov & S. Zhao (Eds.), Critical multimodal studies of popular discourse (pp. 1–14). New York, 
NY: Routledge. 
Flewitt, R., Hampel, R., Hauck, M., & Lancaster, L. (2009). What are multimodal data and transcription? 
In C. Jewitt (Ed.), The Routledge handbook of multimodal analysis (pp. 40–53). New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Gainer, J. S. (2010). Critical media literacy in middle school: Exploring the politics of representation. 
Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 53(5), 364–373. 
Shin-ying Huang Multimodality and Critical Perspective 
 
Language Learning & Technology 36 
Golden, J. (2001). Reading in the dark: Using film as a tool in the English classroom. Urbana, IL: 
National Council of Teachers of English. 
Goldsmith-Thomas, E., Schiff, P., & Schindler, D. (Producers), & Wang, W. (Director). (2002). Maid in 
Manhattan [Motion Picture]. United States: Columbia Pictures. 
Goodman, S. (2003). Teaching youth media: A critical guide to literacy, video production, and social 
change. New York, NY: Teachers College Press. 
Hammer, R. (2011). Critical media literacy as engaged pedagogy. E-Learning and Digital Media, 8(4), 
357–363. 
Hull, G. A., & Nelson, M. E. (2005). Locating the semiotic power of multimodality. Written 
Communication, 22(2), 224–261. 
Jewitt, C., & Oyama, R. (2001). Visual meaning: A social semiotic approach. In T. van Leeuwen & C. 
Jewitt (Eds.), Handbook of visual analysis (pp. 134–156). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Kellner, D., & Share, J. (2009). Critical media literacy, democracy, and the reconstruction of education. 
In D. Macedo & S. R. Steinberg (Eds.), Media literacy: A reader (pp. 3–23). New York, NY: Peter Lang. 
Kist, W. (2008). Film and video in the classroom: Back to the future. In J. Flood, S. B. Heath, & D. Lapp 
(Eds.). Handbook of research on teaching literacy through the communicative and visual arts (pp. 521–
527). New York, NY: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Kress, G. (2000). Multimodality: Challenges to thinking about language. TESOL Quarterly, 34(2), 337–
340. 
Kress, G. (2003). Literacy in the new media age. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Kress, G. (2008). “Literacy” in a multimodal environment of communication. In J. Flood, S. B. Heath, & 
D. Lapp (Eds.), Handbook of research on teaching literacy through the communicative and visual arts 
(pp. 91–100). New York, NY: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Kress, G. (2010). Multimodality: A social semiotic approach to contemporary communication. New York, 
NY: Routledge. 
Kress, G. (2011). “Partnerships in research”: Multimodality and ethnography. Qualitative Research, 11(3), 
239–260. 
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (1996). Reading images: The grammar of visual design. London, UK: 
Routledge. 
Lee, H. C. (2014). Using an arts-integrated multimodal approach to promote English learning: A case 
study of two Taiwanese junior college students. English Teaching: Practice and Critique, 13(2), 55–75. 
Luhrmann, B., Knapman, C., & Mac Brown, G. (Producers), & Luhrmann, B. (Director). (2008). 
Australia [Motion Picture]. United States: 20th Century Fox. 
Machin, D. (2013). Introduction. What is multimodal critical discourse studies? Critical Discourse 
Studies, 10(4), 347–355. 
Machin, D., & Mayr, A. (2012). How to do critical discourse analysis: A multimodal introduction. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
McGinnis, T., Goodstein-Stolzenberg, A., & Saliani, E. C. (2007). “indnpride”: Online spaces of 
transnational youth as sites of creative and sophisticated literacy and identity work. Linguistics and 
Education, 18, 283–304. 
McLaughlin, M., & DeVoogd, G. L. (2004). Critical literacy: Enhancing students’ comprehension of text. 
Shin-ying Huang Multimodality and Critical Perspective 
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
New York, NY: Scholastic. 
Miller, S. M., & McVee, M. B. (2012). Multimodal composing: The essential 21st century literacy. In S. 
M. Miller & M. B. McVee (Eds.), Multimodal composing in classrooms: Learning and teaching for the 
digital world (pp. 1–12). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Nelson, M. E. (2006). Mode, meaning, and synaesthesia in multimedia L2 writing. Language Learning & 
Technology, 10(2), 56-76. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num2/pdf/nelson.pdf 
Nelson, M. E. (2008). Multimodal synthesis and the voice of multimedia author in a Japanese EFL 
context. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 2(1), 65–82. 
Rudin, S., Brunetti, D., & De Luca, M. (Producers), & Greengrass, P. (Director). (2013). Captain Phillips 
[Motion Picture]. United States: Columbia Pictures. 
Shin, D. S., & Cimasko, T. (2008). Multimodal composition in a college ESL class: New tools, traditional 
norms. Computers and Composition, 25, 376–395. 
Silver, J., & Van Wyck, J. (Producers), & Bartkowiak, A. (Director). (2000). Romeo Must Die [Motion 
Picture]. United States: Warner Brothers Pictures. 
Tardy, C. M. (2005). Expressions of disciplinary and individuality in multimodal genre. Computers and 
Composition, 22, 319–336. 
Unsworth, L., & Cleirigh, C. (2009). Multimodality and reading: The construction of meaning through 
image-text interaction. In C. Jewitt (Ed.), The Routledge Handbook of Multimodal Analysis (pp. 151–163). 
New York, NY: Routledge. 
van Leeuwen, T., & Jewitt, C. (Eds.). (2001). Handbook of visual analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Yang, Y. F. (2012). Multimodal composing in digital storytelling. Computers and Composition, 29, 221–
238. 
