Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/review1.pdf 
February 2015, Volume 19, Number 1 
pp. 51–53 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 51 
REVIEW OF COMPUTER-ASSISTED FOREIGN LANGUAGE TEACHING 
AND LEARNING: TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCES 
Computer-Assisted Foreign Language Teaching 
and Learning: Technological Advances 
Bin Zou, Minjie Xing, Yuping Wang, Mingyu Sun, 
and Catherine H. Xiang (Eds.) 
2013 
ISBN 978-1466628212 
US $117.00 
336 pp. 
IGI Global: Information Science Reference 
Hershey, PA 
 
 
Review by Robert Blake, University of California, Davis 
This book is a compendium of sixteen articles about CALL divided into three sections written in English, 
with a particular focus on Chinese and ESL instruction, especially business English for pre-professional 
students in China and first-year Chinese elsewhere in the US and UK. From a theoretical standpoint, each 
article stands alone; the editors do not provide any overarching framework or introduction that informs 
the reader other than the references made separately by each contributor.   
There are four articles in the first section titled Collaborative Learning in CALL.  In Chapter 1, Xing, Zou 
and Wang described a wiki project that asked English students learning Business Chinese in the UK to 
collaborate with Chinese students learning Business English in China with similar goals to those outlined 
by the MIT Cultura Project (Furstenberg, Levet, English, & Maillet, 2001), although the authors made no 
reference of this well-know initiative. Improving students’ intercultural competence was the main goal 
and that appeared to happen as a result of the scheduled wiki activities. In Chapter 2, Wang and Chen 
outlined the curriculum for a totally online Chinese language instruction available to students in Australia.  
The development of an assessment plan for student interaction, collaboration, and reflection constituted 
the focus of this article by means of both synchronous and asynchronous tools such as discussion forums, 
social networking, videoconferencing, Wimba Boards, wikis, blogs, online essays, and online quizzes. In 
Chapter 3, Orsini-Jones, Brick, and Pibworth examined both the affordances and pitfalls of using social 
networks to create a language-learning environment, in this case, for pre-service English teachers. The 
results were anecdotal but point to the overall benefits and promises of this learning environment. In 
Chapter 4, Zhao used a social cognitive approach to design a technologically enhanced academic literacy 
environment for tertiary (i.e. pre-professional) Chinese students in a business English class in China.  
Student essays from both a computer-supported group and a regular in situ project-based group were 
Robert J. Blake                           Review of Computer-Assisted Foreign Language Teaching  
 
Language Learning & Technology 53  
subsequently judged for the level of argumentation, organization, and linguistic sophistication. The 
collaborative approach appeared to improve students’ knowledge of English for Special Purposes and 
their academic literacy as well.   
The second section—CALL, Teachers, and Learners—begins with Chapter 5, a study by White on learner 
autonomy. He observed textchat data from graduate linguistics students and cited their use of ellipsis and 
clipped or reduced forms as proof that they spontaneously formed a community of practice with a degree 
of social autonomy. In Chapter 6, Terantino surveyed both faculty and students’ opinions about using 
Facebook for language instruction. Most participants felt that Facebook was more appropriate for 
personal use and expressed reservations about using it for foreign language courses. Nevertheless, the 
benefits of this medium were obvious to all, but more teacher training about how to use this social 
networking tool for academic purposes would be required if attitudes were going to change. In Chapter 7, 
Guo and Guo found that students using the Wimba Voice Boards to practice their Chinese had high levels 
of engagement and participatory rates, a fact the authors used to support their implementation of a 
blended learning environment. In Chapter 8, Wu challenged the notion that today’s students are digitally 
more savvy than before. Using survey data from over 1,000 foreign language students from a US 
university, this researcher found that 70% of them had a smart-phone or similar product with Internet 
access, but ironically they received little or no educational content through these mobile devices. Students 
asked for more content in the form of videos. Jordan and Coyle in Chapter 9 designed a Moodle 
automated testing curriculum to stimulate students of first-year English in China to take on more personal 
responsibility or agency (i.e. learning autonomy) for their linguistic progress. The results were mixed with 
respect to fostering increased autonomous study skills. 
Chapter 10 begins the third section on CALL Course Design with a one-semester pilot study of online 
Chinese developed by Sun, Chen, and Olson at a US university. The authors provide an insightful 
discussion of the different synchronous and asynchronous components needed to be developed and 
included in this online pilot with the idea that it could then be expanded to include the entire first year in a 
fully online format. Performance data from this experimental class were not statistically different from 
those students enrolled in the regular in situ formats, which the authors used as justification for continuing 
forward with the fully online Chinese curriculum. In Chapter 11, Turel and McKenna offered a 
conceptualization for all of the production and curricular aspects that should go into designing online 
language materials: simplicity, clarity, brevity, consistency, interactivity, flexibility, motivation, and 
visual appeal, to name only a few. In Chapter 12, an interesting psycholinguistic departure from the rest 
of this collection, Mancilla examined the problems L2 students encounter while note taking with respect 
to cognitive overloads. Typically, foreign students in US universities suffer from the split-attention effect:  
they cannot both listen to the lecture and take notes at the same time. She suggested that the Echo 
Smartpen or similar such tools could possibly help alleviate the split-attention effect by associating the 
student´s abbreviated writing entries with the real-time audio recordings of the professor’s lecture. 
Although the author provides no new empirical data, she does outline future avenues of inquiry 
concerning Smartpens. Watson and Miller in Chapter 13 explored the use of the computer with students 
of commercial English to promote better listening comprehension training. The training in identifying 
syllable constituents helped nearly all the participants to improve, but the process sometimes took over 30 
training sessions to accomplish. It was not clear from the study if the participants received a delayed 
posttest; in other words, it is not known whether the treatment make a permanent improvement in the 
subjects’ comprehension abilities. In Chapter 14, Maele, Baten, Beaven, and Rajagopal described 
WebCEF (www.webcef.eu), a European supported collaborative project to provide a dynamic assessment 
of oral proficiency at a distance with goals not unlike ACTFL´s OPI interviews. The WebCEF project 
adapts the Common European Framework of Reference (CEFR) to various business scenarios that prompt 
students to react via a synchronous CMC videoconferencing tool or Virtual Learning Environment (VLE). 
Students rate themselves with respect to their oral responses according to the categories of linguistic 
Robert J. Blake                           Review of Computer-Assisted Foreign Language Teaching  
 
Language Learning & Technology 53  
range, accuracy, fluency, interaction, and coherence. Students themselves were involved in setting goals 
and then determining how to reach them. The tool has been used to coach Belgium business students in 
preparation for online job interviews in English, but no quantitative data was offered in this present study.   
In Chapter 15, Frane and Morton reported on the only online experiment in French in this collection with 
students from the University of Manchester. In this case, the language materials were offered 
asynchronously through a Blackboard e-learning platform. Survey data were collected for students who 
worked freely or with monitored input, with the result that monitored instruction produced better 
progress. In the final chapter in this section, Tsurutani described the CAPTA program, which provides 
phonetic measurements for duration and pitch tracking for any recorded utterance. The author suggested 
how the CAPTA program could be used in conjunction with human raters to make students’ L2 
pronunciation more native like.   
Taken as a whole, this collection presents a series of mostly practically oriented reports on various CALL 
projects and, in particular, provides the reader with a better picture of CALL implementations in Chinese 
language and ESL instruction from around the world. But, again, as a collection of separate descriptive 
studies, broad themes in second language acquisition that might lend cohesiveness to the volume are 
lacking, and the distribution of the articles into particular sections seemed arbitrary at times. Still, it is a 
welcomed addition that adds richness to the CALL field. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Robert J. Blake is professor of Spanish linguistics at UC Davis.  He was director of the UC Language 
Consortium (http://uccllt.ucdavis.edu) from 2000 to 2012.  He has published widely in Spanish linguistics 
(Old Spanish, Spanish syntax, and applied linguistics) and CALL. In 2013, Georgetown University Press 
published the second edition of his book Brave New Digital Classroom with an expanded online 
component. He developed online courses for both first- and second-year Spanish. He is a member of the 
North American Academic of the Spanish Language. From 2013 to 2015, he served as vice-president, 
president, and past president of the Computer Assisted Instruction Consortium (CALICO.org). 
E-mail: rjblake@ucdavis.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Furstenberg, G., S. Levet, K. English, & K. Maillet. (2001). Giving a virtual voice to the silent language 
of culture: The Cultura project. Language Learning & Technology, 5(1): 55–102. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num1/furstenberg/default.html 
