Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2015/news.pdf 
June 2015, Volume 19, Number 2 
pp. 32–35 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 32 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
University of Hawai‘i Center for Language and Technology (CLT) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC) 
 
 
 
 
 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
NFLRC Celebrates 25 Years 
When the U.S. Department of Educationʻs Title VI Language Resource Centers (LRC) Program began, 
the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa (UHM) was one of its first recipients, establishing the National 
Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) in 1990. It is now the oldest LRC in existence and is 
pleased to be celebrating its 25th anniversary this year. 
Throughout its history, the NFLRC’s main goal has been to expand the nation’s capacity to teach and 
learn foreign languages effectively, drawing on UHM’s strengths in instructional technology, applied 
linguistics, second language acquisition, and language teaching. NFLRC projects, materials, professional 
development events, and research focus primarily on the less commonly taught languages of East Asia, 
Southeast Asia, and the Pacific, but they bear relevance to the learning and teaching of all languages. 
As part of its accomplishments, the NFLRC has established three well-regarded online refereed journals 
(Language Learning & Technology, Reading in a Foreign Language, and Language Documentation & 
Conservation) and an active publications division which has produced numerous pivotal research 
monographs in the field of applied linguistics and a multitude of free materials. The NFLRC has also 
offered popular summer institutes and organized and hosted many international conferences (the biennial 
International Conference on Language Documentation & Conservation, PacSLRF, SLRF, Pragmatics & 
Language Learning, and more). Current projects focus on developing and researching curricula and 
resources for project-based language learning (PBLL), best methods in online language teaching, and the 
organization of several professional development institutes and national and international conferences.  
Check out the NFLRC website for our latest, exciting endeavors and thank you again to all our fans for all 
your support! 
2016 Southwest Conference on Language Teaching (SWCOLT) 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology   33 
MARCH 3–5, 2016 • Honolulu, HI 
We are pleased to be hosting the 2016 Southwest Conference on Language Teaching (SWCOLT), its first 
time in Hawai‘i, in conjunction with the Hawai‘i Association of Language Teachers (HALT), which will 
be celebrating its 30th anniversary.  
SWCOLT is a regional foreign language teachers’ organization that brings together K-16 language 
educators from 9 member states: Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawai‘i, Nevada, New Mexico, 
Oklahoma, Texas, and Utah.  
SWCOLT 2016 will be held at the Hilton Waikiki Beach Hotel, with pre-conference workshops on March 
3 and the main conference on March 4–5. The theme of the conference will be I ka ʻōlelo ke ola (“In 
language, there is life”). Please consider submitting an abstract. The Call for Proposals deadline will be 
September 1, 2015. Please see the SWCOLT website for more details. 
STAY IN TOUCH WITH SOCIAL MEDIA 
Did you know that the NFLRC has its own Facebook page with over 2,300 fans? It’s one of the best 
ways to hear about the latest news, publications, conferences, workshops, and resources we offer. Just 
click on the “Like” button to become a fan. For those who prefer getting up-to-the-minute “tweets,” you 
can follow us on our Twitter page. Finally, NFLRC has its own YouTube channel with a growing 
collection of free language learning and teaching videos for your perusal. Subscribe today! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology   34 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
  
 
Published in  
September 2014 
Cultura-inspired intercultural exchanges: Focus on Asian and Pacific 
languages 
by  Dorothy M. Chun (Ed.) (2014) 183pp | ISBN: 978–0–9835816–6–
6  
Browse contents, read editor’s intro. 
Although many online intercultural exchanges have been conducted 
based on the groundbreaking Cultura model, most to date have been 
between and among European languages. This volume presents several 
chapters with a focus on exchanges involving Asian and Pacific 
languages. Many of the benefits and challenges of these exchanges are 
similar to those reported for European languages; however, some of the 
difficulties reported in the Chinese and Japanese exchanges might be due 
to the significant linguistic differences between English and East Asian 
languages. This volume adds to the body of emerging studies of 
telecollaboration among learners of Asian and Pacific languages. 
 
NFLRC maintains a large searchable archive of  free language 
research and teaching materials which currently contains over 350 items. 
These items include foreign language teaching materials —print, audio, 
and video,—language acquisition research papers, and collections of 
conference materials. 
 
Save the trees! Check out our other two online, open-access journals: 
  
Language Documentation & Conservation is a 
refereed, open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC 
and published by University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to 
language documentation and conservation, as well 
as book reviews, hardware and software reviews, 
and notes from the field. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed 
international journal of issues in foreign language 
reading and literacy, published twice yearly on the 
World Wide Web and sponsored by NFLRC and 
the University of Hawai‘i College of Languages, 
Linguistics, and Literature. 
 
View all NFLRC Publications 
  
 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology   35 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
  
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language research. 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We enjoyed seeing many of you at ACTFL 
in San Antonio in November, and at the Central States Conference on the Teaching of Foreign Languages 
in Minneapolis in March. We look forward to seeing more of you at the Computer-Assisted Language 
Instruction Consortium (CALICO) conference in Boulder, Colorado in May. Please stop by our booth to 
say hello! 
SUMMER WORKSHOPS 
This year marks CLEAR’s nineteenth year of offering summer professional development workshops. 
Teachers of all levels and languages have come to Michigan State University’s campus for these 
informative, hands-on courses. Learn more about all of these workshops and find information about 
accommodations, costs, and discount plans by visiting our website. Go to http://clear.msu.edu and click 
on “Professional Development” to apply online.  
Reading and Listening in the Language Classroom: Focus on the Interpretive Mode 
July 13-15, 2015 
Rich Internet Applications for Language Learning: Introductory Techniques 
July 16-18, 2015 
The Basics of Assessment: Applying Proficiency-Based Approaches to the Classroom 
July 20-22, 2015 
Using Short Stories and Young Adult Literature in Literature Circles to Facilitate Reading 
July 23-25, 2015 
Early application deadline: May 8, 2015 
Regular application deadline: June 1, 2015 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/. 
