Language Learning and Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2015/benson.pdf 
October 2015, Volume 19, Number 3 
pp. 88–105 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 88 
COMMENTING TO LEARN: EVIDENCE OF LANGUAGE AND 
INTERCULTURAL LEARNING IN COMMENTS ON YOUTUBE VIDEOS 
Phil Benson, Macquarie University 
It is often observed that the globalization of social media has opened up new opportunities 
for informal intercultural communication and foreign language learning. This study aims 
to go beyond this general observation through a case study that explores how discourse 
analysis tools might be used to uncover evidence of language and intercultural learning in 
comments on YouTube videos involving Chinese-English translanguaging. Analysis of 
exchange structure—interactional acts involving information exchange and stance 
marking—suggests that translanguaging triggers interactionally-rich comments that are 
oriented towards information exchange and negotiation for meaning on topics of language 
and culture. It is argued that the methodologies used have good potential for use in studies 
that aim to investigate learning in online settings, both at the environmental level, in 
macroanalysis of large data sets, and at the individual/situational level, in microanalysis of 
shorter interactional sequences. 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: Cantonese, English, Mandarin Chinese 
Key words: Computer-mediated Communication, Discourse Analysis, Learner 
Autonomy, Video 
APA Citation: Benson, P. (2015). Commenting to learn: Evidence of language and 
intercultural learning in comments on YouTube videos. Language Learning & Technology 
19(3), 88–105. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2015/benson.pdf  
Received: July 1, 2014; Accepted: February 1, 2015; Published: October 1, 2015 
Copyright: © Phil Benson 
INTRODUCTION 
Writing in Language Learning and Technology a little over a decade ago, Koutsogiannis and 
Mitsikopoulou (2004, p. 83) described the Internet as a “worldwide literacy practice environment” that 
also functions as “an informal learning environment for English as a second/foreign language”. More 
recently, Kramsch (2014) has argued that “globalization has changed the conditions under which FL 
[foreign languages] are taught, learned and used” (p. 302) and highlighted four important developments 
with strong implications for current research on Internet-based language learning. First, everyday use of 
online social media is now the norm for wealthier regions of the world. Second, while English remains 
the dominant language, social media are is increasingly supportive of multilingualism. Third, the 
globalization of communications media is blurring distinctions among languages and destabilizing taken-
for-granted codes, norms and conventions. Last, online communication increasingly takes place in 
multimodal environments, such as YouTube. A further development can be summed up in Thorne’s 
(2010) perspective on language learning as being “actualized through processes of communicative 
engagement in intercultural settings, in both on- and offline contexts” (p. 139), which accords with the 
view that language is, when used in contexts of communication, “bound up with culture in multiple and 
complex ways” (Kramsch, 1998, p. 3). In sum, language learning on the Internet can no longer be 
conceptualized simply in terms of access to native speakers of English and English language texts; it is 
now much more a matter of everyday immersion in communicatively complex environments, involving 
multilingualism and language exchange, in which language learning and intercultural learning are often 
intertwined.  
While it can, perhaps, safely be assumed that the Internet now constitutes a rich environment for language 
Phil Benson Commenting to Learn 
 
Language Learning and Technology 89 
and intercultural learning, we currently lack evidence on how exactly this learning takes place in specific 
Internet settings. The aim of this exploratory study is to go beyond this assumption by exploring evidence 
of language and intercultural learning in comments on YouTube videos. Adopting an interactional 
perspective on learning, the study is methodologically oriented and mainly concerned with how tools for 
the analysis of interactional discourse can be employed to dig out evidence of learning in this context. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
The theoretical framework for this study is based on three assumptions. First, if evidence of learning is to 
be found among YouTube comments, it is likely to be evidence of interactional learning. Second, the 
relationships between YouTube videos and comments, and among comments, are interactional 
relationships. Third, translanguaging in YouTube videos, a product of media globalization, acts as a 
trigger for language and intercultural learning in comments. 
Learning and Interaction 
The idea that learning is allied to interaction is central to a range of perspectives on language learning, 
which have variously been termed constructivist, sociocultural, learner-centred, communicative, 
collaborative, cooperative, and dialogic. These perspectives share the view that the cognitive processes 
involved in learning are stimulated and supported by communicative interaction and, in stronger versions, 
that cognition is embodied in interaction (Edwards, 2006; Potter & Molder, 2005). Heritage (2005), for 
example, examines how various uses of the particle oh signal that a speaker “has undergone some kind of 
change of state in his or her locally current state of knowledge, information, orientation or awareness” 
(p.188). For Heritage, this change-of-state token does not simply express a cognitive change that precedes 
it; instead, the change is embedded in and inseparable from the utterance in which it is embedded.  
For Jenks (2010), language learning is also a “social-interactional accomplishment” (p.160). One strand 
of research that has pursued this line of argument has used discourse analysis tools to target “learners’ 
active negotiation for meaning in the process of communication as a vehicle for L2 learning” (Mackey, 
2007, p. 2). These studies have focused largely on opportunities for learning in repair, corrective feedback 
and focus on form episodes, arguing that acquisition of new language occurs when learners negotiate 
problems in communication. Another strand of research has used conversation analysis in microanalyses 
of interaction, often collected in classrooms, in which speakers display positive evidence of learning 
(Seedhouse & Walsh, 2010). These studies have focused on the acquisition of language forms, 
interactional and pragmatic development, and the development of social practices.  
Seedhouse (2005) observed that technology-based interaction was a likely growth area for conversation 
analysis research on language teaching and learning, but questioned how far conversation analysis 
principles could be applied in this area. Jenks (2014) has pursued this line of inquiry in a study of voice 
chat interaction, while several studies of online chat have applied discourse and conversation analysis 
methodologies to investigate learning in online text chat (Tudini, 2007). Tudini’s work is especially 
interesting in this context, because it points to a broader view of negotiation for meaning in online 
interactions that involves both language and culture. Noting that most negotiation for meaning studies 
have focused on acquisition of linguistic forms in repair sequences, Tudini examined how broader 
intercultural issues act as negotiation triggers in online chat between learners and native speakers of 
Italian. Her analysis identified, for example, negotiation for meaning episodes that were prompted by 
gaps in vocabulary knowledge, which could be recoded as negotiations over intercultural knowledge. 
Moreover, these episodes often occurred outside the context of interactional repair. 
As Larsen-Freeman (2004) has observed in a commentary on conversation analysis research on language 
learning: “Saying that something has been learned, saying what has been learned, when it has been 
learned, and the reason it has been learned are big challenges for all SLA researchers” (p. 606). 
Interaction can be seen as one way in which learning is brought into “public view” (Kasper, 2009, p. 11). 
Phil Benson Commenting to Learn 
 
Language Learning and Technology 90 
Most discourse and conversation analysis studies to date have taken one of two routes leading from 
observable interaction to learning: either using microanalysis to identify moments of cognition in short 
interactional sequences (Heritage 2005), or by tracking, over time, the development of linguistic 
knowledge and skills over a series of interactional episodes (Markee, 2008). In both cases, there appears 
to be an assumption that learning involves a change of cognitive state, in which a specific individual 
learns something specific at a specific moment in time. However, if we assume that interactional learning 
processes also take place below the level of observation in discourse, there may well be value in 
approaches that evaluate broader orientations toward learning in larger data sets.  
An earlier study of YouTube comments on a fan-subbed video of a Chinese song with English subtitles 
written by the uploader (Benson & Chan, 2010), for example, identified four prominent topics in the 
comments: (a) accuracy of translations, (b) correct language forms, (c) cultural connotations of language, 
and (d) language learning and teaching. While it was difficult to say exactly who had learned exactly 
what, there was, nevertheless, a clear orientation toward learning in the data as a whole. In a later section 
of this paper, I hope to show how microanalysis can be valuable in demonstrating how learning takes 
place in a short sequence of YouTube comments. The framework proposed in the next section, however, 
is designed more to evaluate the likelihood that learning is taking place in a particular set of online data. 
From this perspective, learning is viewed as a process that potentially occurs in the context of information 
exchange and negotiation for meaning. The proposed framework is based on exchange structure (Sinclair 
& Coulthard, 1975), interactional acts involving information exchange (Stenström, 1994), and stance 
taking (Jaffe, 2009). It is selected in order to allow coding of an entire data set, which can provide a 
context for microanalysis of interactional episodes within the data. 
YouTube and Interaction 
One trajectory in computer-mediated communication research has involved investigating how online 
written discourse is both similar to and different from spoken discourse (Herring, 1999; Jenks, 2014). The 
similarities lie mainly in the sequential organisation of turns and exchanges. These similarities allow 
researchers to use tools designed for the analysis of spoken interaction to investigate the differences, 
which lie mainly in disruptions to the turn-taking system caused by asynchronous sequences of 
interaction. Studies of this kind have been carried out in two broad contexts: (a) asynchronous messaging 
systems, in which messages are, in principle, displayed in the sequences in which they are posted, and (b) 
newsgroup or discussion forum systems in which messages are arranged in the form of topically related 
threads. While text-messaging systems are designed to emulate the turn-taking system of spoken 
interaction, however imperfectly, newsgroup systems are not designed for this purpose, although several 
recent studies have described them as “conversational” (Marcoccia, 2004; Paolillo, 2011).   
YouTube is an online service, officially launched in late 2005, which allows registered users to upload 
video clips for viewing by the general population of Internet users. Each video is displayed on its own 
page, which contains a number of elements including a space below the video in which registered users 
can enter written comments. Registered users can also reply to other users’ comments. At first sight, the 
patterns observed in YouTube comments appear to differ considerably from spoken interaction. Herring 
(2013) has described them as being “prompt-focused”, in that they “respond to an initial prompt, such as a 
news story, a photo, or a video, more often than to other users’ responses” (p. 13). In an analysis of 
YouTube comments, Herring found that responses to other users’ comments were infrequent, which 
meant that the extended “step-wise” (p. 13) (step by step) patterns of digression away from an initiated 
topic that were observed in online chat were largely absent. Other studies, however, have found YouTube 
comments to be more interactional. Bou-Franch, Lorenzo-Dus, and Blitvich (2012) found underlying 
patterns of turn-design carried over from face-to-face conversation in their data and argued that, 
“YouTube polylogues are sufficiently connected so as to constitute a space for online interaction rather 
than a series of disconnected comments” (p. 515). Boyd (2014) also found that most YouTube comments 
were part of “multi-participant, asynchronous ‘conversations’ with other YouTube users” (p. 47). 
Phil Benson Commenting to Learn 
 
Language Learning and Technology 91 
The analytical frameworks used in these studies are all broadly compatible with Sinclair and Coulthard’s 
(1975) understanding of exchange structure as being minimally constituted by a first turn containing an 
Initiation (I) move and a second turn containing a Response (R) move. One of the questions that arises 
from them, however, concerns the position of the YouTube video in the interactional scheme of things. 
Should it be considered as external to any interaction that takes place within the comments, such that 
comments would only be considered interactional if they respond to other comments? Or should the video 
be treated as an I move that begins a series of interactions, such that comments would be interactional if 
they respond either to other comments or to the video? While Herring’s (2013) approach appears to 
assume the former, Adami (2009, p. 395) makes a move in the latter direction, when she suggests that text 
comments, like video responses, emerge from “participants’ interest-driven exploitation of the prompts 
offered by the initial video”. Sindoni (2013) adopts a similar view by positing a “multimodal relevance 
maxim” (p. 205) for YouTube comments, which states that comments need to be “consistent with the 
main communicative focus of multimodal interaction and the most salient semiotic resource: the 
foregrounded video” (p. 180). Both of these approaches suggest that YouTube comments are not simply 
comments on, but responses to YouTube videos. 
Media Globalization and Translanguaging 
Combined with an interactional view of learning, an interactional view of YouTube helps explain how 
YouTube comments can involve learning. The idea of translanguaging is the third element in the 
theoretical framework for this study, which, together with the idea of media globalization, helps explain 
how YouTube comments come to involve language and intercultural learning. Media globalization refers 
to the commercial and social practices through which mass media products and services are increasingly 
designed for global distribution and operation. Over the past decade, this has been especially apparent in 
the development of social media such as Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube. In the case of YouTube it 
takes the forms of an ideology of global community (YouTube describes itself as “a forum for people to 
connect, inform, and inspire others across the globe.” YouTube, 2014a) and a localization strategy, 
initiated when YouTube was taken over by Google in 2006. This strategy involves the development of 
multiple language interfaces and locally-based services around the world (Hollis, 2008), which means that 
YouTube is now able to claim that it is localized in 61 countries and across 61 languages and that 80% of 
its traffic comes from outside the US (YouTube, 2014b). The rapid global expansion of YouTube has 
undoubtedly contributed much to the spread of English-language media, such as news services, television 
shows, and popular music, but media globalization is a multi-directional process that also makes media in 
languages other than English more widely available. One important effect of the global expansion of 
YouTube has been the development of video genres involving translanguaging that exploit the fluidity 
with which YouTube now handles communication across language and cultural divides. 
Translanguaging is a recent term that is both difficult to define and difficult to separate from competing 
terms such as translingual practice (Canagarajah, 2013) and polylanguaging (Jørgensen, Karrebæk, 
Madsen & Møller, 2011). García and Li Wei (2014) define translanguaging as an approach to 
bilingualism that treats bilinguals’ languages “not as two autonomous language systems as has been 
traditionally the case, but as one linguistic repertoire with features that have been societally constructed as 
belonging to two separate languages” (p. 2). The term is used here to cover a range of practices that 
involve moving between or across languages, including code-switching, multi-party conversations in 
which more than one language is used, activities such as watching a subtitled movie, and various kinds of 
multilingual language play (García, 2009).  
In this study, videos involve translanguaging when both Chinese and English are used or when the use of 
English or Chinese as a second language becomes a focus of attention. In earlier YouTube-based studies 
translanguaging was identified in a Chinese music video that had been fansubbed in English (Benson & 
Chan, 2010) and in English language performances by singers who were better known for performing in 
Thai and Japanese (Benson, 2013). In both cases, translanguaging in the video appeared to trigger 
Phil Benson Commenting to Learn 
 
Language Learning and Technology 92 
comments that addressed issues of language and culture. High frequencies of comments on language and 
culture have also been observed in comments on Eurovision song contest entries (Ivković, 2013) and on a 
video of a speech made in English at a UNESCO meeting by a high-level Nepali minister (Sharma, 2014). 
Translanguaging in YouTube appears to attract speakers and learners of the languages concerned, from 
locations around the world, to spaces in which comment on relevant issues of language and culture is the 
order of the day. 
The notions of translanguaging and media globalization are, thus, important to this study in helping to 
explain how communication is directed toward topics of language and culture within the interactional 
framework of the YouTube video and its comments, and potentially toward language and intercultural 
learning. The aim of this study is to understand how this process works in practice, through a more 
systematic analysis of comments on videos involving Cantonese-English and Mandarin Chinese-English 
translanguaging. 
METHODOLOGY 
The study reported in this paper is both exploratory and methodologically oriented. It sets out to explore 
evidence of language and intercultural learning in comments on media-sharing web sites and is especially 
concerned with the role of discourse analysis tools in such investigations. There are two basic options for 
exploring learning in online settings: either to track the behaviour of individuals longitudinally [e.g., 
Black’s (2008) study of a Chinese English language learner’s activity on a fan fiction web site], or to 
examine records of activity on web sites cross-sectionally [e.g., Benson & Chan’s (2010) study of 
comments on a single YouTube video]. The longitudinal aspect of the former approach means that it is an 
apt approach for showing evidence of learning within individuals. A cross-sectional approach is valuable, 
therefore, mainly in showing the degree to which particular kinds of online discourses are likely to 
involve interactional learning and, through microanalysis, the processes that might be involved in 
particular instances. 
Data Collection 
The aim of data collection was to build a data set of videos involving a variety of forms of Chinese-
English translanguaging. The languages involved were limited to Mandarin Chinese, Cantonese and 
English translanguaging in accordance with the location of the study in Hong Kong and the language 
competencies of the researcher and research assistant. An extensive search was conducted, beginning with 
videos that were well known in Hong Kong and then, following a snowball sampling procedure, working 
through related/suggested videos displayed on the right-hand side of the YouTube page. Kavoori (2011) 
refers to distinctive YouTube video genres, or “relatively stable forms of storytelling” (p. 11), 
corresponding to the genres of film and television. These genres orient viewers to the kind of television 
show or film they are watching, and, in the context of YouTube, the kinds of comments that are expected. 
While translanguaging videos could be thought of as a genre, we also found it helpful to categorize the 
videos in the data set into 10 distinct genres of translanguaging. In each genre, the videos that had 
attracted the most comments were retained for analysis: a single video if the number of comments was 
500 or above, or several videos with a combined total of 500 comments or above (Appendix A). The total 
number of comments was 8,850. The aim of this procedure was to construct a data set that would be large 
enough for patterns to emerge, but not too large for manual coding. By selecting videos from different 
genres, we hoped to avoid bias from one particular genre. 
Data Analysis 
The first step in the data analysis was to extract comments that were related to issues of language or 
culture raised by the video from the total of 8,850, which left 2,840 comments for more detailed analysis. 
The discarded comments were mainly those that simply praised or criticized the video (e.g. “cool video!”, 
“LOLZ”, “this sucks!”) and those that included comments that referred to the personal appearance or 
Phil Benson Commenting to Learn 
 
Language Learning and Technology 93 
qualities of participants in the videos, the quality of the video production, and so on. These 2,840 
comments were then coded according to Sinclair and Coulthard’s (1975) exchange structure framework 
and Stenström’s (1994) taxonomy of interactional acts (for more detailed discussion of the use of these 
tools in analysis of YouTube data, see Benson, 2015) and three categories of stance marking (DuBois, 
2007; Jaffe, 2009; Myers, 2010). Finally, a number of microanalyses of short interactional episodes in 
which evidence of learning was apparent were carried out, one of which is discussed in detail in the final 
section of the findings. In each phase, the author and the project research assistant, Ada Fong, carried out 
coding independently of each other with inter-rater reliability coefficients of 95% or greater. More details 
of the procedures involved in these phases of analysis are provided in the sections that follow. 
FINDINGS 
Language and Culture-related Comments 
The 2,840 language-and-culture-related comments that we analyzed represent 32% of the total number of 
comments in the data (8,850), ranging from 18 to 58% across the 10 genres. This suggests that genre may 
have an impact on the proportion of language-and-culture-related comments, although this influence 
seems to be compounded by factors particular to individual videos. The genre with the lowest proportion, 
Chinese speaker singing in English, is represented by a single video by a popular female Cantonese 
singer. The large quantity of comments on the singer herself largely explains the low proportion of 
language-and-culture-related comments on this video, which were, nevertheless, frequent (the fourth 
highest in the data). Nevertheless, the more general observation can be made that translanguaging in 
videos does trigger comments on language and cultural issues. Such comments are infrequent, for 
example, on videos in which the same artist sings in Cantonese and there is no translanguaging. The 
frequency of language-and-culture-related comments in this data set, therefore, provides initial evidence 
that a proportion of commenters orient towards these videos as texts that have something to say about 
language and culture that is worth responding to. 
In this context, it is worth noting that it may not be immediately obvious that all of the genres in the data 
were, in fact, transparently language-and-culture-related. For example, in three of the genres, Chinese-
speaking celebrities simply speak or sing in English. But by commenting on language competence and the 
cultural implications of a Chinese-speaker using English or Chinese in a particular situation, commenters 
highlight the sense in which the video involves translanguaging, which becomes an emerging property of 
YouTube pages as language-and-culture-related comments accumulate.  
Extract 1. Tang Wei in Cannes 
A: To be honest she's speaking neither British nor American accent. It's still very PRC-ish, but it's 
great enough. There's no need to imitate any accent just to make yourself sound professional. 
B: I cann't agree more, accent does not matter, Elegance matters 
An English-language interview with Chinese actress Tang Wei at the Cannes Film Festival, for example, 
may not appear to be an example of translanguaging at first viewing, but it becomes so through 
comments, such as those in Extract 1, that focus on her language use and its appropriateness to her social 
and cultural status.  
Exchange Structure 
Sinclair and Coulthard’s (1975) framework identifies a hierarchy of nested units—transaction, exchange, 
move, and act—in the organization of spoken interaction. An exchange minimally consists of two moves, 
an Initiation (I) and a Response (R). Furthermore, exchanges can either be prolonged by intervening 
moves (Stenström, 1994) or chained together in topically related sequences. In this study, exchange 
Phil Benson Commenting to Learn 
 
Language Learning and Technology 94 
structure coding preceded coding of interactional acts, which stand below moves in the exchange 
structure hierarchy. While stronger evidence of an orientation to learning arises from coding of 
interactional acts, some brief comments can also be made on exchange structure.  
As noted earlier, in this analysis a YouTube video can be considered as a complex I move. This means 
that first comments (i.e. those that are not posted in response to another comment) can realize four move 
types. Table 1 illustrates these with comments related to an English language interview with the four 
members of the Taiwanese pop group F4.  
Table 1. Move Types in First Comments (F4 CNN Interview Talkasia) 
Move Example Frequency 
R dang! he got good english!! 1561 (79%) 
R/I dont those other 2 member of f4 know english?  
408 
 
R+I really? jerry can speak english now? thats great. this vid is really awesome.. (21%) 
I Yep Jerry should learn english I would like hearing him speaking english  
Table 1 shows that most first comments in the data (79%) are R moves that respond to a video and 
terminate the exchange. However, first comments may also include an I move that prospects a response in 
one of three ways: (a) R/I is a single move that both responds to the video and initiates a new exchange 
(Coulthard, 1985, p. 135); (b) R+I consists of an R move followed by an I move; (c) I is a move that is 
usually topically related to the video but not a direct response to it. Comments that contained I moves 
constituted 21% of first comments in the data. Most of these comments were followed by R, R/I, or R+I 
moves, producing a sequence of two exchanges that included the video and two comments. These 
exchange sequences could be extended by further R/I or R+I moves or terminated by an R move. 
Exchange sequences could also be developed by multiple responses to a single I move. The data included 
408 exchange sequences beginning with the video and containing two or more comments, which 
accounted for 1,279 comments, or 45% of the total number analyzed. The average number of comments 
in these sequences was approximately three.  
Although exchange structure analysis provides little or no evidence of learning as such, the presence of 
exchange sequences does give some indication of the richness of the interactional environment (Herring, 
2013). Prolonged exchange sequences point to negotiation for meaning, while a prevalence of simple I 
(video) R (comment) exchanges, points to more superficial engagement. It also points to two interactional 
contexts in which evidence for learning might be found: one related to what viewers learn from the video 
(i.e. IR exchanges), and the other related to negotiation for meaning among commenters (i.e. exchange 
sequences). One observation that can be made is that the data in this study appear to exemplify the 
“stepwise” topic development that Herring (2013) failed to find in YouTube comments, and to support 
studies that have argued for their interactional character (Bou-Franch et al., 2012; Boyd, 2014). It can also 
be noted that there were very few exchange sequences among the comments that were unrelated to 
language or culture. It may well be the case that the interactional character of YouTube comments 
emerges more strongly when analysis is limited to comments that engage with the substantive content of 
the video they are commenting on. 
Interactional Analysis: Acts 
A move may consist of one or more acts, which signal(s) “what the speaker intends, what s/he wants to 
communicate” (Stenström, 1994, p. 30). Discussing the meaning of an “act” of speaking as an 
“exchange”, Halliday (1994) constructs a two-by-two matrix based on two distinctions: “speech role” 
(giving or receiving) and the “commodity exchanged (goods and services or information)” (pp. 68–9). 
Phil Benson Commenting to Learn 
 
Language Learning and Technology 95 
According to Halliday, all acts fundamentally involve giving or receiving either goods and services or 
information. It is reasonable to assume that interactions that involve learning will primarily involve 
information exchange, where information is broadly understood as something that is told.  
Stenström’s (1994) taxonomy of interactional acts identifies primary, secondary and complementary acts. 
Primary acts can realize moves on their own, while secondary and complementary acts usually 
accompany primary acts. Some primary acts encode Halliday’s (1994) distinction between exchange of 
information and exchange of goods and services. Question and Answer, for example, are clearly 
identifiable with information exchange, while Request and Accept/Reject are clearly identifiable with 
exchange of goods and services. In a relatively small number of cases, primary acts realize both types of 
exchanges (e.g., Thank). Some secondary/complementary acts are also associated with information 
exchange either directly (e.g., Uptake) or indirectly when they accompany an informational primary act 
(e.g., Expand and Justify following Evaluate, Opine or Inform).  
As a means of exploring evidence for learning in the data, we decided to code exchanges for acts 
involving information exchange. More than 98% of the acts in the data were coded using a sub-set of 21 
informational primary acts and 11 secondary/complementary acts involving information (Appendix B). 
As the coded comments had already been identified as language-and-culture-related, this signified a 
prevalence of acts that realized information exchange on issues of language and culture. Table 2 lists the 
most frequent primary and secondary/complementary acts, on which several comments can be made. 
Table 2. Frequency of Primary and Secondary/Complementary Informational Acts 
Primary acts Frequency Secondary/Complementary Acts Frequency 
Opine 778 Expand 606 
Evaluate 626 React (uptake) 216 
Challenge 325 Uptake 163 
Question 207 Qualify 113 
Agree 184 Justify 100 
Inform 167 Quote 98 
Answer 148   
Query 137   
Object 100   
Disagree 78   
Evaluate (626) is the second most frequent act in the data and especially frequent in R moves that praise 
or criticize a video. While this is the archetypal YouTube comment (an expanded form of using the like or 
dislike buttons), Evaluates that respond to language-and-culture-related aspects of a video give an 
indication of what commenters orient toward and, perhaps, learn from videos. They are also often 
involved in R/I and R+I moves that lead to counter-evaluations and negotiation for meaning sequences.  
This is illustrated in Extract 2, where A’s Evaluate in response to singer Jacky Cheung’s use of English in 
a CNN interview potentially terminates the exchange, but becomes an R/I move when it receives a 
response. 
 
 
Phil Benson Commenting to Learn 
 
Language Learning and Technology 96 
 
Extract 2. Jacky Cheung CNN TalkAsia Interview 2004-11-20 
A: his english is so bad lol R/I Evaluate 
B: Actually it is pretty good, considering how seldom he speaks English. 
He articulates the words quite clearly (no subtitles required) and uses 
some nice expressions. I think he probably needs a little more time to 
think in Cantonese, then translate the thoughts into English, and hence 
the ums and ahs. That's the way it is with those who do not use the 
language daily. At least I empathise with him. I'll fare much worse if I 
were asked to attend an interview in Cantonese. 
R+I Object + Justify 
Opine + Expand 
 
Opine + Expand 
Opine is the most frequent act (728) in the data, and is similar to Inform (167) in that it adds information 
to an interaction. Unless they respond to a Question or Query, these acts realize I moves and in first 
comments they are usually found in R/I and R+I moves, where the R is an Evaluate. Opine/Inform acts 
largely account for the new information that commenters add to a page, which potentially becomes 
available as a resource for learning. In this sense, Evaluate + Opine/Inform comments drive interaction 
beyond simple I (video) R (comment) exchanges into more complex interactional territory. 
Question (207), Challenge (325), Agree (184), Answer (148), Query (137), Object (100), and Disagree 
(78) acts are highly interactional and are largely found in second comments (e.g., the Object that begins 
B’s comment in Extract 2), although some also realize R/I and R+I moves in first comment responses to 
videos such as the R/I [Question] move in Table 1, “dont those other 2 member of f4 know english?”. The 
frequency of these acts is indicative of the degree to which Opine/Inform acts lead to further interaction. 
Collectively, they are more frequent than the Opine/Inform acts, which points to an orientation to 
negotiation for meaning in the data. 
Expand (606), Qualify (113) and Justify (100) mainly elaborate on Evaluate, Opine and Inform moves as 
shown in the Justify that follows B’s Object and the first and second Expands that follow the Opines in 
Extract 2. The presence of these acts shows how commenters substantiate, account for and modulate 
knowledge claims and their frequency provides some evidence of depth of engagement in negotiation for 
meaning episodes.  
The frequency of Uptake (163), React (uptake) (216), and Quote (98) provides evidence of commenters 
explicitly linking comments to information from a video or preceding comment. Uptake is used in a 
similar way to its description in Stenström’s (1994) taxonomy (“Accepts what was said and leads on”), 
but React (uptake) and Quote call for some explanation. React signals an emotional attitude and usually 
takes the form of exclamations, emoticons, or expressive punctuation placed at the end of a move. React 
(uptake) refers to a subset of React acts that are typically placed at the beginning of a comment and signal 
uptake (e.g. “dang! he got good english!!”, as in Table 1). Quote also signals uptake, in that the 
commenter either refers to a time code on a video, quotes something from the video, or copies words from 
a preceding comment. The frequency of these acts again provides evidence of an orientation to 
negotiation for meaning. 
Stance Taking 
Jaffe (2009, p. 1) defines stance taking as “taking up a position with respect to the form or the content of 
one’s utterance”, which for Myers (2010) “does not just involve having an opinion on a topic; it involves 
using that opinion to align with or disalign with someone else” (p. 264). Stance taking is, in this sense, a 
public interactional act (DuBois, 2007) that signals orientation to a speaker’s or a hearer’s cognitive state. 
In his study of stance taking in blog posts, Myers (2010) examined three main markers of stance: (a) 
Phil Benson Commenting to Learn 
 
Language Learning and Technology 97 
cognitive verbs (I think, I feel, it seems, etc.), (b) adverbs (definitely, really, actually, etc.), and (c) 
conversational particles (hey, uhm, huh, etc.).  
In this study, stance refers to the use of language and discourse markers to signal three kinds of 
orientation toward one’s own or others’ interactional acts, which are related to (a) cognitive activity, (b) 
status of knowledge, and (c) sources of evidence. Cognitive activity is signalled mainly through the use of 
cognitive verbs but also through references to something having been learned, explained, taught, etc. 
Status of knowledge is signalled by adverbs such as definitely, really and actually, and also by adverbials 
such as to be honest or if I am not mistaken, and phrases such as you are right/wrong. Sources of evidence 
are signalled by references to the YouTube video or earlier comments, as hearsay (something that the 
commenter has read, heard or been told), or by reference to first or third person experience. 
Conversational particles (Myers, 2010) were not coded as stance-taking markers in this study as they had 
already been coded as Uptake acts. Coding for stance, thus, captured interactional aspects of the data that 
were not directly realized as moves or acts.  
Table 3. Frequency of stance markers 
Markers Frequency 
Cognitive activity 835 
Status of knowledge 330 
Sources of evidence 64 
Table 3 lists the frequency of the three types of stance-taking markers, which are especially frequent in 
longer comments. In Extract 2, for example, A’s short comment “his english is so bad lol” contains no 
stance markers (which might in itself indicate a stance of certainty), while B’s longer comment includes 
four: (“Actually”, “I think”, “probably”, and “At least”) (see also the frequency of stance markers in 
Extract 3). Lack of space precludes a fuller discussion of this aspect of the data. In brief, frequency of 
stance markers signals the degree to which commenters orient to commenting as a cognitive activity, in 
which information is a negotiable commodity. In this data set, commenters frequently make reference to 
cognitive activity as well as to the status of their knowledge and often modulate their claims. References 
to sources of evidence, on the other hand, are much less frequent, which may reflect the on-the-fly 
character of commenting, which presumably takes place most often during, or in the few seconds after, 
watching a video. 
MICROANALYSIS: A WORKED EXAMPLE 
The findings reported so far suggest that YouTube videos that involve translanguaging create 
environments for comment on language and culture that are rich in terms of information exchange and 
negotiation of meaning. Macroanalysis of a data set at this level points to the likelihood that learning is 
taking place. Identifying evidence of learning and learning processes, however, depends on close 
examination, or microanalysis, of particular interactional sequences. Extract 3 draws together the three 
types of coding discussed in this paper (exchange structure, interactional acts, and stance marking) in a 
microanalysis of one sequence of comments on an English-fansubbed music video of a Mandarin Chinese 
song Fa Ru Xue (Hair Like Snow) by the popular Taiwanese artist Jay Chou. Like many commenters on 
this video, A refers to the difficulty of understanding both the song, with its allusions to classical Chinese 
literature, and the English translation of it. Translanguaging in the video takes the form of the display of 
English subtitles in time with the song and in parallel with the Chinese subtitles on the original video. 
Extract 3 illustrates how this translanguaging creates a context in which comments on language and 
culture emerge. It also shows clear evidence of A’s learning across the sequence of comments. 
Phil Benson Commenting to Learn 
 
Language Learning and Technology 98 
 
 
Extract 3. Jay Chou - Fa Ru Xue [Snow-Like Hair] (English Subtitles) 
  Stance markers* Moves Acts 
1 A: Honestly can someone tell me the meaning of this 
song. The English subtitles is no help bc it makes no 
sense at all. Great video n music singing, but i am so 
confuse of the music video n the lyrics. =) 
I Preface + Question 
Evaluate + Expand + React 
2 B: i think this song is represented of eternal love since 
then most of the lyrics talk about being with the 
person 
R/I Answer + Justify 
3 C: well, going through all these comments helped a 
little. But thanks too. =) 
R+I Uptake + Acknowledge + 
React Thank + React 
4 A: well, that explains a little. Thanks! R+I Uptake + Acknowledge 
Thank + React 
5 D: I'm not really sure but i think he's trying to say that 
he'll love her even if she turns old and her hair is 
white as snow. like eternal love 
R/I Preface + Object + Expand 
6 A: Now that sounds a little better; it explains about her 
hair like snow. Lol Thanks 
R+I Uptake + Acknowledge + 
Expand React + Thank 
Note: *Italicized font = cognitive activity; bolded font = status of knowledge; underlined = sources of knowledge 
The coding for interactional structure and acts shows that A’s first comment is an I move that poses a 
Question to other commenters that is topically related to translanguaging in the video. This is followed by 
B’s Answer, which is coded as R/I because it responds to A’s Question and contributes new information, 
which receives a response from A and also from new participants, C and D. A and C Acknowledge B’s 
Answer and offer Thanks (R+I). A fourth commenter, D, then enters with an R/I move that casts doubt on 
B’s explanation (Query) and proposes an alternative (Object). Lastly, A’s third comment (R+I) 
Acknowledges D’s comment and offers Thanks. At this level of analysis it is notable that the interaction 
is relatively complex, with four commenters contributing six comments, each one containing an I move. 
This structure drives the interaction forward, initially through A’s Question, but also by the three Thank 
acts, which receive no direct response, but nevertheless encourage further contributions. This is also 
evident in the analysis of secondary/complementary acts. In Comments 3, 4, and 6 there is explicit 
evidence of Uptake of information from previous turns, which is also implicit in the Query that begins 
Comment 5. The Expand and Justify acts in Comments 1, 2, 5, and 6 signal cognitive engagement, while 
the Reacts in Comments 1, 3, 4, and 6 signal affective engagement. 
The coding for stance shows, first, that stance markers are frequent: 13 in six comments. Reflecting the 
pattern in the data set as a whole, five references to cognitive activity and six to status of knowledge are 
more frequent than references to two sources of evidence. The markers of cognitive activity refer to the 
commenters’ own cognition (B and D both use i think), but markers in A’s comments also request 
cognitive activity from others (can someone tell me the meaning) and acknowledge receipt of information 
(that explains, it explains). Also interesting in A’s comments is the combining of status of knowledge 
markers with markers of cognitive activity. In Comment 1, A refers to status of knowledge no less than 
three times (Honestly, it makes no sense at all, I am so confuse) in an appeal for explanation. In 
Comment 4, we see that B’s response explains a little, and, lastly, in Comment 6, that D’s comment 
Phil Benson Commenting to Learn 
 
Language Learning and Technology 99 
sounds a little better because it explains specifically about “hair like snow”, which is the key to the 
meaning of the song.  
In this sequence of comments, there is clear evidence of A’s learning, in so far as such evidence can be 
inferred from records of interaction. Comments 1, 4, and 6 document A’s movement from a state of 
confusion, to understanding a little, to understanding a little bit more. Yet this transition is not only a 
matter of stance markers encoding A’s changing cognitive state. We can also see how multiple aspects of 
the sequence of exchanges are conducive to interactional engagement and negotiation for meaning. 
Translanguaging in the video, here, creates an interactional context in which questions about the language 
and cultural references of the song and its translation can be asked and answered. Moreover, A does not 
just learn in this sequence. A is taught by B and D, who are invited to participate in this process of 
interactional learning by the structuring of A’s comments.  
CONCLUSION 
The aim of this paper has been to attempt to move beyond general statements about the affordances of the 
present-day Internet for intercultural communication and foreign language learning by exploring how 
evidence of language and intercultural learning might be gathered in the specific online context of 
comments on YouTube videos. To summarize the findings, I would argue that the study has provided 
some evidence that translanguaging in YouTube videos (which can be considered an effect of media 
globalization and, specifically, the globalization strategies of YouTube) creates contexts in which 
commenters are apt to comment on issues of language and culture raised by the video. When comments 
on language and culture are analyzed separately from the comments as a whole, they are shown to be 
interactionally rich, and oriented towards negotiation exchange and information of meaning. This 
suggests that videos that involve translanguaging create environments in which interactional language and 
intercultural learning are likely to be observed. Direct evidence of such learning is more difficult to 
generate, just as it is in interactional analysis more generally, though I would argue that the microanalysis 
in the previous section comes as close to generating this kind of evidence as we are likely to come.  
One of the main limitations of this paper lies in its reliance on quantifying the frequency of interactional 
features that point to evidence of learning in a set of comments. The significance of the various 
frequencies is difficult to interpret, and especially so without reference to comparable data sets of the 
kinds that have been used in studies of the features of online discourse by, for example, Myers (2010) and 
Ivković (2013). Having acknowledged this limitation, I would want to re-emphasize that this study is both 
exploratory and methodologically oriented. If its findings have value, it is in pointing towards ways of 
using discourse analysis tools to evaluate evidence of language and intercultural learning in online 
discourse, rather than in demonstrating evidence of learning in the particular context of the YouTube 
videos and comments that have been analyzed. In this respect, the significance of the study probably lies 
in (a) pointing to translanguaging in videos, or media content on media-sharing sites more generally, as a 
stimulus to interactional learning around topics of language and culture, and (b) the potential for 
systematic analysis of exchange structure, interactional acts and stance marking to point to evidence of 
learning, both at the environmental level, in macroanalysis of large data sets, and at the 
individual/situational level, in microanalysis of shorter interactional sequences. 
This study points to a variety of areas for further research. These include the application of discourse 
analysis frameworks to uncover evidence of language and intercultural learning in other social media 
contexts: video-sharing services with different characteristics to YouTube, such as Vimeo and Vine, 
image sharing services such as Flickr and Instagram, and social networking services such as Facebook 
and Twitter. Areas that have been observed to be potentially significant in the YouTube data, which have 
only been touched on in this paper, include relationships between language and intercultural learning, 
translanguaging in the comments themselves, the importance of multimodality in the discourse as a 
whole, and the roles of pedagogy and informality in learning. A particularly important question concerns 
Phil Benson Commenting to Learn 
 
Language Learning and Technology 100 
the wider learning of those who read YouTube comments, but do not actively contribute texts of their 
own. While this question goes beyond the scope of the present study, research clearly needs to go beyond 
the learning of the participants in online interaction to consider those who might participate vicariously by 
reading their comments. The point that I want to conclude on, however, is that the impact of the 
globalization of social media on language and intercultural learning is something that we are just 
beginning to understand; if it is to prove a productive area for research, it is important that debate 
continues on methodologies for understanding interactional learning processes in a wide variety of online 
settings. 
 
 
APPENDIX A. Genres of videos involving English-Chinese translanguaging 
Genre Videos 
Chinese speaker interviewed 
in English 
汤唯戛纳英語訪談 [Tang Wei in Cannes] 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pMJHT3t4Pc4 
Zhang Ziyi MSN interview 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ycy1pxYLxdQ 
Jacky Cheung CNN TalkAsia Interview 2004-11-20 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ivYEi_1Avls 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tv_aeXpe-3g 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Db036fmfD-0 
F4 CNN interview talkasia 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QyBr2NlcMh4 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2NhVL1CXtJA 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tiXRQS0-G-U 
English speaker speaking 
Chinese 
White Norwegian Cantonese speaker 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vs5CWBXm-JA 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HC2E5t_08Gs 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N_Qi4svs5bE 
2 White guys talking Cantonese in a supermarket 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=afVp65cAqEk 
Chinese speaker teaching 
English 
英國人怎樣說「擦鞋仔」? [What do the British call ‘shoe shiners’?] 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=chQ7YiOWIH8 
English speaker teaching 
Chinese 
CHOK樣 - Cantonese Word of the Week! 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l-CfO16o6T0 
This is 屈機! - Cantonese Word of the Week! 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oXORo5fPk2U 
Chinese speaker singing in 
English 
連詩雅 Shiga - I'm still loving you (喜愛夜蒲電影主題曲) 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sfXGo_lCiS4 
Phil Benson Commenting to Learn 
 
Language Learning and Technology 101 
English speaker singing in 
Chinese  
美国人翻唱王力宏《你不知道的事》[American covers Leehom 
Wang's "Something you don't know"] 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=retS9qhsUx4 
British guy singing Mandarin Song [Qi Li Xiang] 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I6iAc6v5z90 
我不會喜歡你 陳柏霖翻唱 ～克麗絲叮 
[Christine covers Bo-Lin Chen's "I will not like you"] 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DKceNd3WOw4 
English speaker talking about 
Chinese culture 
Sexy Beijing: Lost in translation 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S3U5u3D2L9Q 
Language and Chinese rap 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JsZPFAjWysA 
English fansubbed song Jay Chou - Fa Ru Xue [Snow-Like Hair] (English Subtitles) 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uSZf4gxlmXw 
S.H.E’s Zhong Guo Hua [removed] 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-ceQcoeuA-8 
Jay Chou: Qian Li Zhi Wai/Faraway [English Subtitles] 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HIhLHMhIGGU 
Chinese speaker making a 
mistake in English on TV 
鄧麗欣英文程度連小學雞都不如：I am very thanks them 
[Stephy Tang's English is not primary school level] 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m511yqXe1qQ 
陳克勤: er...er...er...try our BREAST Gary Chan 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BQIhW4b5zSM 
Chinese speaker interviewed 
in English with interpreter 
Faye in CNN 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fR6RG9_2XmE 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VstEI_stCNcandfeature=relmfu 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bwIY7RmpM0k 
蔡依林英文访谈 [Jolin Tsai English interview] 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D-4YAifQ9Y4 
 
APPENDIX B. Taxonomy of informational acts used in data analysis (adapted from Stenström,1994) 
Primary acts 
1. Acknowledge Signals receipt of information 
2. Agree Expresses agreement 
3. Alert Calls the addressee’s attention 
4. Answer Responds to a questions with information 
5. Challenge* Challenges the addressee 
6. Check (clarify)** Asks for clarification 
7. Check (confirm)** Asks for confirmation 
8. Clarify** Responds to a request for clarification 
Phil Benson Commenting to Learn 
 
Language Learning and Technology 102 
9. Confirm** Responds to a request for confirmation 
10. Correct* Corrects the addressee’s statement 
11. Disagree Expresses disagreement 
12. Evaluate Judges what the previous speaker said 
13. Inform Provides information 
14. Object Signals a different opinion 
15. Opine Gives one’s personal opinion 
16. Praise* Praises the addressee 
17. Query Expresses doubt or strong surprise 
18. Question Asks for information 
19. Self-correct* Corrects own previous statement 
20. Suggest Puts forward an idea or a plan 
21. Thank Expresses gratitude 
Secondary/complementary acts 
22. Clue Follows a primary act and gives a hint 
23. Emphasize Underlines the primary act 
24. Expand Gives complementary information 
25. Identify* Identifies the commenter 
26. Justify Defends or explains the primary act 
27. Metacomment Comments on a current talk 
28. Preface Introduces a primary act 
29. Qualify* Qualifies the primary act 
30. Quote* Quotes from a previous turn 
31. React*** Expresses attitude and strong feelings 
32. Uptake Accepts what was said and leads on 
Notes: * Challenge, Correct, Praise, Self-correct, Identify, Qualify, and Quote were added to the taxonomy in the course of the 
study; ** Stenström includes only Check (Asks for clarification) and Confirm (Responds to a request for confirmation); *** 
Stenström lists React as a primary act. In this study it is reclassified as a secondary act and refers mainly to exclamations (e.g., 
Wow!, Cool!), abbreviations and emoticons (e.g., LOLZ, ^+^), and multiple punctuation marks (e.g., !!!!!, ????). When these 
occur at the beginning of a comment, they often signal uptake of information and are coded as React (uptake). 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This paper is based on a project funded by the Hong Kong Research Grants Council General Research 
Fund, entitled Informal Language Learning in Social Media Environments: A YouTube-based Study (Ref. 
No. 840211). I am grateful to Ada Fong for her invaluable assistance in collecting and analyzing data for 
this project. I am also grateful to David Barton and Carmen Lee for directing me to a section in Barton 
and Lee (2013) on stance taking, when I presented an earlier version of this paper at a conference they 
attended.  
 
Phil Benson Commenting to Learn 
 
Language Learning and Technology 103 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Phil Benson is Professor of Applied Linguistics at Macquarie University. His main research interests are 
in autonomy and language learning beyond the classroom, especially in the contexts of new digital media 
and popular culture. 
E-mail: philip.benson@mq.edu.au 
 
REFERENCES 
Adami, E. (2009). ‘We/YouTube’: Exploring sign-making in video-interaction. Visual Communication. 
8(4), 379–399. 
Barton, D., & Lee, C. (2013). Language online: Investigating digital texts and practices. London, UK: 
Routledge. 
Benson, P. (2013). English and identity in East Asian popular music. Popular Music 32(1), 23–33. 
Benson, P. (2015). YouTube as text: Spoken interaction analysis and digital discourse. In R. Jones, A. 
Chik, & C. Hafner (Eds.), Discourse and digital practices (pp. 81–96). London, UK: Routledge. 
Benson, P. & Chan, N. (2010). TESOL after YouTube: Fansubbing and informal language learning. 
Taiwan Journal of TESOL, 7(2), 1–23.  
Bou-Franch, P., Lorenzo-Dus, N., & Blitvich, P. G-C. (2012). Social interaction in YouTube text-based 
polylogues: A study of coherence. Journal of Computer-mediated Communication, 17, 501–521. 
Boyd, M. (2014). (New) participatory framework on YouTube? Commenter interaction in US political 
speeches. Journal of Pragmatics, 72, 46–58. 
Canagarajah, S. (2013). Translingual practice: Global Englishes and cosmopolitan relations. London, 
UK: Routledge. 
Coulthard, M. (1985). An introduction to discourse analysis. (2nd ed.). London, UK: Longman. 
Du Bois, J. W. (2007). The stance triangle. In R. Englebretson (Ed.), Stancetaking in discourse: 
Subjectivity, evaluation, interaction (pp.139–182). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Edwards, D. (2006). Discourse, cognition and social practices: The rich surface of language and social 
interaction. Discourse Studies. 8(1), 41–49. 
García, O. (2009). Education, multilingualism and translanguaging in the 21st century. In T. Skutnabb-
Kangas, R. Phillipson, A.K. Mohanty & M. Panda (Eds.), Social Justice through Multilingual Education 
(pp. 140–158). Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
García, O., & Li Wei. (2014). Translanguaging: Language bilingualism and education. Basingstoke, UK: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
Halliday, M. A. K. (1994). An Introduction to functional grammar. London, UK: Arnold. 
Heritage, J. (2005). Cognition in discourse. In H. T. Molder and J. Potter (Eds.), Conversation and 
Cognition (pp. 184–202). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.  
Herring, S. C. (1999). Interactional coherence in CMC. Journal of Computer-mediated Communication, 4 
(4). Retrieved from http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1083-6101.1999.tb00106.x/full 
Herring, S. C. (2013). Discourse in Web 2.0: Familiar, reconfigured, and emergent. In D. Tannen & A. M. 
Trester (Eds.), Discourse 2.0: Language and new media (pp. 1–25). Washington, DC: Georgetown 
Phil Benson Commenting to Learn 
 
Language Learning and Technology 104 
University Press. 
Hollis, N. (2008). The global brand: How to create and develop lasting brand value in the world. 
Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Ivković, D. (2013). The Eurovision Song Contest on YouTube: A corpus-based analysis of language 
attitudes. Language@Internet, 10. Retrieved from 
http://www.languageatinternet.org/articles/2013/Ivkovic 
Jaffe, A. (2009). Introduction: The sociolinguistics of stance. In A. Jaffe (Ed.), Stance: Sociolinguistic 
perspectives (pp. 3–28). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Jenks, C. (2010). Adaptation in online voiced-based chat rooms: implications for language learning in 
applied linguistics. In P. Seedhouse, S. Walsh, & C. Jenks (Ed.), Conceptualising 'learning' in applied 
linguistics (pp. 147–162). Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Jenks, C. (2014). Social interaction in second language chat rooms. Edinburgh, Scotland: Edinburgh 
University Press. 
Jørgensen, J. N., Karrebæk, M. S., Madsen, I. M., & Møller, J. S. (2011). Polylanguaging in 
superdiversity. Diversities, 13(2), 23–37 
Kasper, G. (2009). Locating cognition in second language interaction and learning: Inside the skull or in 
public view? International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching. 47, 11–36. 
Kavoori, A. (2011). Reading YouTube: The critical viewers guide. New York, NY: Peter Lang. 
Koutsogiannis, D., & Mitsikopoulou, B. (2004). The internet as a glocal discourse environment: A 
commentary on “Second language socialization in a bilingual chat room” by Wan Shun Eva Lam and 
“Second language cyberhetoric: A study of Chinese L2 writers in an online usenet group” by Joel Bloch. 
Language Learning and Technology. 8(3), 83–89. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num3/pdf/koutsogiannis.pdf 
Kramsch, C. (1998). Language and culture. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Kramsch, C. (2014). Teaching foreign languages in an era of globalization: An introduction. Modern 
Language Journal. 98(1), 296–311. 
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2004). CA for SLA? It all depends. Modern Language Journal, 88, 603–607. 
Mackey, A. (2007). The role of conversational interaction in second language acquisition. In A. Mackey 
(Ed.), Conversational interaction in second language acquisition (pp. 1– 26). Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press. 
Marcoccia, M. (2004). Online polylogues: Conversation structure and participation framework in Internet 
newsgroups. Journal of Pragmatics, 36, 115–145. 
Markee, N. (2008). Toward a learning behavior tracking methodology for CA-for-SLA. Applied 
Linguistics, 29(3), 404–427. 
Myers, G. (2010). Stance-taking and public discussion in blogs. Critical Discourse Studies, 7 (4), 263–
275. 
Paolillo, J. C. (2011). “Conversational” codeswitching on Usenet and Internet Relay Chat. 
Language@Internet, 8, 1–23. Retrieved from http://www.languageatinternet.org/articles/2011/Paolillo 
Potter, J. & Molder, H. T. (2005). Talking cognition: Mapping and making the terrain. In H. T. Molder & 
J. Potter (Eds.), Conversation and cognition (pp.1–54). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Seedhouse, P. (2005). Conversation analysis and language learning. Language Teaching. 38(4), 165–187. 
Phil Benson Commenting to Learn 
 
Language Learning and Technology 105 
Seedhouse, P., & Walsh, S. (2010). Learning a second language through classroom interaction. In P. 
Seedhouse, S. Walsh, & Jenks, C. (Eds.), Conceptualising 'learning' in applied linguistics (pp. 127–146). 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Sharma, B. K. (2014). On high horses: Transnational Nepalis and language ideologies on YouTube. 
Discourse, Context and Media, 4–5, 19–28. 
Sinclair, J. M., & Coulthard, M. (1975). Towards an analysis of discourse. Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press. 
Sindoni, M. G. (2013). Spoken and written discourse in online interactions: A multimodal approach. 
London, UK: Routledge. 
Stenström, A.-B. (1994). An introduction to spoken interaction. London, UK: Longman.  
Thorne, S. L. (2010). The ‘intercultural turn’ and language learning in the crucible of new media. In S. 
Guth & F. Helm (Eds.), Telecollaboration 2.0: Language, literacies and intercultural learning in the 21st 
century (pp. 139–164). Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Tudini, V. (2007). Negotiation and intercultural learning in Italian native speaker chat rooms. The Modern 
Language Journal. 91(4), 577–61. 
YouTube (2014a). About YouTube. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/yt/about/ 
YouTube (2014b). About YouTube. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/yt/press/statistics.html 
