Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/commentary.pdf 
February 2015, Volume 19, Number 1 
pp. 1–9 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
Contextualized Views of Practices and Competencies in CALL Teacher 
Education Research 
Nike Arnold, Portland State University1 
Lara Ducate, University of South Carolina 
While teachers play a central role in capitalizing on the potentials of computer assisted 
language learning (CALL), CALL teacher education overall still appears not to be 
adequate and effective (Healey et al., 2011; Hubbard, 2008). Furthermore, foreign/second 
language teachers have expressed a desire for more and better professional development 
opportunities in that area (Beaven, Emke, Ernest, Germain-Rutherford, Hampel, Hopkins, 
Stanojevic & Stickler, 2010; Digedu, 2014; Kessler, 2006). Given the continuing and new 
challenges for CALL teacher education, this special issue of Language Learning & 
Technology on CALL teacher education further speaks to its importance for our field and 
ultimately our students. To advance our understanding of CALL teacher education, the 
main goal for this issue is to move beyond research on teacher beliefs and attitudes to 
investigate actual practices and competencies, especially from a longitudinal perspective, 
that traces teachers’ development. The current issue brings together a collection of articles 
that represents a wide variety of contexts, formats, foci, and research methods. This 
variety is particularly important given the highly contextualized nature of teaching and 
learning (Freeman & Johnson, 1998) and the different needs of pre-service and in-service 
teachers (Beaven et al., 2010). 
Keywords: Teacher Education, Computer Assisted Language Learning 
APA Citation: Arnold, N., & Ducate, L. (2015). Contextualized views of practices and 
competencies in CALL teacher education research. Language Learning & Technology, 
19(1), 1–9. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/commentary.pdf 
Copyright: © Nike Arnold & Lara Ducate 
INTRODUCTION 
There is no doubt that technology has changed the educational landscape in subtle as well as profound 
ways. In addition to administrative and programmatic uses (e.g., student recruitment and retention, parent- 
teacher communication, high stakes testing), its impact can also be seen directly in the classroom. In a 
2014 survey of 620 K-12 teachers in the US, 90% of respondents reported that they and their students use 
technology in class (Digedu, 2014). But while technology has made its way into many classrooms, there 
is still room for growth. A majority of US K-12 teachers indicated a desire to make more use of 
instructional technology (Digedu, 2014). Furthermore, there seems to be a need to expand the ways in 
which it is used. The same survey reported mostly basic uses that seem like “digital replacement[s] for 
manual/non-digital formats” (Digedu, 2014, p. 6). There is similar unrealized potential in second and 
foreign language (L2) classrooms (Healey, Hanson-Smith, Hubbard, Ioannou-Georgiou, Kessler & Ware, 
2011). A recent survey of almost 1,300 US language teachers, for example, reported that technology 
remains infrequently used to engage learners in culture learning and interpersonal communication 
(American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages, 2011), an area where computer assisted 
language learning (CALL) can provide unique opportunities. 
Teachers play a central role in realizing these unique opportunities of CALL. In fact, they are “the 
lynchpin around which successful online learning events revolve” (Guichon & Hauck, 2011, p. 188). In 
addition to selecting which CALL applications will be used and how (Hubbard, 2008), teachers 
significantly shape the outcomes of CALL through their instructions, scaffolding, feedback and responses 
Arnold & Ducate Contextualized Views: CALL Teacher Education Resarch 
 
Language Learning & Technology 2 
to teachable moments. With teachers acting as such “pivotal players” (Hubbard, 2008, p. 176), it is 
particularly problematic that CALL teacher education overall is still not entirely adequate and effective. 
Although many in-service programs now address CALL, at least as a topic in a general methods course 
(American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages, 2011), this training often does not prepare 
teachers to successfully integrate CALL into their teaching practices (Healey et al., 2011; Hubbard, 
2008). In fact, teachers in general and L2 teachers in particular have expressed a desire for more and 
better professional development opportunities in that area (Beaven, Emke, Ernest, Germain-Rutherford, 
Hampel, Hopkins, Stanojevic & Stickler, 2010; Digedu, 2014; Kessler, 2006). 
The role of technology is now being recognized in several teacher education standards and frameworks, 
for example the European Profile for Language Teacher Education (Kelly, Grenfell, Allan, Kriza, 
McEvoy, 2004), the EPOSTL European Portfolio for Student Teachers of Foreign Languages (Newby, 
Allan, Fenner, Jones, Komorowska & Soghikyan, 2007) and ACTFL’s Program Standards for the 
Preparation of Foreign Language Teachers (American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages, 
2013). In addition, specific technology-focused standards have been developed, such as the TESOL 
Technology Standards (Healey et al., 2011) and the ISTE Standards (International Society for Technology 
in Education, 2008).  
Such standards can play an important role in teacher education (Murphy-Judy & Youngs, 2006). Besides 
acknowledging the pedagogical potential of CALL, they recognize that teaching with technology requires 
additional, even unique skills compared with teaching in face-to-face contexts (Comas-Quinn, 2011; 
Compton, 2009; Hampel & Stickler, 2005), as evidenced also by the TPACK (Technological Pedagogical 
Content Knowledge) framework (Graham, 2011). In fact, it even demands “a reconceptualising of the 
roles of both teacher and learner.” (Comas-Quinn, 2011, p. 230). 
Given the continuing and new challenges for CALL teacher education outlined above, this topic 
“continues to feature high on the CALL research agenda” (Guichon & Hauck, 2011, p. 187). This special 
issue of Language Learning & Technology on CALL teacher education further speaks to its importance 
for our field and ultimately our students. When all L2 teachers can create technology-rich and engaging 
learning environments, “social justice in the form of a more equitable dispersion of technology-related 
skills, knowledge, and attitude—major cultural capital in the 21st century—can emerge (Oxford & Jung, 
2007, p. 41). 
To advance our understanding of CALL teacher education, the main goal for this issue is to move beyond 
research on teacher beliefs and attitudes to investigate actual practices and competencies, especially from 
a longitudinal perspective, that traces teachers’ development. Such research can have important 
curriculum and program design implications.  
This issue brings together a collection of articles that represents a wide variety of contexts, formats, foci 
and research methods. Such variety is particularly important given the highly contextualized nature of 
teaching and learning (Freeman & Johnson, 1998) and the different needs of pre-service and in-service 
teachers (Beaven et al., 2010). In particular, this issue features the following articles: 
• In Supporting in-service language educators in learning to telecollaborate, Robert O’Dowd 
introduces an online platform designed to help educators develop the skills needed to implement 
telecollaboration projects. His interviews with four in-service teachers in multiple countries, who 
used this site, revealed that each struggled with different competencies. For such informal 
training, peer mentors proved to be particularly valuable. 
• Similar to telecollaboration, 3D virtual worlds have a steep learning curve for educators. ESL 
teacher training in 3D virtual worlds by Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven describes how six pre-
service ESL teachers in Canada, who used 3D virtual worlds with English learners from Turkey, 
engaged in collaboration and situated learning to develop five integrated skills related to the 
pedagogical implementation of this tool.  
Arnold & Ducate Contextualized Views: CALL Teacher Education Resarch 
 
Language Learning & Technology 3 
• Unlike Kozlova & Priven’s study with its focus on situated learning, Chin-chi Chao’s 
contribution Rethinking transfer: Learning from CALL teacher education as consequential 
transition focuses on the connections in-service teachers in Taiwan build between a CALL course 
and their teaching practice. Interviews eight months after the course showed that teachers had 
limited opportunities to apply what they had learned, in part because of a mismatch between 
course materials and teaching context. The teachers did, however, continue to critically reflect, 
which led to change in their practices. 
• Mei-Hui Liu and Robert Kleinsasser’s article, Exploring EFL teachers’ knowledge and 
competencies: In-service program perspectives, also focuses on in-service teachers of English as 
a foreign language in Taiwain, who participated in a TPACK-based professional development 
program. They traced the teachers’ self-efficacy and competencies over the course of a year and 
triangulated that data with the perspectives of students and administrators. 
• In her article From TPACK-in-action workshops to classrooms: CALL competency developed and 
integrated, Shu-Ju Diana Tai uses surveys, interviews and classroom observations to assess the 
effectiveness of a workshop for in-service teachers in Taiwan. Participants transformed the 
material from the workshops and were able to match tools’ affordances to their context. 
• In another article that examines teachers’ usage of affordances, Karen Haines’ Learning to 
identify and actualize affordances in a new tool reports on a 14-month long study of in-service 
teachers of Italian to examine how they view the affordances of wikis and blogs and how their 
perspectives change over time.  
• The final article in this special edition addresses a seldom discussed issue in the field of CALL, 
namely how to prepare students to use technology in ethical and legal ways. Teaching critical, 
ethical, and safe use of ICT to teachers by Sang-Keun Shin examines the efficacy of two training 
sessions for pre-service teachers in Korea. 
In this commentary, we will continue to discuss these seven articles in light of the following three themes: 
1) the impact of different types of CALL teacher training, 2) the development of teacher cognition (Borg, 
2003), and 3) reflective and collaborative formats of CALL teacher education.  These common themes 
emerged from the studies in this special issue but also connect with trends in the larger field of (CALL) 
teacher education. 
THEME 1: THE IMPACT OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF CALL TEACHER EDUCATION 
Formal CALL teacher education continues to play an important role in preparing teachers to incorporate 
technology into their classes. While even one course can positively influence pre-service teachers’ 
confidence and competencies (Desjardins & Peters, 2007), some studies question the efficacy of the 
single-course approach and call for more extensive training (Hegelheimer, 2006; Peters, 2006). 
Additional important curricular questions are: 1) On which tools should the course(s) focus since teachers 
do not always have access to the tools for which they receive training (Williams, Abraham, & 
Bostelmann, 2014)? and 2) How should this training be structured? Teacher educators have used a variety 
of approaches, such as project-based learning to combine theory and practice (Debski, 2006), distributed 
learning to help participants view CALL from the student and teacher perspective (Bauer-Ramazani, 
2006; Egbert, 2006), and portfolio-based learning (Van Olphen, 2007).  
But even multiple CALL courses are probably not sufficient in sustaining teachers’ CALL knowledge 
over their career (Kessler, 2006). This raises the important question of how to continue to support 
teachers (Cutrim Schmid, 2011; Kessler, 2006; Kessler & Bikowski, 2011).  In in-service contexts, for 
example, situated learning and informal training take on a bigger role. But while in-service teachers may 
be able to work in a self-directed manner to explore new tools, they do not always recognize all of the 
affordances of the new technology without assistance (Kessler, 2006; Whyte, 2011).  
The contributions to this special issue also recognize the importance of both formal and informal CALL 
Arnold & Ducate Contextualized Views: CALL Teacher Education Resarch 
 
Language Learning & Technology 4 
education and note the significance of active experimentation in either context. O’Dowd and Haines both 
report on the informal learning of in-service teachers. After interviewing four teachers with limited 
experience conducting telecollaborative exchanges, O’Dowd highlights the value of less experienced 
telecollaboration teachers pairing with experienced peers to help them navigate the organizational, 
pedagogical, and technological difficulties they can encounter during telecollaborative exchanges. Haines 
followed two in-service teachers over 14 months to examine how they realized the affordances of blogs 
and wikis in their courses. She finds that the teachers understood the affordances differently than one 
might expect based on their specific contexts (e.g., courses, student population, institution, individual 
cohorts) and how they had incorporated previous tools. For example, their experiences with blogs 
influenced how they conceptualized the use of wikis and therefore made them unaware of how wiki 
affordances differed from those of blogs. Formal training on these tools could have been more effective in 
helping these teachers notice the affordances specific to each tool more quickly.  
Several articles in this issue also focus on formal training. Liu and Kleinsasser as well as Tai both 
emphasize the benefits of TPACK-focused CALL training for in-service EFL teachers in Taiwan, which 
increased their self-efficacy, competencies and ability to match the affordance of the technology with 
their goals. Focusing on the ability to use technology in ethical and legal ways, Shin also finds that formal 
training effectively raised participants’ awareness. 
Whether trainings are formal or informal, two other important themes that were raised in these studies 
were the value of active experimentation with tools in a relevant context, as noted by Haines, and 
Kozlova and Priven, and that development takes time. O’Dowd, Chao, Haines, and Liu and Kleinsasser 
demonstrate that teachers’ perceptions and competencies can develop during initial training, but will 
continue to change and develop. As teachers situate their competencies and tools in their specific contexts 
and curricula, they also continue to struggle and thereby refine their strategies and understandings of the 
tools and their affordances. In addition, due to the quick pace of technological change (Williams, 
Abraham, & Bostelmann, 2014), they must be prepared to adapt tools or appropriate new tools that might 
fit their needs even better.  
Remaining questions regarding types of teacher education include how to provide meaningful pre-service 
training with a focus on the necessary competencies for recognizing affordances and applying them to 
specific teaching contexts, as well as what types of in-service trainings can support teachers in developing 
their knowledge and implementation of CALL throughout their teaching. 
THEME 2: THE DEVELOPMENT OF TEACHER COGNITION 
The current view of teacher education recognizes “that teachers are active, thinking decision-makers who 
make instructional choices by drawing on complex, practically-oriented, personalised, and context-
sensitive networks of knowledge, thoughts, and beliefs” (Borg, 2003, p. 81), also referred to as teacher 
cognition. Among other factors, teacher cognition is affected by prior experiences and attitudes (Borg, 
2003), an influence that has also been documented for CALL. Pre-service teachers who are not very 
technically inclined at the beginning of a training or who were unable to implement their ideas during the 
training, for example, have been shown to be less likely to integrate CALL into their classes after the 
training (Chao, 2006; Kessler, 2006).  
In the “long-term complex developmental process” (Freeman & Johnson, 1998, p. 402) of learning to 
teach, instructors interact with peer experts, experience successes and failures with various tools, and 
refine their CALL use based on their specific teaching contexts. Such experiences have the potential to 
shape teachers’ cognition in profound ways. The studies included in this special issue explore some of the 
complex issues associated with teacher cognition and how teachers appropriate new CALL knowledge. 
One of the key findings regarding teachers’ development, as shown by O’Dowd, Haines, and Liu and 
Kleinsasser, is the importance of individual factors. Each teacher develops differently according to his/her 
prior knowledge, teaching context, attitudes, and general pedagogical knowledge, all of which affect how 
Arnold & Ducate Contextualized Views: CALL Teacher Education Resarch 
 
Language Learning & Technology 5 
she/he identifies affordances of technology and how s/he reacts to challenges.  Chao, for example, 
examines how K-12 in-service teachers built connections between a training course and their teaching, 
which demonstrate a variety of paths that can be taken regarding implementation of CALL after training. 
Surprisingly, the teachers seldom used the tools as the trainer had expected, which speaks to the complex 
relationship between teacher cognition, training and implementation.   
Other articles in this issue investigate how specific competencies develop. In their study on 3D virtual 
worlds, Kozlova and Priven found that the development of online teaching skills is a “spiral process” as 
the skills demonstrated in the pre-teaching phase are revised throughout pre-teaching and then again 
during the online teaching phase. Not only do competencies sometimes develop in a spiral fashion, they 
can also arise in an interconnected way as evidenced by O’Dowd’s findings regarding the technical and 
organizational skills necessary for telecollaboration. In addition, Kozlova and Priven argue that 
technology, pedagogy, and evaluation skills are all acquired together and constitute one integrated skill 
set. In contrast, Liu & Kleinsasser found that some of their participants increased their technology 
literacy, but did not sufficiently integrate TCK or TPK as evidenced by their lack of collaborative tasks or 
effective assessments.  
These findings have important implications for designing effective training that accounts for spiral 
development and the fact that teachers will not always learn the material in the same manner or the order 
in which it is presented. Considering these individual differences demands that trainers reach in-service 
and pre-service teachers on their own levels to make the material relevant to their own needs, 
predispositions, and contexts.  
THEME 3: REFLECTIVE AND COLLABORATIVE FORMATS OF CALL TEACHER 
EDUCATION 
The third theme that appeared in the articles of this special issue was the use of reflection and 
collaboration in CALL teacher education. Again, this theme mirrors current trends in the field of (CALL) 
teacher education. Since Schön’s 1983 book, the reflective practitioner has been an influential way to 
conceptualize educators’ professional knowledge and practice. Within CALL teacher training, many 
studies have underscored the benefits of self-reflection and self-evaluation for informing and improving 
teaching practices (Bustamande & Moeller, 2013; Cutrim Schmid, 2011). Collaborative learning has also 
been found to be a useful method for encouraging reflection and allowing pre- and in-service teachers to 
receive feedback from peers. The exposure to multiple perspectives can help trigger even deeper 
reflection (Bustamande & Moeller, 2013; Whyte, 2011). All of these findings are substantiated in the 
special issue articles. 
In regard to collaboration, Haines as well as Kozlova and Priven report that collaboration between 
teachers provided important support and led to deeper understandings than if the teachers had been 
working alone. In Haines’ study, two teachers collaborated on the use of wikis and blogs in their classes 
and shaped each other’s views of the tools. Haines noticed that the teachers viewed their professional 
development as a collaborative endeavor as evidenced by their use of the pronoun “we” in the interviews. 
Kozlova and Priven’s pre-service teachers also collaborated on task development, which led to the co-
construction of new knowledge within the development of five integrated skills. The in-service teachers 
incorporated their peers’ suggestions and feedback throughout the project and borrowed their peers’ ideas 
to help them critically reflect on their own teaching. In addition, observing their peers’ teaching promoted 
critical reflection about their own teaching, which led to individual improvements. O’Dowd’s participants 
also noted the value of being linked to experienced mentors who could assist them with their 
telecollaboration projects.  
As noted in the studies above, collaboration can also lead to deeper reflection as shown by Kozlova and 
Priven. Similarly, Chao found among EFL teachers that the continuous reflection in which the 
participants engaged as they interacted with digital devices in their classrooms led to unexpected results 
Arnold & Ducate Contextualized Views: CALL Teacher Education Resarch 
 
Language Learning & Technology 6 
in their teaching and even a change of teacher identity. Eight months after the initial TPACK training, the 
teachers continued to engage in reflection and develop new understandings in regard to their use of 
technology in the classroom. Chao argues that these later reflections “involved reconstruction of 
knowledge and skills, rather than merely application or use of something that has been acquired 
elsewhere.”  
Reflection and collaboration will remain important themes within the field of CALL teacher education 
and studies should continue to explore and examine the most effective means to encourage pre- and in-
service teachers to become reflective practitioners who value and can successfully engage in collaborative 
professional development.  
CONCLUSION 
As illustrated above, the studies in this special issue of Language Learning & Technology connect with 
the previous literature on teacher education as well as CALL teacher education by reconfirming that: a) 
both formal and informal training can be beneficial but have unique limitations and constraints, b) teacher 
development in the area of CALL is not a linear, uniform process and depends heavily on teacher 
predispositions and teaching contexts, and c) pre-service and in-service teachers benefit greatly from 
collaborative and reflective forms of CALL training.  
This issue also reminds us of the importance of context. In teaching, there is no one right way of doing 
things - what is effective and appropriate depends to a large extent on a wide variety of contextual factors 
(Larsen-Freeman, 2012). Furthermore, ”contextual factors … [play] an important role in determining the 
extent to which teachers are able to implement instruction congruent with their cognitions” (Borg, 2003, 
p. 81). The teacher, as well as her/his immediate and larger context, significantly shape if and how CALL 
is implemented and with which outcomes. Therefore, more research is needed to help us identify ways in 
which CALL teacher education can successfully account for the context-specific nature of teaching and 
learning. In addition, future research should investigate how specific competencies develop and if/how 
they are interconnected. It will be particularly important to frame such research within standards and other 
policy frameworks (e.g., the TESOL Technology Standards) that guide accreditation and certification. 
 
NOTE 
1. Both authors contributed equally to this commentary. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We would like to thank Mónica Vidal, the Managing Editor, as well as Dorothy Chun and Trude Heift, 
the Editors-in-Chief, for their support throughout the process, as well as the reviewers for their helpful 
feedback to the authors.  
 
 
 
 
 
Arnold & Ducate Contextualized Views: CALL Teacher Education Resarch 
 
Language Learning & Technology 7 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Lara Ducate is an associate professor of German at the University of South Carolina in Columbia, South 
Carolina, USA. Her research focuses on teacher education, online collaboration, and mobile assisted 
language learning.   
E-mail: ducate@sc.edu 
Nike Arnold is an associate professor of Applied Linguistics at Portland State University in Oregon, 
USA. Her research focuses on teacher education, online collaboration, and the role of psychological 
factors in teaching and learning. 
Email: narnold@pdx.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages (2013). Program standards for the preparation 
of foreign language teachers. Retrieved from http://www.actfl.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/ACTFL-
Standards20Aug2013.pdf 
American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages (April 2011). A decade of language standards: 
Influence, impact and future directions. Survey results. Retrieved from 
https://www.actfl.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/StandardsImpactSurvey_FINAL.pdf 
Bauer-Ramazini, C. (2006). Training CALL teachers online. In P. Hubbard, & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher 
education in CALL (pp. 45‒62). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Beaven, T., Emke, M., Ernest, P., Germain-Rutherford, G., Hampel, R., Hopkins, J., Stanojevic, M. M., & 
Stickler, U. (2010). Needs and challenges for online language teachers – the ECML project DOTS. 
Teaching English with Technology: Developing Online Teaching Skills, 10(2) 5‒20. 
Borg, S. (2003). Teacher cognition in language teaching: A review of research on what language teachers 
think, know, believe, and do. Language Teaching, 36, 81‒109. 
Bustamante, C., & Moeller, A. J. (2013). The convergence of content, pedagogy and technology in online 
professional development for teachers of German: An intrinsic case study. CALICO Journal, 30(1), 82–
104.  
Chao, C. (2006). How webquests send technology to the background: Scaffolding EFL teacher 
professional development in CALL. In P. Hubbard, & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 
45‒62). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Comas-Quinn, A. (2011). Learning to teach online or learning to become an online teacher: An 
exploration of teachers’ experiences in a blended learning course. ReCALL, 23, 218‒232.  
Compton, L. K. L. (2009). Preparing language teachers to teach language online: A look at skills, roles, 
and responsibilities. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 22(1), 73‒99. 
Cutrim Schmid, E. (2011). Video-stimulated reflection as a professional development tool in interactive 
whiteboard research. ReCALL, 23, 252‒270.  
Debski, R. (2006). Theory and practice in teaching project-oriented CALL. In P. Hubbard & M. Levy 
(Eds.), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 45‒62). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Desjardins, F., & Peters, M. (2007). Single-course approach versus a program approach to develop 
technological competencies in preservice language teachers. In M. Peters, K. Murphy-Judy, R. Z. Laving 
Arnold & Ducate Contextualized Views: CALL Teacher Education Resarch 
 
Language Learning & Technology 8 
& M. A. Kassen (Eds.), Preparing and developing technology-proficiency L2 teachers (pp. 3‒22). San 
Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Digedu (April 2014). Technology use in the classroom: Benefits & barriers. Retrieved from 
http://digedu.com/files/benefits-barriers.pdf 
Egbert, J. (2006). Learning in context: Situating language teacher learning in CALL. In P.  
Hubbard, & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 45‒62). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: 
John Benjamins. 
Freeman, D., & Johnson, K.E. (1998). Reconceptualizing the knowledge-base of language teacher 
education. TESOL Quarterly, 32(3), 397‒417. 
Graham, C. (2011). Theoretical considerations for understanding technological pedagogical content 
knowledge (TPACK). Computers and Education, 57(3), 1953–1960. 
Guichon, N., & Hauck, M. (2011). Editorial: Teacher education research in CALL and CMC: More in 
demand than ever. ReCALL, 23, 187‒199.  
Hegelheimer, V. (2006). When the technology course is required. In P. Hubbard, & M. Levy (Eds.), 
Teacher education in CALL (pp. 45‒62). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Hampel, R., & Stickler, U. (2005). New skills for new classrooms: Training tutors to teach languages 
online. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 18(4), 311‒326.  
Healey, D., Hanson-Smith, E., Hubbard, P., Ioannou-Georgiou, S., Kessler, G., & Ware, P. (2011). 
TESOL technology standards: Description, implementation, integration. Alexandria, VA: Teachers of 
English to Speakers of Other Languages. 
Hubbard, P. (2008). CALL and the future of language teacher education. CALICO Journal, 25(2), 
175‒88. 
International Society for Technology in Education (2008). ISTE standards: Teachers. Retrieved from 
http://www.iste.org/docs/pdfs/20-14_ISTE_Standards-T_PDF.pdf 
Kelly, M. Grenfell, M., Allan, R. Kriza, C. & McEvoy, W. (2004). European profile forlanguage teacher 
education: Final report. Retrieved from http://ec.europa.eu/education/languages/pdf/doc477_en.pdf 
Kessler, G. (2006). Assessing CALL teacher training: What are we doing and what could we do 
better? In P. Hubbard, & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 45‒62). Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Kessler, G. and Bikowski, D. (2011). The Influence of SLA training in curricular design among teachers 
in preparation. CALICO Journal, 28(2), 522‒545. 
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2012). From unity to diversity: Twenty-five years of language-teaching 
methodology. English Teaching Forum, 2, 28‒38. Retrieved from 
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ982846.pdf 
Murphy-Judy & Youngs (2006). Technology Standards for teacher education, credentialing, and 
certification. In P. Hubbard, & M. Levy (eds.,), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 45‒62). Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Newby, D., Allan, R., Fenner, A., Jones, B., Komorowska, H., Soghikyan, K. (2007).European portfolio 
for student teachers of languages. Retrieved from http://archive.ecml.at/mtp2/fte/pdf/STPExtract.pdf 
Oxford, R. L., & Jung, S.-H. (2007). National guidelines for technology integration in TESOL programs: 
Factors affecting (non)implementation. In M. Peters, K. Murphy-Judy, R. Z. Laving & M. A. Kassen 
Arnold & Ducate Contextualized Views: CALL Teacher Education Resarch 
 
Language Learning & Technology 9 
(eds.), Preparing and developing technology-proficiency L2 teachers (pp. 23‒50). San Marcos, TX: 
CALICO. 
Peters, M. (2006). Developing computer competencies for pre-service language teachers: Is one course 
enough? In P. Hubbard, & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 45‒62). Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Schön, D.A. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action. New York, NY: Basic 
Books. 
Van Olphen, M. (2007). Digital portfolios: Balancing the academic and professional needs  of world 
language teacher candidates.  In M. Peters, K. Murphy-Judy, R. Z. Laving & M. A. Kassen (Eds.), 
Preparing and developing  technology-proficiency L2 teachers (pp. 265‒294). San Marcos, TX: 
CALICO. 
Whyte, S. (2011). Learning to teach with videoconferencing in primary foreign languageclassrooms. 
ReCALL, 23, 271‒293. 
Williams, L., Abraham, L.B., & Bostelmann, E.D. (2014). A discourse-based approach to CALL training 
and professional development. Foreign Language Annals. Advance online publication.  
