Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2015/chen.pdf 
June 2015, Volume 19, Number 2 
pp. 177–196 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 177 
L2 BLOGGING: WHO THRIVES AND WHO DOES NOT? 
Rainbow Tsai-Hung Chen, National Chengchi University 
While research has reported generally enthusiastic results regarding L2 blogging, some 
studies have found contrasting blogging experiences among individual learners. 
Consequently, this study investigated the factors underlying such discrepancies by 
exploring 33 EFL learners’ experiences of participating in a blog project at a Taiwanese 
university. The students wrote personal blogs and responded to each other over a ten-week 
period. Data was collected through a questionnaire and individual interviews with 10 of 
the students. Drawing on a sociological approach, specialization codes of legitimation 
(Maton, 2007, 2014), the study found salient differences in the students’ educational 
beliefs and practices, which appeared to be linked to their positive or negative blogging 
experiences. By analyzing the relations between the pedagogical design, learners’ existing 
educational dispositions, and their blogging experiences, the study argued that the blog 
project assumed learners of a certain type - those who recognized themselves as 
“knowers” in terms of their blog content - while disadvantaging others who did not 
possess this attribute. Practitioners are therefore advised to exercise caution when 
designing blog activities. 
Language(s) learned in this study: English 
Keywords: Learners’ Attitudes, Blogging, Writing 
APA Citation: Chen, R. T.-H. (2015). L2 Blogging: Who Thrives and Who Does Not? 
Language Learning & Technology, 19(2), 177–196. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2015/chen.pdf 
Received: October 1, 2013; Accepted: September 1, 2014; Published: June 1, 2015 
Copyright: © Rainbow Tsai-Hung Chen 
INTRODUCTION 
Nearly two decades after their first appearance, blogs continue to be utilized in second language (L2) 
teaching and learning. Blogs’ educational affordances, such as their capacity to expand learning beyond 
the classroom walls and to archive the learning process, thereby allowing reflection and metacognitive 
analysis, are well-documented in the literature (see Ducate & Lomicka, 2005; Godwin-Jones, 2003). 
Many of these educational affordances of blogs are shared by other Web 2.0 technologies. Nevertheless, a 
defining characteristic that sets blogs apart from the “older” asynchronous online communication 
technologies, such as discussion boards, is that blogs are often owned by individuals; that is, bloggers 
have control of their work in terms of its content and presentation. This freedom to make choices for their 
own blogs can lead L2 learners to develop a sense of ownership, thereby enhancing their motivation to 
write. In addition, unlike discussion boards, blogs are intended to be visible to audiences on the Internet, 
so learners are likely to be careful about their language accuracy. On the other hand, in comparison with 
the “newer” social networking applications, such as Facebook, whose focus is primarily on developing 
friendship (Merchant, 2011), blogs are commonly used as online platforms for their authors to share 
knowledge about a particular topic. Accordingly, blog posts are often expected to be longer and of a more 
intellectual nature than Facebook messages. These characteristics of blogs make them a particularly 
suitable pedagogical tool for L2 education. 
Researchers have investigated the potential of blogs for facilitating learners’ development of various 
skills in L2 learning contexts, which can be roughly divided into three categories. First, blogs have been 
used to provide language skill practice, most typically in writing (Bloch, 2007; Vurdien, 2013), and 
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  178 
recently also in speaking (through voice blogging) (Huang, 2015). Studies in this category have 
concluded that learners’ writing performance improved with regard to their knowledge and use of 
vocabulary, grammar (Vurdien, 2013) and rhetorical strategies (Bloch, 2007), and that they considered 
their pronunciation, oral communication fluency, and confidence in speaking to be enhanced (Huang, 
2015), although Golonka, Bowles, Frank, Richardson and Freynik (2014) cautioned that the results of this 
line of research were based on non-experimental research. 
In the second category, blogs were utilized to sharpen L2 learners’ metacognitive skills, such as their 
abilities to conduct autonomous (Alm, 2009; Bhattacharya & Chauhan, 2010), reflective (Absalom & De 
Saint Léger, 2011; Murray & Hourigan, 2008) and collaborative learning (Mompean, 2010). Through 
analyzing the number and content of learners’ blog contributions, and surveying their perceptions, this 
strand of research has reported evidence of the targeted learning behaviors. Sun (2009), for example, 
through observing her EFL participants’ processes of making voice posts, identified their self-regulated 
behaviors, such as monitoring and evaluating their own learning. In another study, by having learners 
with better coordination or language skills help their peers write blogs in groups, Bhattacharya and 
Chauhan (2010) found that the initial interdependence among their participants eventually led them to 
develop independent decision-making skills and an ability to take independent action. 
Finally, an increasingly number of studies have explored how blogs assist L2 learners in developing 
intercultural competence. Participants in these studies blogged with native speakers of the target language 
(García-Sánchez & Rojas-Lizana, 2012; Yang, 2011) or fellow learners of a different linguistic and 
cultural background (Melo-Pfeifer, 2015). Blogs have also been used for L2 learners to reflect on and 
share their cultural experience on their study abroad sojourn (Comas-Quinn, Mardomingo, & Valentine, 
2009; Ducate & Lomicka, 2005; Elola & Oskoz, 2008). As these projects tend to involve learners 
communicating with people outside the immediate educational contexts or entail learners physically 
departing from classroom settings to obtain cultural knowledge in situ, the authenticity of learning is 
augmented. This form of learning, Melo-Pfeifer (2015) argued, engages learners in “significant social 
writing activities which gain visibility and legitimacy in the eyes of the ‘other’” (p.16). Researchers have 
reported learners’ more sophisticated understanding of the target culture (Elola & Oskoz, 2008) and 
development of their linguistic repertoire (Melo-Pfeifer, 2015). It has also been noted that L2 learners’ 
travel blogs can be of interest to future students of a similar L2 program, other students of the target 
language, and even family and friends (Ducate & Lomicka, 2005). Arguably, this type of blogs has 
greater potential than the other two types to attract audiences on the Internet than the others. 
While most L2 blog studies have reported attaining their pedagogical goals, a small number of 
investigations have identified unfavorable learner experiences and perceptions. For example, some 
learners were found to be reluctant to publicize their work online for fear of criticism (Alm, 2009); others 
lacked motivation to participate in blog activities because they were not interested in the topics and 
viewed the tasks as extra homework (Vurdien, 2013), while still others felt their peers’ comments on their 
blogs lacked variety and depth, hence disengaging them from the activity (Lee, 2010). Although these 
experiences were not shared by the majority of the learners in the studies, they indicate that the frequently 
claimed educational benefit of blogs in motivating and empowering learners through personalizing 
learning did not materialize for all learners. Indisputably, no learning tool or environment is amenable to 
every learner; however, considering that previous research on L2 blogging has paid little attention to 
discrepancies between learners’ experiences, the study reported in the rest of this paper aimed to address 
this gap in the literature by exploring how the same blogging environment may empower some learners 
while disengaging others. Specifically, the study investigated EFL learners’ blogging experiences at a 
university in Taiwan, with a view to understanding the differences in learner experiences, and the factors 
underlying them. It examined the teaching design and learner experiences through a sociological approach 
- specialization codes of legitimation (Maton, 2007, 2014). By doing so, the study also sought to 
introduce an alternative theoretical perspective for understanding learners’ experiences of L2 blogging. 
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  179 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
Specialization codes of legitimation is one dimension of Maton’s Legitimation Code Theory (LCT), 
which emerged in the late 1990s by building upon Basil Bernstein’s (2000) sociological theories, and has 
been applied across a burgeoning array of social fields and educational practices, including linguistics 
(Hood, 2011; Matruglio, Maton, & Martin, 2013), educational technology (Chen, Maton, & Bennett, 
2011; Howard & Maton, 2011), school courses (Lamont & Maton, 2010; Macken-Horarik, 2011), higher 
education (Shay, 2011; Wolff & Luckett 2013), and design studies (Carvalho, Dong, & Maton, 2009). 
LCT describes education as comprising fields of struggle where actors’ beliefs and practices represent 
competing claims to legitimacy; that is, actors within a field are constantly “striving to attain more of that 
which defines achievement and to shape what is defined as achievement to match their own practices” 
(Maton, 2014, p.17). Specialization codes of legitimation, abbreviated as LCT(Specialization), is then a 
means to understanding the dominant basis of achievement, or what makes actors and practices special 
and worthy of distinction, in a field. Underpinning LCT(Specialization) is the notion that every practice, 
belief or knowledge claim, is about or oriented towards something (i.e., its object) and by someone (i.e., 
its subject). Educational contexts or practices, for example, embody messages as to both what is valid to 
know and how (i.e., their object), and also who is an ideal actor (i.e., their subject). When applied to L2 
learning, the “what” refers to the language skills to be learned and the “how” denotes procedures through 
which these skills are learned, and the “who” is the language learner. According to Maton, when 
analyzing an educational practice, one can then distinguish two kinds of relations: relations between the 
practice and its object, called “epistemic relations” (ER), and relations between the practice and its 
subject, called “social relations” (SR). 
Each of these relations may be relatively strongly (+) or weakly (-) emphasized in a practice. The relative 
strength of the two relations then allows the practice to be categorized with a “specialization code” 
(ER+/-, SR+/-) (Figure 1). The four possible specialization codes, annotated with their referents in L2 
learning contexts (either language skills or language learners), are: 
• knowledge code (ER+, SR-), where possession of specialized knowledge (i.e., language skills) are 
emphasized as the basis of achievement, and the attributes of actors (i.e., language learners) are 
downplayed; 
• knower code (ER-, SR+), where specialized knowledge (i.e., language skills) are less significant 
and instead the attributes of actors (i.e., language learners) are emphasized as measures of 
achievement; 
• elite code (ER+, SR+), where legitimacy is based on both possessing specialized knowledge and 
being the right kind of knower; and, 
• relativist code (ER-, SR-), where legitimacy is ostensibly determined by neither specialized 
knowledge nor knower attributes. 
 
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  180 
 
Figure 1. Specialization codes (Maton, 2014, p.30). 
It should be noted that the concepts of “epistemic relations” and “social relations” may be manifested in 
different empirical forms in different studies. In the present study, epistemic relations were realized in the 
data as “language skills” and “the teaching of language skills”; and social relations were realized as 
“personal knowledge and experience” and “the personal dimension of the learning process.” Table 3 
presents these manifestations in an analytical framework for these two concepts, which was adapted from 
Chen (Chen, 2010; Chen et al., 2011) for use in the present study. A detailed explanation of the 
framework is provided in the Data Analysis section. 
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  181 
As studies have shown (see Maton, 2014), specialization codes can be used to analyze a diverse range of 
practices (e.g., curriculum, teaching approaches, beliefs) with a variety of methods (e.g., documentary 
analysis, surveys and interviews). For example, by analyzing extracts from published articles, Hood (2011) 
identified disciplinary differences in how writers sourced other authors in academic texts. The study 
found that the discourses in natural sciences were specialized by a knowledge code and those of the 
humanities embodied a knower code. Carvalho et al. (2009) examined designers’ perceptions of the basis 
of achievement in four design-related fields using a survey and interviews. The study argued that a lack of 
shared understanding among the four fields was due to a clash between the underlying specialization 
codes characterizing each field. Of particular relevance to the present investigation is Chen et al.’s (2011) 
study of Chinese students’ experiences of online courses at an Australian university. Through interviews 
and document analysis, the study concluded that the Chinese students, as a cultural group, were 
characterized by knowledge-code learning orientations, which clashed with the knower code 
characterizing the Australian teaching practices. The mismatch was found to lead to feelings of anxiety 
and depression among the students. Drawing on theoretical and empirical insights from Chen et al.’s 
research, the present study departed from it by considering differences among learners within the same 
culture through a case study in Taiwan. 
LCT(Specialization) was chosen as the theoretical framework for this study because it provides a set of 
tools for analyzing and comparing: 1) what the teacher required of the learners in the blogging 
environment; 2) learners’ dispositions related to English learning, such as their beliefs, attitudes and 
established learning practices; and 3) their blogging experiences. The analysis and comparison, in turn, 
enabled the study to reveal the factors that caused some learners, but not others, to thrive in the blog 
project. 
METHOD 
The study was conducted with 33 EFL students enrolled in an elective course, Learning English with 
Corpora & the Web, at a Taiwanese university. It was guided by the following questions: 
1. What are the differences in learner perceptions and experiences of the blog project? 
a) What do the students value in the project and what does this convey about their educational 
dispositions? 
b) What characterizes those who experience the project positively and those who perceive it less 
positively? 
2. How do specialization codes help explain the differences? 
a) Which specialization codes characterize the pedagogical intentions, the students’ educational 
dispositions, and their blogging experiences, respectively? 
b) What are the relations between these specialization codes and their implications for the 
students’ blogging experiences? 
Project Context 
The course Learning English with Corpora & the Web aimed to help students develop independent 
learning skills for studying English by introducing them to a selection of online resources, including Web 
2.0 technologies and public corpora. The researcher was the instructor of the course. Blogs were 
introduced to students as one of the Web 2.0 technologies, and the blog project was conducted to allow 
students to experience communicating their thoughts to a general audience in English. It was expected 
that through this experience, students would see blogging as a useful way to learn English independently. 
As such, the use of blogging in the present study fell into the second category of L2 blog research 
discussed earlier when reviewing the literature, which focuses on developing learners’ metacognitive 
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  182 
skills. 
The project was implemented for ten weeks, in which each student wrote a personal blog on a topic of 
their choice. The teaching design aimed to maximize the educational potentials of blogs, particularly in 
terms of extending learning beyond classroom settings, and empowering learners by allowing them to 
control their learning. The blog topics chosen by the students could be categorized into music, arts, travel, 
sport, health, pop culture and college life. All the posts each student made on their blog had to be 
connected to their chosen topic, consistent with how a blog is used in real life. This was to enhance the 
authenticity of the blogs, and therefore the possibility of their attracting outside readers. The teacher-
researcher highlighted this purpose to students to encourage them to write for a real audience. 
Students were required to write one post on their blogs every week. To facilitate interaction, they were 
also asked to comment on two of their classmates’ blogs every week, one assigned by the teacher to 
ensure that every student received at least one comment each week, and the other of their choosing. To 
avoid giving students too great a workload, their further responses to these peer comments was 
encouraged, but not mandatory. Over the ten-week period, the students (N = 33) wrote a total of 247 posts 
and made 536 comments (i.e., each student made an average of 7.5 blog entries and 16.2 comments). The 
teacher provided weekly language feedback for the whole class (hereafter “language notes”), which was a 
collection of language revision suggestions for each student, intended as an additional learning resource. 
The suggestions were intentionally minimal, with the teacher correcting only one sentence from each blog, 
usually a sentence characterizing students’ commonly-made errors. Students were required to revise their 
blogs based on the language notes; however, while this was stated in the project requirements announced 
to students, the teacher-researcher did not emphasize it in class. Rather, to guide students to find their own 
language errors, a “self-editing” activity was held after students made their first posts, in which they were 
taught to use online resources to edit their English. Finally, a “meeting partners” activity was organized in 
the sixth week for students to socialize with those whom they had interacted with on their blogs. Such a 
face-to-face meeting at the mid-point of an online project has been found to help foster trust among 
learners, thus making them more willing to share their personal feelings online (Michinov & Michinov, 
2008). Note that while the course was delivered face-to-face, classes were held in a computer lab, with 
each student conducting mostly individually-based learning tasks through their own desk-top computers. 
The relatively low physical interaction among the students made the “meeting partners” activity necessary. 
Table 1 outlines the pedagogical intention behind each of these aspects of the project, and provides an 
analysis of the intentions using LCT(Specialization). All seven aspects of the project were considered to 
be of equal importance in the implementation of the project. As illustrated in Table 1, the pedagogical 
intentions reflected a knower-code learning environment, as 5 out of the 7 aspects of the project were 
characterized by a knower code. For example, in guiding students to write their blogs (the first aspect in 
Table 1), the teacher constantly reminded them to focus their writing on their own experiences and 
perspectives related to the topic. On the other hand, the teacher did not highlight the need to focus on 
language forms and writing structure. According to the analytical framework for the LCT(Specialization) 
concepts used in this study (Table 3), this emphasis on the learner’s personal experience and knowledge, 
and the downplaying of language skills, indicated that the pedagogical intention behind this aspect of the 
project embodied stronger social relations and weaker epistemic relations. This aspect of the project was 
therefore specialized by a “knower code” (ER-, SR+). 
 
 
 
 
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  183 
Table 1. Pedagogical Intentions of the Project from the Perspective of Specialization Codes. 
Aspect of the project Pedagogical intention Coding orientation 
a) Writing blogs To motivate learners to write in English by 
allowing them to discuss their personal 
experiences and perspectives  
knower (ER-, SR+) 
b) Reading blogs To expose learners to a variety of topics their 
peers are interested in, thereby allowing them 
to see the personal aspects of their peers  
knower (ER-, SR+) 
c) Writing comments To encourage learners to express their 
opinions of others’ posts 
knower (ER-, SR+) 
To enhance interactivity among learners 
d) Reading language notes To alert learners to correct language forms  knowledge (ER+, SR-) 
e) Writing on one topic To build a link between blogs and their 
authors, thereby helping learners develop a 
sense of identity to their blogs 
knower (ER-, SR+) 
To enhance the blogs’ authenticity, hence 
maximizing the possibility of external 
readers 
f) Meeting partners To facilitate social interaction knower (ER-, SR+) 
g) Self-editing To alert learners to correct language forms  knowledge (ER+, SR-) 
Note. Aspects a, b, c, e, and f de-emphasize language forms; aspects d and g de-emphasize learners’ personal attributes. 
Participants 
All students (N = 33) in the course participated in the study by completing a questionnaire voluntarily and 
anonymously. They were all aged between 19 and 22, and consisted of 1 first-year (3%), 12 second-year 
(36%), 13 third-year (39%), and 7 fourth-year (21%) students. About 70% of them (23) were female. The 
students were enrolled in different degree programs: 13 from social sciences (39%); five each from 
commerce (15%) and foreign languages (15%); four from law (12%); two each from communication 
(6%) and sciences (6%); and one each from liberal arts (3%) and international affairs (3%). They had 
studied English as a foreign language for approximately seven years, and none of them had experienced 
living in an English-speaking country.  
Table 2. Interviewee Demographics 
Group Student Blog topic Gender Degree program Year at university 
1 A Flamenco Female Social sciences Fourth year 
 B Rock bands Male Social sciences Third year 
 C  Animation Male Foreign languages Second year 
 D Shopping Female Liberal arts Third year 
 E Baseball  Male Social sciences Second year 
2 F Health Male Social sciences Fourth year 
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  184 
 G A school club Female Social sciences Second year 
 H A pop singer Female Communication Second year 
 I Movies Female Law Second year 
 J College life Female Commerce Third year 
Twenty-four of the students volunteered to be interviewed: 13 were interviewed. These 13 students were 
selected because they were representative of the overall participants of the study with regard to their year 
at university, gender, and major. This paper focuses on 10 of these interviewees because data collected 
from their interviews helped address the research questions. Like the overall participants of the study, the 
majority of these 10 interviewees (n = 8) were second- or third-year students, followed by fourth-year 
students (n = 2), and more than half of them (n = 6) were female. In terms of disciplinary background, 5 
were taking a major in social sciences, and 1 each was from commerce, foreign languages, law, 
communication and liberal arts. Table 2 outlines the information about these interviewees, as well as their 
blog topics. 
Data Collection 
All data collection was conducted in Chinese. The teacher-researcher administered the questionnaire to 
the class at the end of the project. The questionnaire contained two questions. The first question asked 
students to rate the usefulness of the seven aspects of the project for their learning on a scale of 0 to 5, 
with 0 being the most negative rating and 5 the most positive. The seven aspects of the project to be rated 
were: a) writing my blog; b) reading others’ blogs; c) commenting on others’ blogs; d) reading language 
notes; e) focusing my blog on one topic throughout the project; f) meeting partners; and g) self-editing. 
The students were also invited to give reasons for their ratings. The second question asked students to 
provide suggestions for improving the project (“How do you think the project can be improved to help 
students learn more?”). At the end of the questionnaire, students were invited to volunteer for individual 
interviews and to do so by either leaving their names in the questionnaire or contacting the teacher-
researcher through email. 
The purpose of the interviews was to identify positive and less-positive blogging experiences and to 
explore the relations between these experiences and learner characteristics. Each interview lasted for 
about an hour. During the interviews, students were asked to discuss various aspects of their blogging 
experiences, such as their approaches to completing the tasks and their views of their own work and 
learning process (see Appendix for the interview questions). They were also invited to comment on the 
questionnaire results. All interviews were translated into English by a research assistant and checked by 
the teacher-researcher for language accuracy. 
To mitigate possible effects caused by the power relations between the teacher and students, the teacher-
researcher conducted the interviews after the students had received their final grades for the course. In 
addition, to further reduce effects of teacher-student relations, the interview questions were carefully 
written to highlight that the emphasis of the study was on students’ views of their own learning in the 
project rather than on their evaluation of the effectiveness of the project. For example, to categorize 
learners who experienced the project positively or less positively, instead of asking the students how 
satisfied they were with the project, these two questions were used: 1) “What gave you a sense of 
achievement in the project?” and 2) “If the project were to continue, would you participate, or would you 
prefer that the teacher conduct another type of project to help you learn?” Students who gave positive 
responses to both questions were generally categorized as satisfied learners and those who gave negative 
responses to both questions were classified as less-satisfied learners unless their responses to other 
questions suggested otherwise. As a result, among the 13 students interviewed, five were categorized as 
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  185 
“satisfied learners”, another five were classified as “less-satisfied learners” (Table 2), and the remaining 
three could not be categorized into either group. The three students therefore were not the focus of this 
study. 
Data Analysis 
Students’ overall approval ratings of the seven aspects of the project in the questionnaire were analyzed 
using descriptive statistics. After the assumption of normality was confirmed using a Shapiro-Wilk test 
(W = .975, p = .636), a paired-samples t test was performed to determine whether the differences between 
students’ mean ratings for the two knowledge-code aspects and their mean ratings for the five knower-
code aspects of the project were statistically significant. Interview data was analyzed in two stages. In the 
first stage, the analysis focused on identifying themes emerging from the data. Examples of such themes 
were: “audience awareness had a positive effect on satisfied learners but a negative effect on less-satisfied 
learners” and “less-satisfied learners preferred being given writing topics while satisfied learners 
considered this demotivating”. The generated themes were further sorted into two broad categories: 
“content of learning” and “teaching methods”. In the second stage of analysis, the interview data was 
examined through the lens of LCT(Specialization), using the adapted analytical framework (Table 3). To 
determine inter-rater reliability of the coding at this second stage of analysis, a colleague of the teacher-
researcher, who was already familiar with the theory, independently coded five randomly-selected 
interviews (approximately 40% of the interview data) that the teacher-researcher had previously coded. 
The inter-rater reliability was calculated at .84, which was satisfactory for the study, as a figure of .80 is 
generally considered sufficient for establishing confidence in rater reliability (Green, 1998; Mackey & 
Gass, 2005), especially for what Mackey and Gass (2005) would classify as a reasonably high-inference 
coding scheme. 
To explain the analytical framework used in this second stage of analysis, as shown in Table 3, the 
framework is divided into two sections: the epistemic relations (ER) section on the left, and the social 
relations (SR) section on the right. Each of these two sections has three columns. The first column in each 
states what ER or SR means in the present study in the aspects of “content of learning” and “teaching 
methods.” (For example, in relation to “content of learning”, ER means an emphasis on language skills, 
and SR means an emphasis on personal knowledge and experience.) In the second column of each section 
are indicators for deciding the strengths of ER and SR (i.e., whether a piece of data was coded as ER+/- or 
SR +/-). The third column contains example quotes of the indicators drawn from the empirical data. 
Using the top row of the ER section as an example to illustrate how the data was coded using the 
framework, the example quote (by a student) in the third column, “when reading others’ blogs, I learned 
words and phrases that were new to me, and I could see the errors they made, and learned from that,” 
suggested the student considered language skills to be a significant form of legitimate knowledge in the 
learning context (as shown in the second column of the top row of the ER section). As this indicated an 
emphasis on language skills (see the first column), the data was coded as exhibiting stronger epistemic 
relations (ER+) in terms of the content of learning. (Note that LCT uses “stronger/weaker” or “relatively 
strong/weak” rather than “strong/weak” to avoid the binaries of strong/weak.) Likewise, turning to the top 
row of the SR section, the example quote (again by a student) in the third column, “you may get to know 
different people through your blog. You may hear new perspectives, even those from people in different 
countries,” was coded as manifesting stronger social relations (SR+) in terms of the content of learning 
because it highlighted personal knowledge and experience (as shown in the first column of the SR 
section). 
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  186 
Table 3. Analytical Framework for Epistemic Relations and Social Relations in this Study. 
 Epistemic relations (ER) Social relations (SR) 
 Concept 
manifested as 
emphasis on: 
Indicators for deciding 
ER strength 
Example quotes of 
indicators from empirical 
data 
Concept 
manifested as 
emphasis on: 
Indicators for 
deciding SR 
strength 
Example quotes of 
indicators from empirical 
data 
Content 
of 
learning 
Language 
skills 
ER+ Language skills are 
emphasized as a 
significant form of 
legitimate educational 
knowledge. 
When reading others’ 
blogs, I learned words 
and phrases that were 
new to me, and I could 
see the errors they made, 
and learned from that. 
Personal 
knowledge 
and 
experience 
SR+ Personal 
experiences and 
opinions are 
viewed as 
legitimate 
knowledge in the 
language learning 
context. 
You may get to know 
different people through 
your blog. You may hear 
new perspectives, even 
those from people in 
different countries. 
  ER- Language skills are 
downplayed as less 
important in defining 
legitimate educational 
knowledge. 
I wouldn’t be put off by 
language errors someone 
made on their blog. I 
normally focused on 
reading the content. 
 SR- Personal 
experience and 
opinions are 
downplayed and 
distinguished 
from legitimate 
knowledge in the 
language learning 
context. 
Except for those who 
know me personally, 
who would care about 
my life or what I think? 
Teaching 
methods 
The 
teaching 
of 
language 
skills 
ER+ Procedures for learning 
language skills are 
explicit to learners and 
emphasized as a 
significant form of 
pedagogy.  
The teacher could teach 
us certain words in class 
and then ask us to 
practice using them in 
our blogs. 
The 
personal 
dimension 
of the 
learning 
process 
SR+ Individual 
learners’ 
preferences are 
explicitly 
emphasized as a 
significant form of 
pedagogy. 
I don’t like to be 
restricted to writing in a 
certain format. My 
incentive to write is 
stronger when I’m given 
more freedom. 
  ER- Procedures for learning 
language skills are 
implicit to learners and 
downplayed as not 
significantly shaping 
pedagogy. 
The teacher didn’t ask us 
to, for example, 
exchange our writing 
with a partner, and then 
tell each other how to 
improve their sentences. 
 SR- Individual 
learners’ 
preferences are 
downplayed as not 
significantly 
shaping pedagogy. 
If everyone wrote about 
the same topic every 
week, they would be 
writing to fulfill the 
assignment, rather than 
writing what they really 
wanted to write. 
Note. +/- indicates “stronger” / “weaker”
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  187 
FINDINGS 
This section presents the findings through the lens of specialization codes in two parts. The first part 
reports what students valued in the project and what this conveyed about their educational dispositions by 
drawing on the quantitative data from the questionnaire. The second part discusses the differences among 
the students’ educational dispositions and the impact of these dispositions on their blogging experiences, 
based on the interview data. 
What Learners Valued in the Project and Their Overall Educational Dispositions 
Table 4 shows students’ ratings of the seven aspects of the project, which indicated that they considered 
the only two knowledge-code oriented aspects of the project to be the two most beneficial aspects. As 
shown in the table, “reading language notes” was rated as the most valuable for their learning (M = 4.61 
out of maximum score of 5, SD = 0.55), followed by “self-editing” (M = 4.36, SD = 0.81). All five 
knower-code aspects of the project were rated lower than these, with “writing comments” (M = 3.18, SD 
= 0.87) and “meeting partners” (M = 3.26, SD = 0.91) being perceived as the two least beneficial aspects. 
Also, results of the paired-samples t test indicated that there was a statistically significant difference 
between the students’ mean ratings for the knowledge-code aspects and their mean ratings for the 
knower-code aspects of the project (t = -8.35, p < .01). In other words, students gave a statistically 
significantly higher score for the knowledge-code aspects (M = 4.48) than the knower-code aspects (M = 
3.66) of the project. 
These results suggested that the students as a whole valued the opportunities to learn language forms over 
those to express their opinions of their classmates’ views and to socialize with them. The epistemic 
relations characterizing the students’ educational dispositions were thus stronger (ER+), while the social 
relations weaker (SR-). Together, these gave a knowledge code. Clearly, there was a code clash between 
the knower-code pedagogical intentions of the project and the students’ overall knowledge-code learning 
dispositions. To investigate the effects of the code clash, the study turned to the interview data. 
Table 4. Students’ Ratings of How Beneficial the Seven Aspects of the Project Were to Their Learning. 
Aspect of the project Coding orientation M SD 
Reading language notes knowledge 4.61 0.55 
Self-editing knowledge 4.36 0.81 
Writing blogs knower 4.18 0.63 
Writing on one topic knower 4.06 0.89 
Reading blogs knower 3.58 0.99 
Meeting partners knower 3.26 0.91 
Writing comments knower 3.18 0.87 
Note. N = 33; six-point scale (0 = Least beneficial, 5 = Most beneficial) 
Differences among Learners’ Educational Dispositions and Their Impact on Blogging Experiences 
To tease out the factors separating positive and negative EFL blogging experiences, the results presented 
in this section are based on the interviews with the 10 students categorized as satisfied or less-satisfied 
learners. The satisfied learners are referred to as students A, B, C, D, and E (hereafter “group one”), and 
the less-satisfied learners are referred to as F, G, H, I, and J (hereafter “group two”) (Table 2). The 
discussion concentrates on comparing their characteristics primarily in terms of their attitudes towards the 
content of learning, and also in relation to their views of the teaching methods of the project. 
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  188 
Content of Learning 
Characteristics of Satisfied Learners.  A strong theme running through the interview data was that group 
one students had a lot to say about their topics. The majority of them (A, B, C, E) stated that they had 
sufficient content to add to their blogs if the project were to continue for another semester. For example, 
student E, who wrote about baseball, commented: 
I have plenty of things to write. There were about ten games being played every day… I normally 
watched my favorite teams, but I also paid attention to special incidents about other teams. 
Without this blog, I would’ve been chatting with my friends or people on the Internet about the 
games anyway. 
As indicated in the quote, the content of student E’s blog was an important part of his everyday life. In 
addition, he and the other students in this group considered themselves to have a degree of expertise in 
their topics, and some (A, B, C) also demonstrated the intention to educate readers about their topics. For 
example, the following statement by student B, whose blog was about rock bands in the 70s and 80s, 
shows that he claimed expertise in his topic based on his experience of being a guitarist. He felt the 
experience entitled him to decide for his readers worthwhile information to learn about the bands: 
The musicians I wrote about are all my favorite and I know a lot about them. I know what is so 
legendary about them and what is worth writing. Based on my knowledge, I decided which 
interesting parts I wanted to include in my post…. Because I have played the guitar for a long 
time, I don’t want to introduce some mainstream musicians. That kind of information is not 
interesting. (Italics added by author to emphasize key aspects) 
The remark was echoed by student A, who wrote about flamenco. Albeit in a less assertive tone, she 
noted that in being a flamenco dancer, she was capable of selecting key information about the dance and 
describing it in a way that made flamenco more accessible to her readers: 
I find online information about flamenco overwhelmingly long, and even as a dancer myself, I 
can’t always grasp the point immediately. I hope that after reading the brief and simple 
descriptions of flamenco on my blog, my classmates would have a basic understanding of the 
dance. 
On occasion, students received only one peer comment or none at all. However, the students in this group 
were apparently not disheartened by this, largely because of the confidence they had in their knowledge 
of their topics. Three (B, C, E) felt that it was likely caused by their classmates not knowing enough about 
the topic to write a comment. Many (A, B, C, E) also added that they considered writing their blogs a 
worthwhile experience even with a lack of peer comments because they were able to document their 
feelings and thoughts about something they were devoted to. The ability to write about their devotion in a 
foreign language had a significant meaning for this group. One said with noticeable pride, “Having the 
capability to keep an English blog about animation is a manifestation of my passion for it” (C). To 
another student, this capability also brought about a sense of ownership of her work, as suggested in this 
remark: 
The feeling that I have organized my understanding of Flamenco by myself gave me a great sense 
of achievement. I used to only listen to other people talking about it, or read about it on the 
Internet. This semester I felt I had documented my knowledge about the dance. (A) (Italics added 
by author) 
Another characteristic this group had in common was their conscious effort to build a self-image through 
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  189 
their blogs, which indicated they had readers in mind while writing. For example, student B said: 
Readers may be judging who I am by what I wrote. They may be evaluating whether I’m really a 
guitarist myself, or simply someone who listens to rock music. Who knows who will be reading 
my blog? 
The above quote also showed the student was considering the possibility of having an audience outside 
class. Audience awareness led some students (A, C, E) to refrain from using jargon and information that 
required insider knowledge to decipher. For example, one student stated, “If I said a pitcher was injured 
because of a particular way he threw the ball, I think none of my classmates would understand me” (E). 
Another student (B) who started using some technical terms after he shared his blog with his guitarist 
friends outside class mid-semester, expressed an even stronger audience awareness by saying, “They 
wouldn’t want to read detailed explanations of the simple stuff,” adding that in order not to lose his non-
guitarist readers in class, he attached Chinese translation to those terms. 
Finally, while all students in this group said they were happy to receive feedback on their English, most 
of them (A, B, D, E) noted they did not consider a detailed correction of their English necessary. 
Moreover, although they all revised their sentences after reading the teacher’s suggestions, only one (C) 
stated that he read the teacher’s language suggestions for other students. Some (A, B, D) also mentioned 
that when reading their classmates’ blogs, they did not pay much attention to their classmates’ English. 
When asked if they felt their English had improved because of the project, all of them gave an affirmative 
answer. In their explanation, as the project proceeded, they were able to write more in a shorter time. The 
following observation made by student D was shared by many other group one participants (A, B, C):  
When writing the third or fourth post, I was quite satisfied with my writing. I felt I had a better 
sense of English. I mean, I didn’t get stuck at as many places as before. Compared with my 
previous posts, I could feel I wrote much faster. 
Student D added that she had never experienced this kind of progress before because in the past, she had 
only written in English for exams. When writing for that purpose, she noted, “I worried about a lot of 
things, such as structure and grammar, and I concentrated on inserting fancy vocabulary and sentence 
patterns into my writing to impress the marker.” Another two students also said that in their later posts, 
they found they were able to skip the step of translating their thoughts from Chinese to English (A, C). 
In summary, this group shared a number of characteristics: they had strong passion for, and claimed 
expertise in the knowledge they shared on their blogs. This enthusiasm and confidence was accompanied 
by a palpable ambition to teach their audience about what they knew. They also developed ownership of 
their work, seeing it as reflecting part of their selves. Together, these themes revealed that the group 
recognized the knowledge they had obtained in their personal life as valid knowledge in educational 
settings, such as in the blog project. As illustrated, they thrived at being allowed to bring their personal 
knowledge to the blogging environment, through which they shared the social aspects of themselves with 
people inside and outside school. This emphasis on the socially based characteristics of the learner as the 
basis of legitimate insights indicated that the social relations characterizing this group’s educational 
dispositions were relatively strong (SR+). Moreover, while highlighting the personal knowledge 
displayed in their own and their peers’ blogs, this group downplayed the significance of English language 
skills. Even when discussing their language improvement, the students accentuated how it had become 
easier for them to express their thoughts (the “who”) rather than on the attainment of language skills (the 
“what” and “how”). The relative de-emphasis on language skills embodied weaker epistemic relations 
(ER-). In short, regarding the content of learning, this group demonstrated relatively strong knower-code 
(ER-, SR+) educational dispositions. 
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  190 
Characteristics of Less-Satisfied Learners. Like their group one counterparts, group two exhibited shared 
characteristics, although most of these were in direct contrast to those of group one. The first salient 
characteristic was that group two did not demonstrate passion or lasting commitment to their blog topics. 
In fact, all of them experienced difficulty focusing on their topics. One discussed the stress of having 
nothing to say about her topic:  
The night before the due date, I would start worrying there was nothing new I could say about 
this singer. I chose her as my topic because I happened to be listening to her latest album at the 
time. I didn’t plan what I would write about her, so I became a bit anxious. I felt I was running 
out of ideas all the time. (H)  
Another gave up on her initial topic because she was not willing to dedicate time to researching it: 
I had wanted to write about music, and I spent a lot of time looking for information in the first 
two weeks. But then I found it took too much time, so I switched to writing about miscellaneous 
things that happened in my daily life. (J) 
Second, in terms of audience awareness, two students (H, I) in this group showed that they were 
conscious of the larger audience on the Internet, but the awareness had a negative impact on their writing. 
Contrary to their group one peers striving to construct a positive image because of the awareness, these 
two students in group two detached themselves from their writing by avoiding disclosing their opinions, 
as indicated in this quote by student I: 
I wouldn’t say what was on my mind that might sound too critical. I might touch on the issue but 
I wouldn’t go into too much depth…. People may get upset, and I worry about the consequences. 
I mean, some people may leave nasty messages on my blog. I don’t like that. 
The rest of the group said that it had never occurred to them that people outside class might read their 
blogs even though the teacher had mentioned the possibility. Typical comments provided by these 
students were “Who would read my blog? It’s just an assignment; it’s not like I have written something 
that’s a big deal” (F), and “Except for those who know me personally, who would care about my life or 
what I think?” (J). These statements also suggested that, unlike group one, the students did not think their 
blogs would offer valuable information to others. Neither did they share Group one’s sense of mission to 
introduce what they knew about the topics to their readers. This observation was confirmed when another 
two students (F, G), who wrote about health tips and volunteer work experience, gave a lukewarm 
response to the question about whether or not they would be pleased if their blogs helped other people 
learn about their topics. Regardless of the relatively large number of responses some of his posts had 
attracted, student F noted, “It gave me a chance to practice English, and that’s all.” 
Finally, in contrast to their lack of enthusiasm about their writing content, this group expressed great 
concern about their language improvement. The data indicated that they did not find participating in the 
project a satisfying experience because they felt it did not help them improve their English. Student H, for 
example, said, “In my blog, I always used words I already knew, so I didn’t feel I was making any 
progress.” Some (H, G, J) likened blogging to writing a diary, stating that blogging was too informal to be 
as effective as writing a traditional essay in terms of pushing them to learn language forms. As G noted: 
When blogging, you write whatever is on your mind, but when writing a formal essay, you have 
to have an introduction, a conclusion, transition signals, things like that. The teacher could have 
required us to do more things like this in our blogs. 
Summing up, with respect to the content of learning, group two experienced the project very differently to 
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  191 
group one. They suffered from having little to write and did not deem what they wrote to be of value to 
themselves nor to others. Put another way, they felt their personal insights were not worth sharing, which 
indicated a downplaying of their socially based attributes. This de-emphasis on the social aspects of the 
learner was also exemplified by students H and I’s suppression of expressing their personal views on their 
blogs. The social relations characterizing this group’s educational dispositions were thus relatively weak 
(SR-). In addition, this group’s comments regarding the project’s drawbacks in offering them new 
language skills to learn (the “what”) manifested an emphasis on the epistemic relations (ER+). Together, 
the specialization code represented by group two’s educational dispositions concerning the content of 
learning was a “knowledge code” (ER+, SR-). 
Teaching Methods 
Because group one’s characteristics regarding the teaching methods can only be fully understood once 
group two’s responses have been presented, this section discusses group two’s responses first. 
In addition to feeling that they did not learn new words and formal writing structure through blogging, 
group two students noted that their learning was hampered by the insufficient amount of direct teacher 
instruction in writing skills. Student I, for example, expressed her need for the teacher to lecture on 
language forms, which was echoed by two other group two participants (G, H): 
In the past, after we wrote an essay, the teacher would usually tell us our mistakes. The teacher 
would also lecture on correct grammar or the usage of words we didn’t know. So we could learn 
them. But with blogging, I often didn’t know about the mistakes I might have made. 
When asked to comment on the suggestions for improving the project raised in the questionnaires or by 
other students during their interviews, and invited to offer additional suggestions, group two’s responses 
revolved around the teaching methods, including three in particular: the teacher assigning the same 
writing topic for the whole class, so they could compare their own writing with others’ writing (G, I); the 
teacher requiring them to practice using words, phrases or sentence patterns taught in class in their posts, 
and checking for correct usage (G, H); and also generally, the teacher making more corrections of their 
writing (F, G, H, I, J). 
All group one participants were strongly against the first two of these suggestions, insisting that being 
able to write about a topic of their interest was the greatest strength of the project and that it would be 
“very annoying” and “contrived” (B) to be “forced” (A, E) to use certain words or sentence patterns in 
their posts. Regarding the third suggestion, one student (C) spoke favorably of more error corrections, 
while the others said that although they welcomed it, it would not have given them a stronger incentive to 
write their blogs. It is worth mentioning that student C revealed he edited his posts more carefully after he 
realized the teacher would not do so for him. 
In summary, with regard to the teaching methods, there was also a marked contrast between the two 
groups’ views. Group two’s apparent need for more instructional guidance suggested they felt the control 
over what knowledge they learned and how they learned it should reside with the teacher. As illustrated, 
they did not appreciate the freedom to decide what to write, appearing to be disoriented with such a 
teaching strategy. Put another way, to them, individual students’ learning preferences were secondary to 
explicit teaching procedures - epistemic relations were highlighted (ER+) while social relations were 
downplayed (SR-). Group two’s educational dispositions pertaining to teaching methods, like their 
dispositions concerning the content of learning, were thus also specialized by a “knowledge code” (ER+, 
SR-). 
By contrast, group one’s responses to group two’s suggestions for improving the project indicated that in 
terms of teaching methods, group one valued the space allowed for personal predilections in their learning 
processes, considering too much teacher control to be an imposition to their writing. Accordingly, group 
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  192 
one’s educational dispositions relating to teaching methods, like their dispositions regarding the content 
of learning, also represented a “knower code” (ER-, SR+). 
DISCUSSION 
This study explored Taiwanese EFL learners’ experiences of participating in a blog project with an 
intention to understand potential discrepancies in their views of this form of learning. Using Maton’s 
(2007, 2014) specialization codes as the theoretical framework, the study yielded two major findings. The 
first was that the students, as a whole, entered the blogging environment with educational dispositions at 
odds with those considered desirable in the environment. Specifically, the pedagogical design, aiming to 
empower individual learners by recognizing their personal experiences and perspectives as valid 
educational knowledge, was specialized by a knower code. The design constructed learners as already 
legitimate knowers by virtue of who they were. However, the educational dispositions of the students in 
this study tended to be characterized by the opposite knowledge code, which devalued what was 
prioritized in the teaching design and focused on language skills instead. The consequences of this code 
clash came to light in the blogging experiences of some students, who were arguably the “wrong” kind of 
knowers for this type of learning, which will be discussed hereafter. 
The second finding of the study was that the differences in individual learners’ educational dispositions 
led to their more, or less, positive blogging experiences. Those who prospered in the project tended to 
possess stronger knower-code educational dispositions, which matched the pedagogical design. By 
regarding it as legitimate to bring their personal knowledge to the blogging environment, and also being 
ready to do so, the students showed they recognized the basis of achievement in the project resided in the 
characteristics to do with themselves (i.e., the social aspects of the knower), and they could identify with 
it. They also had the means to realize it. As discussed in the preceding section, they had abundant 
personal knowledge of their blog topics, and they were empowered by the ample freedom to present it in 
their preferred ways. They were therefore pre-equipped with the attributes assumed by the pedagogical 
design, which made them the “right” kind of knowers for the project. These students’ blogging 
experiences could therefore be conceptualized as knower-code ones. 
On the other hand, those who were less satisfied with the project envisioned a clear-cut boundary between 
educational knowledge and everyday knowledge. To them, the possession and manifestation of good 
language skills, regardless of what is being communicated through the skills, defined a successful learner. 
They also held direct instruction by the teacher to be essential for effective learning. In this form of 
thinking, it is specialized knowledge of the field that shapes the knower. This relatively strong 
knowledge-code educational disposition was not considered desirable in the blogging environment, 
rendering the students the “wrong” kind of knowers for the project. As a result, unlike the former group, 
their experience of the project was not one of freedom from the constraints of bounded and controlled 
knowledge, but rather one of an “absence” of guidance and direction from the teacher. Not recognizing 
their own or their peers’ personal insights shared in the blogging context as valid educational knowledge, 
and feeling that they were not taught valid knowledge in the blogging environment, the students 
experienced the project as devoid of legitimacy. Accordingly, they could not base their success on their 
positions as knowers or on the “right” procedures to gain knowledge. The experience embodied a 
“relativist code” (ER-, SR-), empty of knowledge and knower. I therefore conclude that when a learner 
whose educational dispositions represent a knowledge code enters a learning context specialized by a 
knower code, a code clash and a resultant relativist-code experience can be anticipated. 
Blogs and other Web 2.0 technologies have facilitated practitioners’ use of teaching approaches that 
emphasize the socially based attributes of the learner as well as the personal and social dimensions of 
learning. While the convergence of these technologies and pedagogical approaches obviously has its 
merits, the study found that this form of teaching practice assumes a particular type of learner. It is 
therefore advised that practitioners exercise caution when implementing this kind of teaching practice 
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  193 
with learners who may not be equipped with knower-code dispositions. In addition to making the basis of 
achievement explicit to learners, one way to address this problem is to incorporate some optional 
knowledge-code tasks in the teaching design; another is to find ways to help learners who do not possess 
the desirable learning attributes to cultivate them. This may include exposing them to learning behaviors 
and attitudes compatible with the learning environment, modeled by the teacher or by their fellow learners 
through collaborative work. 
Finally, it is important to consider the limitations of this study and avenues for further research. The study 
argued that differences in L2 learners’ educational dispositions led to their differing blogging experiences. 
This does not discount the possibility that other factors beyond the scope of this study, such as language 
proficiency, gender, and disciplinary differences, may also have played a role. Future research could 
investigate these factors. Another important direction for further research is to develop methods for 
identifying knowledge-code and knower-code educational dispositions to help practitioners diagnose the 
needs of their learners. 
CONCLUSION 
By investigating the relations between a blog-assisted language teaching design, learners’ educational 
dispositions, and their blogging experiences, the study reported in this paper found that a knower-code 
EFL blog project is favorable to learners of a certain kind and disadvantageous to others. The paper 
demonstrated how an alternative theoretical perspective could offer new insights into the problem under 
study. In short, a code match between a learner’s educational dispositions and the blog design resulted in 
the learner experiencing the project positively as enabling space for personal creativity, whilst a code 
clash between a learner’s dispositions and the blog design caused the learner to experience the project 
negatively as withholding knowledge and direct instruction from him/her. As illustrated, 
LCT(Specialization) provided concepts that allowed learning and teaching practices, as well as their 
relations, to be systemically analyzed and compared, leading to a theorization of EFL learners’ blogging 
experiences. Future research utilizing this theory to investigate other dimensions of language teaching and 
learning practices will be valuable. 
 
APPENDIX: Interview Guide 
1. How did you choose your blog topic? 
2. Which entry in your blog is your favorite? Which entry took the longest time to write? 
3. Describe your process of composing a post, from deciding what to write to publishing it online. 
4. What gave you a sense of achievement in the project? 
5. What pleased/frustrated you about writing a blog? 
6. What do you think about people you don’t know reading your blog? 
7. What influenced your decisions in choosing a blog to read? 
8. What influenced your decisions in choosing a blog to comment on? 
9. Were you happy with the comments you received in terms of quantity and quality?  
10. Did it bother you if/when you didn’t receive at least two comments on each of your blog entries? 
11. If the project were to continue, would you participate, or would you prefer that the teacher conduct 
another kind of project to help you learn? 
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  194 
12. How do you think the project can be improved to help students learn more? 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The author thanks all participants for their involvement in the study, and the anonymous reviewers for 
their helpful suggestions and comments on this paper. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Rainbow Chen is an assistant professor in the Foreign Language Center at National Chengchi University, 
Taiwan. Her research interests include second language education, cross-cultural education, and 
sociological perspectives on technology-enhanced learning and teaching. 
E-mail: rchen@nccu.edu.tw 
 
REFERENCES 
Absalom, M., & De Saint Léger, D. (2011). Reflecting on reflection: Learner perceptions of diaries and 
blogs in tertiary language study. Arts and Humanities in Higher Education, 10(2), 189–211.  
Alm, A. (2009). Blogging for self-determination with L2 learner journals. In M. Thomas (Ed.), Handbook 
of research on Web 2.0 and second language learning (pp. 202–222). Hershey, PA: Information Science 
Reference. 
Bernstein, B. (2000). Pedagogy, symbolic control, and identity: Theory, research, critique (Rev. ed.). 
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. 
Bhattacharya, A., & Chauhan, K. (2010). Augmenting learner autonomy through blogging. ELT Journal, 
64(4), 376–384. 
Bloch, J. (2007). Abdullah’s blogging: A generation 1.5 student enters the blogosphere. Language 
Learning & Technology, 11(2), 128–141. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num2/pdf/bloch.pdf 
Carvalho, L., Dong, A., & Maton, K. (2009) Legitimating design: A sociology of knowledge account of 
the field. Design Studies, 30(5), 483–502. 
Chen, R. T.-H. (2010). Knowledge and knowers in online learning: Investigating the effects of online 
flexible learning on Chinese student sojourners. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of 
Wollongong, Australia. 
Chen, R. T.-H., Maton, K., & Bennett, S. (2011). Absenting discipline: Constructivist approaches in 
online learning. In F. Christie & K. Maton (Eds.), Disciplinarity: Functional linguistic and sociological 
perspectives (pp. 129–150). London, UK: Continuum. 
Comas-Quinn, A., Mardomingo, R., & Valentine, C. (2009). Mobile blogs in language learning: Making 
the most of informal and situated learning opportunities. ReCALL, 21(1), 96–112. 
Ducate, L. C., & Lomicka, L. L. (2005). Exploring the blogosphere: Use of web logs in the foreign 
language classroom. Foreign Language Annals, 38(3), 410–421.  
Elola, I., & Oskoz, A. (2008). Blogging: Fostering intercultural competence development in foreign 
language and study abroad contexts. Foreign Language Annals, 41(3), 454–477. 
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  195 
García-Sánchez, S., & Rojas-Lizana, S. (2012). Bridging the language and cultural gaps: The use of 
blogs. Technology, Pedagogy and Education, 21(3), 361–381. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2003). Emerging technologies: Blogs and wikis: Environments for on-line 
collaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 12–16. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/pdf/emerging.pdf 
Golonka, E. M., Bowles, A. R., Frank, V. M., Richardson, D. L., & Freynik, S. (2014). Technologies for 
foreign language learning: A review of technology types and their effectiveness. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 27(1), 70–105. 
Green, A. (1998). Verbal protocol analysis in language testing research: A handbook. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Hood, S. (2011). Writing discipline: Comparing inscriptions of knowledge and knowers in academic 
writing. In F. Christie & K. Maton (Eds.), Disciplinarity: Functional Linguistic and Sociological 
Perspectives (pp.106–128). London: Continuum. 
Howard, S., & Maton, K. (2011). Theorising knowledge practices: A missing piece of the educational 
technology puzzle. Research in Learning Technology, 19(3), 191–206. 
Huang, H-c. (2015). From web-based readers to voice bloggers: EFL learners’ perspectives. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 28(2), 145–170.  
Lamont, A., & Maton, K. (2010). Unpopular music: Beliefs and behaviours towards music in education, 
in (Ed.). In R. Wright (Ed.), Sociology and Music Education (pp. 63–80). London, UK: Ashgate. 
Lee, L. (2010). Fostering reflective writing and interactive exchange through blogging in an advanced 
language course. ReCALL, 22(2), 212–227. 
Macken-Horarik, M. (2011). Building a knowledge structure for English: Reflections on the challenges of 
coherence, cumulative learning, portability and face validity. The Australian Journal of Education, 55(3), 
197-213. 
Mackey, A., & Gass, S. M. (2005). Second language research: Methodology and design. Mahwah, N.J.: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Maton, K. (2007). Knowledge-knower structures in intellectual and educational fields. In F. Christie & J. 
R. Martin (Eds.), Language, knowledge and pedagogy: Functional linguistic and sociological 
perspectives (pp. 87–108). London, UK: Continuum. 
Maton, K. (2014). Knowledge and knowers: Towards a realist sociology of education. London, UK: 
Routledge.  
Matruglio, E., Maton, K., & Martin, J. R. (2013). Time travel: The role of temporality in enabling 
semantic waves in secondary school teaching. Linguistics and Education, 24(1), 38–49. 
Melo-Pfeifer, S. (2015). Blogs and the development of plurilingual and intercultural competence: Report 
of a co-actional approach in Portuguese foreign language classroom. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 28(3), 220–240.  
Merchant, G. (2011). Unravelling the social network: Theory and research. Learning, Media and 
Technology, 37(1), 4–19. 
Michinov, N., & Michinov, E. (2008). Face-to-face contact at the midpoint of an online collaboration: Its 
impact on the patterns of participation, interaction, affect, and behavior over time. Computers & 
Education, 50(4), 1540–1557. 
Mompean, A. R. (2010). The development of meaningful interactions on a blog used for the learning of 
Rainbow T.-H. Chen L2 Blogging: Who Thrives? 
 
Language Learning & Technology  196 
English as a foreign language. ReCALL, 22, 376–395. 
Murray, L., & Hourigan, T. (2008). Blogs for specific purposes: Expressivist or socio-cognitivist 
approach? ReCALL, 20(1), 82–97. 
Shay, S. (2011). Curriculum formation: A case study from history. Studies in Higher Education, 36(3), 
315–329. 
Sun, Y.-C. (2009). Voice blog: An exploratory study of language learning. Language Learning & 
Technology, 13(2), 88–103. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num2/sun.pdf 
Vurdien, R. (2013). Enhancing writing skills through blogging in an advanced English as a Foreign 
Language class in Spain. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 26(2), 126–143. 
Wolff, K., & Luckett, K. (2013). Integrating multidisciplinary engineering knowledge. Teaching in 
Higher Education, 18(1), 78–92. 
Yang, Y.-F. (2011). Learner interpretations of shared space in multilateral English blogging. Language 
Learning & Technology, 15(1), 122–146. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/yang.pdf 
