Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2015/news.pdf 
October 2015, Volume 19, Number 3 
pp. 52–55 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 52 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
University of Hawai‘i Center for Language and Technology (CLT) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC) 
 
 
 
 
 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
The NFLRC Team @ ACTFL 2015 
NOVEMBER 20-22, 2015 • San Diego, CA 
Going to the 2015 American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages (ACTFL) Convention in San 
Diego, California? The NFLRC team will be out in full force with 6 exciting presentations related to our 
Project-Based Language Learning (PBLL) and Online Language Pedagogy (OLP) projects. Mark your 
calendars and come join us! 
Also, come visit our booth (#1849) in the ACTFL 2015 Exhibit Hall! 
2016 ONLINE SYMPOSIUM: PROJECT-BASED LANGUAGE LEARNING (PBLL): 
INSPIRING TEACHERS, TRANSFORMING LEARNING  
On January 12-15, 2016, the Project-Based Language Learning (PBLL) Online Symposium will bring 
together experts, educational leaders, and world language teachers to foster conversation on the potential 
of PBLL to transform and enhance language education. PBLL’s intersections with content-based 
instruction, task-based language learning, and performance assessment make it an ideal means for 
grounding language learning in real needs and measurable outcomes.  
We invite language educators, policymakers, researchers, and innovators to join the conversation and help 
further refine the Project-Based Learning framework by anchoring it to issues and ideas that are relevant 
to language education. This unique FREE event will provide attendees not only invaluable opportunities 
to access expertise in PBLL and engage in thought-provoking and constructive dialogues, but also a 
chance to network with professionals who are passionate about this topic. 
2016 ONLINE INSTITUTE: FUNDAMENTALS OF PROJECT-BASED LANGUAGE 
LEARNING 
Project-Based Learning has a rich and productive history extending for over 100 years. Embark on a 
journey of discovery to better understand project-based language learning (PBLL) and explore its 
connections with 21st Century Skills, content-based instruction, performance assessment and your own 
instructional context. Experts in the field guide you through the creation of a project blueprint. Connect 
with colleagues who have a common interest in quality PBLL implementation.  
Complete Option 1 as part of a facilitated cohort or Option 2 via self-paced study. Successfully complete 
all assigned tasks and earn an NFLRC digital badge, which qualifies you to apply for the NFLRC PBLL 
Intensive Summer Institute offered each year. Registration for the online institute is $25 and opens in 
November 2015. Space is limited, so sign up today. 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
2016 Southwest Conference on Language Teaching (SWCOLT) 
MARCH 3–5, 2016 • Honolulu, HI 
We are pleased to be hosting the 2016 Southwest Conference on Language Teaching (SWCOLT), its first 
time in Hawai‘i, in conjunction with the Hawai‘i Association of Language Teachers (HALT), which will 
be celebrating its 30th anniversary.  
SWCOLT is a regional foreign language teachers’ organization that brings together K-16 language 
educators from 9 member states: Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawai‘i, Nevada, New Mexico, 
Oklahoma, Texas, and Utah.  
SWCOLT 2016 will be held at the Hilton Waikiki Beach Hotel, with pre-conference workshops on March 
3 and the main conference on March 4–5. The theme of the conference will be I ka ʻōlelo ke ola (“In 
language, there is life”). Please see the SWCOLT website for more details 
STAY IN TOUCH WITH SOCIAL MEDIA 
Did you know that the NFLRC has its own Facebook page with over 2,800 fans? It’s one of the best 
ways to hear about the latest news, publications, conferences, workshops, and resources we offer. Just 
click on the “Like” button to become a fan. For those who prefer getting up-to-the-minute “tweets,” you 
can follow us on our Twitter page. Finally, NFLRC has its own YouTube channel with a growing 
collection of free language learning and teaching videos for your perusal. Subscribe today! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
 
NFLRC maintains a large searchable archive of  free language research 
and teaching materials which currently contains over 350 items. These 
items include foreign language teaching materials —print, audio, and 
video,—language acquisition research papers, and collections of 
conference materials. 
Save the trees! Check out our other two online, open-access journals: 
  
Language Documentation & Conservation is a 
refereed, open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC 
and published by University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to 
language documentation and conservation, as well 
as book reviews, hardware and software reviews, 
and notes from the field. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed 
international journal of issues in foreign language 
reading and literacy, published twice yearly on the 
World Wide Web and sponsored by NFLRC and 
the University of Hawai‘i College of Languages, 
Linguistics, and Literature. 
View all NFLRC Publications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research 
(CLEAR) 
  
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We enjoyed seeing many of you in 
Boulder, CO at the CALICO conference, and look forward to seeing you at MIWLA and ACTFL later 
this year. We will be hosting CALICO 2016 right here in East Lansing, so May would be a perfect time to 
come and visit us in person! 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
CLEAR hosted three well-attended professional development workshops in July. Covering topics 
including reading and listening in the language classroom, online tools for language learning, and 
proficiency-based assessment, the workshops offered hands-on experience and lots of ideas for language 
educators from across the United States. Watch our Web site in October for the announcement of topics 
and dates for summer 2016, our twentieth year of summer workshops. 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/resources/newsletter/. 
