Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/emerging.pdf 
February 2015, Volume 19, Number 1 
pp. 10–22 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 10 
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES 
THE EVOLVING ROLES OF LANGUAGE TEACHERS:  
TRAINED CODERS, LOCAL RESEARCHERS, GLOBAL CITIZENS 
Robert Godwin-Jones, Virginia Commonwealth University 
APA Citation: Godwin-Jones, R. (2015). The evolving roles of language teachers: 
Trained coders, local researchers, global citizens. Language Learning & Technology, 
19(1), 10–22. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/emerging.pdf 
Copyright: © Robert Godwin-Jones 
INTRODUCTION 
Language teachers are working in a world which has changed in the past decades in fundamentally 
disruptive ways, through profound changes in the role that networked computers play in everyday life and 
through the social and demographic shifts brought on by an increasingly globalized society, bringing 
together more than ever before people from different cultures and languages in real and virtual 
environments. Not all parts of the world are affected in the same way or at the same rate of change, but 
these global trends are likely to bring significant changes to communities everywhere (Canagarajah, 
2002). One of the byproducts of this new environment is the growth in opportunity for language learning, 
in particular through informal environments such as social networks and networked gaming. Increasingly, 
our students’ lives involve heavy use of technology, especially through mobile devices, and the building 
and maintenance of meaningful relationships not necessarily based on face-to-face contact and sometimes 
extending well beyond their own home base. Second language teachers need to be able to work 
effectively in this evolving environment, preparing students for work and life in a world likely to be quite 
different from that in which they grew up, and which is likely to continue to change in significant ways. 
The challenges for training language teachers to deal with this dynamic are considerable. We need 
teachers not only to be proficient in the target language and have sufficient training in being effective 
classroom teachers, but they also will need to be able to cope with increased use of technology, and the 
need for all educated citizens to be global citizens (Kumaravadivelu, 2013). They will need to be able to 
follow new developments in technology and be able to understand their potential use in second language 
instruction. Crucially, teachers will need to be able to assess how new developments might fit in (or not) 
to their local instructional context. In this column we will examine the interconnected roles that L2 
(second language) teachers may need to play in order to be effective in a changing social, educational, 
and technological environment. Fundamentally, this involves 1) gaining an inside appreciation of how 
computers and networks operate, 2) being able to evaluate new technologies and how they can be 
integrated into their own teaching and learning environments, and 3) learning how to equip students to 
deal with an increasingly interconnected and multilingual world. 
LEARNING TO CODE 
At a conference talk in November, 2014, Tim Berners-Lee, the inventor of the World Wide Web, called 
on politicians to learn how to program, not, he said, because we want them to spend their time writing 
computer code, but because we want them to be able to make informed decisions about laws having to do 
with technology use. There have been similar calls for other professionals, such as marketing specialists 
or business professionals to learn to code. In fact, there have been proposals for coding to be taught to all 
schoolchildren. This, indeed, will be the case in England starting in 2015, with all children from ages 5 to 
16 being introduced to programming. Estonia already introduced computer programming in the early 
years of its primary schools. President Obama made a plea in 2013 for coding to be taught more widely in 
Robert Godwin-Jones Evolving Roles of Language Teachers 
 
Language Learning & Technology  11 
U.S. schools and during the “Hour of Code” project in 2014 wrote some JavaScript himself. The recent 
uproar over Barbie: I can be a computer engineer captures the current interest in the U.S. in extending 
coding abilities to everyone. The book begins with Barbie describing to her sister a game she is designing. 
But when her sister asks to play the game, Barbie laughingly replies that she’s only coming up with the 
idea for the game, her male friends are doing the programming. Subsequently, it turns out that Barbie has 
infected her own computer and that of her friends with a virus and has no idea what to do. Clearly, this is 
not a classic of world literature, nor an educational model for girls. A remix of the book has Barbie 
empowered to help design and code the game. 
The idea behind the coding movement is not to teach hard-core programming universally, but rather to 
have children learn to code in order to become familiar with programming logic and procedures. Tools 
are being developed specifically for that purpose. One of those being widely used in education at the 
primary and secondary levels is Scratch, a free multimedia development environment created at MIT. It 
uses a visual, drag-and-drop interface with simple, English-like syntax (also available in some 40 other 
languages). Scratch can be used to create games, animations, or digital stories. There are a substantial 
number of language learning apps created by educators or children. Any app created with Scratch has 
viewable source code, making it quite easy to learn by example or to create templates. Using Scratch 
introduces children to the basics of procedural computer programming through a user-friendly, media-rich 
environment. Mitch Resnick, the MIT professor heading up Scratch development, gave a Ted talk, 
advocating for children to learn programming, in which he compared learning to code to becoming 
proficient in a second language. In his view, learning to code allows users to become "fluent in 
technology", by which he meant going beyond just using tools and services, to be able to "express 
oneself” through software. He goes on to tout the benefits of learning to program, many of which mesh 
with language learning skills. He pointed to a young programmer learning the role of variables by needing 
to use them in the process of coding the functionality he wanted, i.e. learning in a real-world, task-based 
context. Other skills mentioned are the ability to break down a complex idea into smaller elements, 
learning how to collaborate with others, and strategizing on how to work around bottlenecks, all of which 
will sound familiar to L2 teachers weaned on task-based language learning. 
There's no question in my mind that the kind of "technology fluency" Resnick is promoting is something 
advantageous to any language teacher (and to teachers in other fields as well). Clearly, few children 
experiencing coding in school will grow up to become professional programmers, nor is there any 
expectation that language teachers en masse will be writing software. However, it certainly is the case that 
language teachers - to one degree or another - will be using software in their teaching and that the role and 
nature of that software will evolve considerably over the teachers’ careers. This means that teachers 
should not just learn how to use current tools and services, but should have an understanding of how they 
were created, how they differ from what came before, how they might be improved, and how they fit 
together with other tools and services. One way to gain that kind of inside knowledge is to have some 
understanding of how technology tools and services are built (like learning a language to gain an inside 
view of a culture). Learning to code oneself is an important step in that direction. It can be invaluable in 
understanding what's possible and what's not possible, what might be trivial to code or might require a 
substantial investment in time and manpower. This provides a quite different perspective on software 
selection and use. I've experienced too many IT managers (information technology) and technology 
project directors who wasted considerable time, effort, and money buying into programs or projects for 
which, if they had had a better foundational knowledge of computing fundamentals, would not have been 
under consideration at all. 
The necessity of teachers being able to evaluate and adapt new software is not a new idea in CALL 
research (Warschauer, 2002; Robb, 2006, for example), but in today’s world what is needed is knowledge 
and experience that goes beyond being able to make informed decisions about new options in 
instructional technology. This needn't translate into learning C++ or Java. Using a visual programming 
Robert Godwin-Jones Evolving Roles of Language Teachers 
 
Language Learning & Technology  12 
environment such as Scratch can provide a useful introduction to concepts and procedures, for learning 
programming basics such as abstraction, sequencing, loops, variables, functions and conditional logic. 
Additional experiential gains from learning programming basics include insight into iterative design, 
structuring data, the process and value of trial and error, and the nature of non-linear thinking. Learning 
the exact syntax of any given programming language is not as important as gaining an appreciation of 
basic programming logic and procedures. It could be sufficient to be able to understand a project concept 
expressed through “pseudo code”, a high-level representation in plain English of a programming 
algorithm (a set of step-by-step operational instructions). 
A tool that can provide an introduction to programming basics, and as well enable creation of quite 
sophisticated applications, is LiveCode, which like Scratch, uses an easy-to-follow, English syntax. In 
fact, anyone old enough to have done any work in HyperCard will feel quite at home with LiveCode, as it 
is based on the scripting language of that Apple product, HyperTalk. Like its predecessor, HyperCard, 
LiveCode has been used to create language learning courseware, with a set of templates available. There 
are multiple other opportunities for learning programming, from formal courses to online tutorials and 
instructional videos. The online service CodeAcademy provides free interactive introductions to a variety 
of languages, including HTML, JavaScript, PHP, Python, and Ruby; similar learning opportunities are 
available from Code Avengers and Code School. MOOCs (massive open online courses) provide more 
formal and in-depth programming courses. Online projects such as CoderDojo provide access to volunteer 
programming clubs, an opportunity to learn in a collaborative environment. One of the most accessible 
options for exploring coding informally is to try out one of the many online interactive programming 
sites, which, through directions and prompts, guide users to write sample code. The written code is then 
run, allowing instant viewing of the result, as in the screenshot from a JavaScript interactive tutorial in 
Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Beginning to learn JavaScript from an online tutorial 
A quite popular language used for Web programming today is Ruby, an object-oriented language from 
Japan. The TryRuby site offers a nice 15-minute interactive tour of Ruby, while the CodeAcademy’s 
short course takes 9 hours. The most popular language taught in North American computer science 
programs today is Python, created by a Dutch programmer. CodeAcademy’s introduction to Python takes 
13 hours and an interactive tutorial is available. Clearly, none of these sites will turn teachers into 
professional programmers, but they do provide a nice taste of what’s involved in writing code. 
Robert Godwin-Jones Evolving Roles of Language Teachers 
 
Language Learning & Technology  13 
TECHNOLOGY FUNDAMENTALS  
Learning the fundamentals of computer programming is, of course, only one part of what teachers need to 
know in terms of technology. One of the areas of increasing importance is a fundamental understanding 
of the World Wide Web and the Internet. At a recent conference, I demoed a webpage I had created as a 
guide to resources for an intermediate language class, what used to be called a "homepage". The page was 
nothing fancy, basically a set of hyperlinks, some annotated, but it did, as do many webpages today, 
automatically reformat itself when viewed on a smaller screen. Afterwards, one of the other panelists, 
who had reported on her own Blackboard course site, asked me who had done the "programming" for the 
page I showed. The colleague was quite proficient in using a learning management system (LMS) to 
create a website for students, but had, I discovered in talking with her, no idea how webpages were 
created. She may have heard of HTML (hypertext markup language) or even of CSS (cascading style 
sheets), but did not know what role they played in webpage creation. By assuming webpages had to be 
"programmed", which likely implied having to use special, dedicated programming software, she was 
unaware of how simple webpage authoring is (or at least can be). Because the underlying code (HTML, 
CSS, or JavaScript) is plaintext, any text editor can be used, making it easy to copy and paste code from 
one page to another, or, as I had done, to paste the code necessary to switch CSS style sheets. This was 
code I had gotten from one of the many code sharing sites on the Internet (along with files containing 
sample CSS styles) and was able to use with only slight modifications. Users of an LMS, or any of the 
other many template authoring systems on the web today (for blogging, wikis, etc.) don't need this degree 
of web literacy in order to write a blog post or engage in other activities. However, I would argue, that, 
given its central role in communication and socialization today, knowing how the web works is important. 
Even in template-based systems, as well as in many forums or blog posts, it's possible to customize the 
look and feel by manually making changes to the HTML. A recent survey from the Pew Research Center 
found that most American internet users are not familiar with the basic concepts underpinning the 
Internet, including having difficulty in distinguishing the “web” from the “internet”. That degree of digital 
illiteracy is untenable for language teachers. 
In their article on "Language teachers in the 21st century”, written a decade ago, Chapelle and 
Hegelheimer (2004) already call for teachers to have a "basic understanding of webpage design and 
creation" (p. 308), as well as how to upload an HTML file to a server and modify it as needed. In their 
inventory of web literacy (searching, selecting, repurposing, troubleshooting), I would add bookmarking, 
annotating, and curating, as well as an understanding of streaming media (and of the legal and technical 
issues in saving streams as files). Chapelle and Hegelheimer mention an awareness of how interactivity 
works on the web. Today that involves a fundamental understanding of the nature of JavaScript and of the 
differences between such a scripting language and actual programming languages (such as Java). The 
code in scripting languages such as HTML or JavaScript, is not compiled ahead of time into an executable 
application, as is the case with programming languages such as Java or C++, but rather run (“interpreted”) 
in real-time when it’s accessed, as in the case of HTML/JavaScript in a browser. In general, scripting 
languages tend to be quick and easy, while programming languages are used for more complex projects, 
but that distinction does not always hold. All you need typically to work with a scripting language is a 
text editor. Along those lines, an understanding of the role and nature of PHP, a server-side scripting 
language, is useful, particularly given its role as the language behind the popular LMS (learning 
management system), Moodle. The rise of HTML5 has made the role of helper applications and plug-ins 
less important than in the past (see Godwin-Jones, 2014a). 
Chapelle and Hegelheimer in 2004 recommended familiarity with a set of communication tools. As an 
indicator of the extent to which technology can change in a decade, all the tools discussed (ICQ, IRC, 
Java Chat, AOL/MSN instant messaging, MOOs/MUDs) are today either gone or marginalized. One 
might put email for communicating with students in the list of communication modalities which have 
become problematic. Text messaging has become a much more widely used method of communicating, as 
Robert Godwin-Jones Evolving Roles of Language Teachers 
 
Language Learning & Technology  14 
has Twitter. Most of these conversational exchanges are taking place on mobile devices. Given the central 
importance that mobile phones play in the lives of many of our students, an understanding of the 
possibilities for using them in our teaching is important. One simple approach in terms of mobile access is 
that previously mentioned, of creating webpages to function as a kind of mobile companion for a course. 
This can provide mobile-friendly access (large touch accessible buttons) to resources students might want 
to use on the go, such as vocabulary flashcards, audio files, or short readings. Students can save a link to 
the page as an icon on their phones’ home screen, so that it's quick and easy to find. Putting the page on 
the open web, instead of within an LMS, also makes access easier, as there is no login requirement. 
Ideally, the page and its resources can be made available even if the user is off-line. This can be done 
through application cache or by saving the content in an e-book format (such as EPUB 3). Going this 
route to enable mobile access may be beyond the time and effort constraints of many language teachers, 
but keeping mobile in mind when thinking about making learning resources available students will surely 
be of growing importance. 
In the mobile space, another area of importance is understanding the nature of mobile apps, an area of 
tremendous growth in recent years. Creating mobile apps is not likely to be the free time activity of 
choice for most language teachers. However, having a fundamental understanding of how apps work is 
easily achievable (see Godwin-Jones, 2011). It’s important, for example, to be able to differentiate 
between proprietary apps, which run only on specific platforms, and web apps, which are universal. 
LiveCode, mentioned earlier, allows for creation of mobile apps for both Android and iOS operating 
systems. Hopscotch is a mobile app designed to teach basic programming skills to children and can be 
used to create games, animations, or stories. It uses a building-block system (chunks of pre-written code) 
that are combined and sequenced to create mobile programs (iOS only). For teachers interested in mobile 
gaming, the ARIS platform can be used to create quite sophisticated games for iOS devices (see Godwin-
Jones, 2014b). 
LEARNING TO USE TECHNOLOGY IN CONTEXT 
Being knowledgeable about available technology tools and services for language learning does not 
necessarily translate into teachers being able to make effective use of CALL in their teaching. In fact, the 
consensus in recent research on the use of language learning technology indicates that even in well-
equipped schools, there is scant evidence of effective technology integration in instruction (Hubbard & 
Levy, 2006; Ebsworth, Kim & Klein, 2010). This situation exists despite teacher standards and guidelines 
from a variety of governments, agencies, and organizations which strongly encourage or even mandate 
meaningful and effective technology use (Murphy-Judy & Young, 2007; DelliCarpini, 2012). Even 
among teachers who have had formal CALL instruction or undergone other professional training, the 
level of technology integration can be disappointing (Guichon & Hauck, 2011). We seem far from the 
state of "normalization" (Bax, 2003) in which the integration of technology is so widespread and routine 
that it represents the every day status quo in instructed language learning. There are, of course, a variety 
of possible explanations for this state of affairs, from practical issues of budgeting constraints, 
equipment/infrastructure issues, teacher overload, or lack of effective training to more intangible factors 
like teacher beliefs and attitudes.  
One of the most fundamental impediments for teachers to integrate CALL resources effectively is a lack 
of knowledge of how the resources can be used in their particular context, with their students, with their 
curriculum, and within the limitations of the educational and cultural environment in which the school is 
located. Knowing the teaching and learning context in which learning resources will be used seems such 
an obvious requirement for effective use as not to need additional discussion. Yet, I would argue, there's 
not always enough consideration of how technology should be adapted to local conditions. In books on 
CALL, and, I suspect, in many CALL courses as well, there's some mention of localizing, but, for 
practical reasons little discussion of specific contexts. This makes it incumbent on teachers themselves to 
Robert Godwin-Jones Evolving Roles of Language Teachers 
 
Language Learning & Technology  15 
take the responsibility of deciding the appropriateness of the tools and services to be used. In some cases, 
the physical conditions of use will set limits to what’s possible to implement. In some parts of the world, 
reliable power and wired internet access may be unavailable, making mobile access the technology of 
choice. Knowing the capabilities of the most commonly used phones would in that case be necessary.  
There are, of course, a good many other factors outside the control of the teacher which may have a 
significant impact on what is doable. There may be a national or local curriculum that precludes particular 
approaches to language instruction and that constrain the use of particular technologies. In some 
countries, preparation for success on high-stakes standardized tests may exert a determining influence on 
instruction (Chen & Reimer, 2009). I currently direct an ESL program (English as a second language) in 
which a large number of students from Saudi Arabia are enrolled. The Saudi Embassy precludes any of 
their scholarship students from participating in online or hybrid English language instruction. In many 
parts of the world, equipment scarcity or networking issues may make particular uses of instructional 
technology problematic. In other instances, particular cultures of use have developed around language 
teachers, influenced sometimes by national language policies, teacher reward systems, or by commercial 
interests. In Scandinavia, for example, English teachers can take advantage of the television culture which 
results in English language programs being televised with the original soundtrack, not dubbed into the 
local language, as is the case in most European countries.  
I recently gave a presentation at ChinaCALL on creating OER materials (open educational resources) for 
teaching German. It was politely received, but I felt that I hadn't connected well with the audience, 
overwhelmingly Chinese teachers of English. Of course, this may have been due to an uninspiring 
presentation, but in talking afterwards with Chinese and non-Chinese colleagues some additional factors 
emerged. The obvious one was that my presentation was the only one that dealt with a language other 
than English, an indication of the absolute dominance of that language in Chinese L2 instruction. Another 
factor was the concept of creating shareable learning materials. The consensus among my conversation 
partners was that in the competitive environment of English language instruction in China, there are 
opportunities to leverage one's own work in developing materials or initiating innovative teaching 
techniques in order to receive recognition or even win teaching awards, which could translate into pay 
raises. Additionally, the publishing companies which market English textbooks have such a strong 
presence in the Chinese market that they may be discouraging teacher-created learning materials. The 
companies offer a host of auxiliary materials and services around their textbooks and are very active in 
organizing training seminars for English teachers, which obviously strengthens their market standing 
(Goh & Chen, 2014). This is a very different environment from India, where non-commercial language 
learning materials are being developed, with a particular interest in producing indigenous materials. There 
are number of national, government-supported OER projects underway. A recent project creates a hybrid 
learning environment for Indian English teachers using Moodle, which encourages collaboration in using 
and creating resources (C. Siskin, personal communication, November 20, 2014). 
The effectiveness of technology use is also, of course, determined by the specific school context and the 
individual learners. The degree to which students feel comfortable and confident in the use of particular 
tools or services is an important consideration in their success or failure. Overcoming resistance to the use 
of “old school” technologies such as email or an LMS may be needed, or it might be necessary to 
convince students that social networking sites/tools they know and use can legitimately be used in 
education. In any case, learner training may be necessary (Hubbard, 2004; Hubbard, 2013). What might 
be needed as well is an understanding of students’ relationship to the language being learned. This means 
getting to know something about students’ identities and aspirations and, in some contexts, being able to 
provide students with the opportunity to develop identities through their L2 to supplement what the 
national or educational culture supplies (Lam, 2004; Johnson, 2006). Dealing explicitly as well with 
student attitudes toward technology use can be helpful in overcoming mismatches between student views 
and those of the teacher (Karabulut, Levelle, Li, & Suvurov, 2012). 
Robert Godwin-Jones Evolving Roles of Language Teachers 
 
Language Learning & Technology  16 
As teachers become aware of new options in technology (through peers, conferences, media reports, 
workshops), they will need to be able to assess the potential applicability to their own teaching. 
Depending on the resource or software, that might be an easy decision—low cost, good match, easy to 
use/integrate—or considerably more involved—high cost, uncertain fit, required training. Teachers will 
need to make choices based on their training, on their accumulated experience, and on the time/energy 
they have available. This may seem a tall order for already overburdened teachers, but being able to adapt 
resources and approaches to local conditions is the only way CALL resources can be integrated into a 
learning environment so as to be meaningful and sustainable. A unified, packaged approach may be what 
school administrators and educational policy makers envision, when considering technology use in 
schools, but teachers with real-world experience know how unlikely that approach is to be successful. 
Moreover, the nature of technology resources for language learning has changed considerably, just in the 
past few years. It used to be that selection of software was a major decision affecting teachers, 
administrators, and technical support personnel. Additionally, software had to be installed on all 
computers, in a lab environment, or in classrooms. In this scenario the advice provided in many CALL 
manuals makes good sense, namely to be cognizant of software lifespan, institutional support, and 
compatibility (Levy & Stockwell, 2006). While clearly these concerns are still applicable to much 
software use (productivity suites, for example), teachers today are more likely to be using technology in a 
modular, nimble, and on-demand fashion, cobbling together online exercises, web resources, OER 
materials, and possibly mobile apps. This provides more flexibility and increases teacher control (and 
responsibility), thereby attenuating the sense that some teachers may have of losing control through 
technology use (Guichon & Hauck, 2011). 
Giving teachers more responsibility for vetting resources for their own teaching may be unfamiliar in 
terms of technology use, but is really just an extension of what language teachers have always done, using 
their experience and creativity to adapt textbooks and other curricular materials to the needs of their 
students. What language teacher has not created handouts, exercises, and group projects to supplement 
textbooks? Encouraging teachers to record their experiences and systematize their findings allows others 
to profit from their work, leads teachers to reflect more on the significance of their actions, and in effect 
makes teachers into researchers. One recent study (McNeil, 2013) emphasized how important it is for 
teacher journals to be reflective, but also to have a real-world connection, in order for teachers to find 
enough value in the process to continue. Of particular appropriateness and usefulness for teachers is 
working on projects that reflect action research or exploratory practice, in which there are practical efforts 
to improve teaching through experimentation and to discover the roots of issues that arise in practice 
(Karabulut, Levelle, Li, & Suvurov, 2012). Research has shown that having teachers participate in 
research projects can enhance the value of the findings (Muller-Hartmann, 2000). 
National patterns of use in terms of language learning materials provide one of the contexts in which 
CALL is used and in which teacher training and professional development occur. The essential role that 
consideration of cultural attitudes and practices play, as they relate to teaching and learning, is well-
known through problematic experiences exporting Western-style teaching methodologies (Kern, 2006; 
Littlewood, 2007; Bannink, 2010) or learning management approaches (Reeder, Macfadyen, Roche & 
Chase, 2004). Teacher training programs that further national or regional goals and in which government 
or school officials have a vested interest stand a good chance of being sustainable. Successful programs 
are also likely to provide baseline training for all teachers, with options for interested teachers to go 
further. This is what is advocated for and built in to the TESOL Technology Standards. This is how the 
LearnIT2teach project in Ontario, Canada, is organized. It provides hybrid instruction for ESLand LINC 
teachers (Language instruction for newcomers to Canada). Teachers are trained to use a variety of 
learning resources created for the project, all of which are shared as OER, specifically designed for the 
bilingual Canadian context. Additionally, training is provided for teachers who want to create their own 
learning materials:  
Robert Godwin-Jones Evolving Roles of Language Teachers 
 
Language Learning & Technology  17 
The LearnIT2teach professional development program does not directly teach computer skills; 
however, the four training stages are designed to support teachers, so long as they enter the 
program with minimal computer capabilities. An additional training stage has been developed 
specifically with the needs of program administrators in mind. Stage 1 is a face-to-face 
introduction to the key elements of the LearnIT2teach program; Stage 2 is an introduction to the 
various instructional and administrative tools available in the program’s LMS, Moodle; Stage 3 
lets instructors deepen their knowledge by selecting and customizing courseware and putting it to 
work in their own classes; and Stage 4 lets instructors create their own e-learning activities and 
upload them to a digital repository, for access by other professionals and by students (Fahy, 
Sturm, & McBride, 2012, p.  11) 
Providing different levels of training and allowing teachers options for determining the extent to 
participate is more likely than a one-size-fits-all approach to accommodate the varied interests, 
backgrounds, and goals likely to be represented in a CALL course or other professional training. With the 
increasing number of part-time teachers, this kind of flexible scaffolding in CALL training is of growing 
importance. 
One of the benefits of a program such as LearnIT2teach is that it brings local language teachers together, 
to enable them to learn from one another. Studies have shown that in developing skills and knowledge to 
use technology in teaching, it is often the case that informal learning is more effective than formal 
instruction (Kessler, 2007). Communities of practice (CoP) provide one means to supply that kind of 
informal learning. These can be local or regional in membership or have a larger scope if operating 
online. Webheads in Action, for example, has long been offering collaborative support for technology use 
in TESOL. Particularly useful for teacher-researchers is the ability to share and compare with peers 
concrete techniques, project ideas, and classroom integration strategies. Professional organizations and 
conferences can help supply that kind of experience as well. Another valuable experience is for teachers 
themselves to engage in a distributed learning environment (Dooly, 2009), whether that be a formal, 
credit-bearing course, or an informal exchange based on a professional talk or as a follow-up to a 
conference. Informal networks are especially valuable if there are a range of voices and backgrounds 
represented. A study of an online community for Chinese teachers found that the “that heterogeneity of 
community members is crucial for the sustainable and healthy growth of an online professional 
development community in which participants can establish both vertical and horizontal relationships by 
sharing ideas, feelings and experiences with people with diverse voices but shared vision of professional 
pursuits” (Wu, Gao, & Zhang, 2014, p. 248). 
A recent article (Hou, 2015) describes an online CoP for Chinese teachers of English, which emerged 
from a language teaching methodology course. A subsequent stage of the online community consisted of 
student teachers placed in schools. The study points to a number of benefits of the online community, 
with student teachers feeling more comfortable in the online setting to express their views openly and 
freely. The author also points to cultural aspects of the online community:  
The framework of CoPs, a Western construct, shows a high degree of compatibility with Chinese 
styles of learning. The CoP mediated by online mode of communication has greatly impacted, 
and ultimately reshaped, a hierarchical social behavior pattern that Chinese student teachers and 
supervisors adopt, leading to a revolutionary change towards a more equal student-teacher 
relationship...The notion of passive, quiet, obedient, dependent, uncritical Chinese learners has 
been challenged in this study. The findings provide alternative evidence directly from the 
perceptions of Chinese student teachers and supervisors. (p. 14) 
The project demonstrates the potential to adapt online practices, tools, or services to local conditions and, 
in the process, the potential to dispel lingering essentialist views of cultural identity. 
Robert Godwin-Jones Evolving Roles of Language Teachers 
 
Language Learning & Technology  18 
INTEGRATING INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATIVE COMPETENCE  
Increasingly, a goal of L2 learning is to help students become informed and engaged global citizens, 
meaning that they understand their own culture and the beliefs, values, and assumptions that accompany it 
enough to be able to appreciate critically differences and similarities in interacting with others from 
different cultural backgrounds. One step in that direction would be for student teachers to engage in auto-
ethnography, writing self-critically about one’s teaching experiences from a cultural perspective 
(Kumaravadivelu, 2013). Adrian Holliday has suggested that teachers carry out a kind of ethnographic 
analysis of their classroom and its cultural components, arguing that this information is of more 
importance for success, than the teaching methodology used (1994). A project involving English teachers 
in Korea used digital storytelling to have teachers engage in reflective inquiry (Prosser, 2013). It’s of 
course important for language teachers to have had first-hand experience with other cultures (and not just 
the target culture), either through face-to-face contact or virtually. Studies have shown how important it is 
for effective integration of intercultural communicative competence (ICC) into L2 teaching for the 
teacher to have had personal experiences of this kind (Göbel & Helmke, 2010). There is a much greater 
likelihood for ICC content and treatment to be shallow and stereotypical if the teacher has had limited 
exposure to other cultures. Göbel and Helmke’s study shows that a criteria for selecting cultural content 
that many teachers use is the extent to which it is up-to-date rather than whether it incorporates topics that 
will lead to discussions uncovering meaningful differences in perceptions and perspectives between 
cultures. A study by Young and Sachdev (2011) revealed that one of the strategies teachers used in 
choosing cultural materials was to avoid conflict. This is an area which could be helped by teacher 
training, through guiding teachers towards ways to handle discussion of controversial topics, treating 
them as critical incidents and rich points for analyzing cultural difference (Belz, 2002; Thorne, 2003). L2 
teachers coming into contact with peers in formal or informal ways can help in finding strategies for 
dealing sensitively and effectively with situations rife with learning potential, but also with risk.  
In addition to CoPs, a more formal option for teachers is participation in MOOCs, which typically involve 
participants from a variety of countries and universities. MOOCs have expanded from their origins in 
North America to be offered by a large number of countries. At the same time, there has been some 
movement to address local conditions, in terms of language, culture, and technology access (Fyle, 2013; 
Godwin-Jones, 2014c). Of particular benefit are local groups that sponsor meet-ups, either through 
informal get-togethers or by way of formal courses at a local university, to discuss course content, provide 
a local perspective, and possibly to make available locally developed assessments, which can be the basis 
for academic credit. MOOCs have been developed specifically for language teacher training. The 
University of Oregon has offered several MOOCs for ESL teachers, in conjunction with the US State 
Department. The Open University (UK) will be offering a MOOC for English teachers in 2015. 
Many MOOCs have a finite course structure, with learning and collaborative activities available only for 
the period during which the MOOC is being offered. The so-called cMOOCs (constructivist MOOCs) 
follow a different pattern and provide the opportunity for teachers (or others) to engage with each other 
beyond the confines of the course, thus providing opportunities for establishing longer-term communities 
of practice. One recent example is the Connected Learning MOOC. The course was built around the idea 
of learning about connected learning by using tools (blogs and Twitter) that are principally used today to 
collaborate and communicate online. The course also emphasized the advantages of the open web and the 
importance of student writing and other creative work being made available openly and freely on the 
Internet, not kept within a proprietary system. It encouraged participants to establish a personal learning 
space for documenting and sharing. Part of that effort is learning how to set up one’s own website, 
including the basics of server management and of how to register one's own domain. As an outgrowth of 
another cMOOC, ds106, taught at Mary Washington College, that College has been encouraging students 
to establish a personal domain and has set up a service to allow them to do that. This is the kind of 
technology fluency we should be aiming for in the training of language teachers. 
Robert Godwin-Jones Evolving Roles of Language Teachers 
 
Language Learning & Technology  19 
OUTLOOK 
The idea of having one's own internet domain offers an opportunity for creating e-portfolios, both for 
students and teachers. One of the benefits of having one's own website is the accompanying implication 
that this is a longer-term, ongoing project. Having teacher education as a one-shot experience is in 
conflict with the reality of teacher development over time. This is all the more the case when technology 
is involved. Asserting one’s professional identity through a personal domain is an indicator (and 
encourager) of teacher autonomy, as well as setting up a platform for the teacher as researcher, a place to 
document and share classroom experiences and experiments.  
Running one’s own server is also one of the activities associated with a recent movement in education, at 
least in North America, “maker” culture. The idea is that students create and share real products, whether 
they be digital stories, 3-D objects, or mobile games. It stresses hands-on experience and collaboration. 
This is in part an outgrowth of the mashup culture, users creating something uniquely personal from 
disparate elements. It is also clearly tied to the call for all children to learn to code. Maker culture is most 
commonly associated with STEM fields (science, technology, engineering, math), but there are examples 
of projects in the language arts as well as in second language instruction. Maker culture is, in a way, the 
logical extension of the idea of situated learning, an important concept in teacher education today. It 
provides a parallel to the call in communicative language instruction for students to use language for real-
world exchanges. The Maker Lab in the Humanities at the University of Victoria features projects that use 
mixed media methods to interpret historical materials and to build interactive sites from humanities 
perspectives. 
It seems unlikely that large numbers of L2 teachers will introduce maker projects into their classes, but 
learning about that approach to technology integration and its possible applications to teaching could 
provide useful information on the environment in which today’s students are living and learning. What L2 
teachers are able to do in terms of new technologies is affected by a great number of factors, in particular 
where a teacher is in terms of career trajectory. Teacher development is a gradual process, as teachers 
“progress from a narrow focus upon classroom procedures and survival strategies, in their early work, to a 
more developed sense of the social and cultural aspects of the classroom when they are more 
experienced” (Bax, 1997, p. 238). It’s possible that the incorporation of technology could follow that 
pattern but it’s more likely newly trained teachers will have a headstart in terms of technology familiarity. 
It’s equally likely, however, that, with the growth of on-line instruction, all L2 teachers may be expected 
to teach hybrid or online courses, whether they have been trained to do so or not. That may include part-
time teachers as well. This increases the need for more and better opportunities for teacher collaboration 
and continuous training, which should not only deal with the mechanics of how to use technology in 
teaching, but also on “helping teachers reconsider their professional identities as teachers in an online 
environment” (Comas-Quinn, 2011, p. 25). As has often been pointed out, coursework alone may lead to 
teacher training, but not necessarily to technology use, as what is needed for that to happen is a “sequence 
of situated technology experiences” (Egbert, Paulus & Nakamichi, 2002, p. 118). Increasingly, that is 
likely to occur online. Ideally, the online environment, whether a MOOC, CoP, or other community site, 
will offer opportunities for both formal, structured learning and informal, spontaneous sharing, with 
opportunities for critical self-reflection.  
Just as students keep journals in order to explore cross-cultural encounters in the context of their own 
backgrounds, teachers can become more aware of their teaching practices (and own cultural biases) 
through reflection and narrative inquiry. Sharing with peer collaborators one’s critical reflections deepens 
the individual teacher’s perspective and enriches the conversation for all involved (Egbert, Paulus & 
Nakamichi, 2002). Knowledge co-constructed in this way is likely to prove both more immediately useful 
and more sustainable. One of the benefits of involving teachers in critical inquiry and action research is to 
have more longer-term, classroom-connected studies in contrast to the short-term nature of most 
published CALL research. 
Robert Godwin-Jones Evolving Roles of Language Teachers 
 
Language Learning & Technology  20 
For teachers engaged in online teaching, development of a teacher’s sense of herself as an online teacher 
is crucial, as White and Ding have written, “The most crucial challenge for teachers taking up e-language 
teaching comes not from changes in knowledge, roles, skills, and practices per se, but from challenges to 
teacher identity and teacher self in each of these domains” (2009, p. 334). Such changes are personal and 
difficult, and the challenges facing L2 teachers should not be easily dismissed. Motivating L2 teachers 
from the outside—supervisory pressure, continuing education requirements, etc.—is likely not sufficient. 
Observation syndrome (ramping up ahead of a classroom visit) leads to short-term changes, which may 
vanish soon after. Studies of teacher motivation show that teachers need to incorporate the new desirable 
knowledge or behavior into their own image of themselves as future or ideal teachers (Kubanyiova, 2009; 
White & Ding, 2009).  It’s important for the profession to have an image of the ideal L2 teacher for the 
purposes of teacher training: highly technology literate, actively involved in researching and 
experimenting with new approaches, committed to cross-cultural understanding. At the same time, we 
have to be honest about expectations and consider the conditions under which L2 teachers work, which 
vary dramatically and, in many cases, are far from optimal. In one study dealing with teacher educators in 
Syria, teacher participants overwhelming commented that in their country there were too many 
computers, with the implication being that with so many pressing social problems, computer-assisted 
language instruction did not rise to the top of their concerns (Albirini, 2006). Goals should be set for 
teacher training which encourage and enable teachers to become “transformative intellectuals” (Johnson, 
2006, p. 249), while we also maintain a perspective that respects moral-ethical concerns and takes into 
consideration the real lives of teachers. 
 
REFERENCES 
Albirini, A. (2006). Teachers' attitudes toward information and communication technologies: the case of 
Syrian EFL teachers. Computers & Education 47(4), 373–398. 
Bannink, A. (2010), West meets East: On the necessity of local pedagogies. Journal of Intercultural 
Communication 24, 1–11.  
Bax, S. (1997). Roles for a teacher educator in context-sensitive teacher education. ELT Journal 51(3), 232–
241.  
Bax, S. (2003). CALL: Past, present, and future. System, 31(1), 13–28.  
Belz, J. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning & 
Technology 6(1), 60-81. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/belz/default.html 
Canagarajah, A. (2002). “Reconstructing local knowledge, reconfiguring language studies.” In A. S. 
Canagarajah (Ed.), Reclaiming the local in language policy and practice. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, pp. 
3–24.  
Chapelle, C. & Hegelheimer, V. (2004). The English language teacher in the 21st century. In S. Fotos & C. 
Browne (eds.), New Perspectives in CALL for Second Language Classrooms. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 299–316. 
Chen, C. & Reimer, T. (2009). Teacher beliefs, contextual factors, and Taiwanese high school teachers' 
integration of technology into the classroom. International Journal on Digital Learning Technology 1(3), 224–
244. 
Comas-Quinn, A. (2011). Learning to teach online or learning to become an online teacher: An exploration of 
teachers’ experiences in a blended learning course. ReCALL, 23(3), 218–232.  
DelliCarpini, M. (2012) Building computer technology skills in TESOL teacher education. Language Learning 
& Technology 16(2), 14–23. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2012/action.pdf 
Robert Godwin-Jones Evolving Roles of Language Teachers 
 
Language Learning & Technology  21 
Dooly, M. (2009). New competencies in a new era? Examining the impact of a teacher training project. 
ReCALL 21(3), 352–369.   
Ebsworth, M., Kim, A. & Klein, T. (2010). Projections: From a graduate TELL class to the practical world of 
L2 teachers. CALICO Journal 27(2), 349–375   
Egbert, J. Paulus, T. & Nakamichi, Y. (2002). The impact of call instruction on classroom computer use: A 
foundation for rethinking technology in teacher education. Language Learning & Technology 6(3), 108–126. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num3/egbert/default.html 
Fahy, P., Sturm, M. & McBride. R. (2012). Professional development for language teachers:Tthe 
LearnIT2teach project. Ontario: TVLT New Media Language Training. 
Fyle, C. (2013). Teacher education MOOCs for developing world contexts: Issues and design considerations. 
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference of MIT’s Learning International Networks Consortium 
(LINC). Cambridge, MA: Learning International Networks Consortium. 
Göbel, K. & Helmke, A. (2010). Intercultural learning in English as foreign language instruction: The 
importance of teachers’ intercultural experience and the usefulness of precise instructional directives. Teaching 
and Teacher Education 26, 1571–1582. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2011). Mobile Apps for Language Learning. Language Learning & Technology 15(2), 2–
11. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/emerging.pdf 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2014a). Towards transparent computing: Content authoring using open standards. 
Language Learning & Technology 18(1), 1–10. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/emerging.pdf  
Godwin-Jones, R. (2014b). Games in language learning: Opportunities and challenges. Language Learning & 
Technology 18(2), 9–19 Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/emerging.pdf 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2014c). Global reach and local practice: The promise of MOOCS. Language Learning & 
Technology, 18(3), 5–15. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/emerging.pdf  
Goh & Chen (2014). Teacher knowledge about oral English instruction and teacher profiles: an EFL 
perspective. Teacher Development 18(1), 1–19. 
Guichon, N. & Hauck, M. (2011). Teacher education research in CALL and CMC: More in demand than ever. 
ReCALL 23(3), 187–199.  
Holliday, A. (1994). Appropriate methodology and social context. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Hou, H. (2015). What makes an online community of practice work? A situated study of Chinese student 
teachers’ perceptions of online professional learning. Teaching and Teacher Education 46, 6–16.  
Hubbard, P. (2004). Learner training for effective use of CALL. In S. Fotos & C. Browne (Eds.), New 
perspectives in CALL for second language classrooms (pp. 45-67). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  
Hubbard, P. (2013). Making a case for learner training in technology enhanced language learning 
environments. CALICO Journal 30(2), 163–178.  
Hubbard, P. & Levy, M. (2006). The scope of CALL education. In P. Hubbard & M.Levy (Eds.) Teacher 
Education in CALL (pp. 3-–0). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Johnson, K. (2006). The sociocultural turn and its challenges for second language teacher education. TESOL 
Quarterly 40, (1), 235–257. 
Karabulut, A., Levelle, K., Li, J., & Suvurov, R. (2012). Technology for French learning: A mismatch between 
Robert Godwin-Jones Evolving Roles of Language Teachers 
 
Language Learning & Technology  22 
expectations and reality. CALICO Journal, 29(2), 341–366.  
Kessler, G. (2007). Formal and informal CALL preparation and teacher attitude toward technology. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning 20(2), 173–188. 
Kubanyiova (2009). Possible selves in language teacher development. In Z. Dörnyei & E. Ushioda (Eds.) 
Motivation, language identity and the L2 self (pp. 314–332). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Kumaravadivelu, B. (2013). Rethinking global perspectives and local initiatives in language teaching. In S. 
Ben Said & L. J. Zhang (Eds.), Language Teachers and Teaching: Global Perspectives and Local Initiatives 
(pp. 317–323). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Kern, R. (2006). Perspectives on technology in learning and teaching languages. TESOL Quarterly, 40(1), 
183–210. 
Lam, W. (2004). Second language socialization in a bilingual chat room: global and local considerations. 
Language Learning & Technology 8(3), 44–65. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num3/pdf/lam.pdf 
Levy, M. & Stockwell, G. (2006). CALL dimensions: Options and issues in computer-assisted language 
learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
McNeil, L. (2013). Exploring the relationship between situated activity and CALL learning in teacher 
education. ReCALL 25(2), 215–232. 
Muller-Hartmann, A. (2000). The role of tasks in promoting intercultural learning in electronic networks. 
Language Learning & Technology 4(2), 129–147. Retrieved from 
http://www.llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/muller/default.html 
Murphy-Judy, K., & Youngs, B. L. (2006). Technology standards for teacher education, credentialing, and 
certification. In P. Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 45–60). Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands: John Benjamins.  
Prosser, A. (2013). Teacher narratives: Digital storytelling, methodology and cultural appropriacy. Global 
perspectives on Computer-Assisted Language Learning. WorldCALL 2013 Proceedings (pp. 286–289). Ulster, 
UK: University of Ulster. 
Reeder, K., Macfadyen, L. P., Roche, J. & Chase, M. (2004). Negotiating Culture in Cyberspace: Participation 
Patterns and Problematics. Language Learning and Technology, 8(2), 88–105. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num2/reeder/default.html  
Robb, T. (2006). Helping teachers to help themselves. In P. Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.) Teacher education in 
CALL (pp. 335-347). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamin. 
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2) 38–67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/pdf/thorne.pdf 
Young, T. & Sachdev, I (2011). Intercultural communicative competence: exploring English language 
teachers’ beliefs and practices. Language Awareness 20(2), 81–98. 
Warschauer, M. (2002). A developmental perspective on technology in language education. TESOL Quarterly 
36(3), 453–475. 
White, C. & Ding. A. (2009). Identity and self in e-language teaching. In Z. Dörnyei & E. Ushioda (Eds.) 
Motivation, language identity and the L2 self (pp. 333–349). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Wu, H., Gao, J. & Zhang, W. (2014). Chinese EFL teachers' social interactionand socio-cognitive presence in 
synchronous computer-mediated communication. Language Learning & Technology, 18(3), 228–254. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/wugaozhang.pdf 
