Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2015/review3.pdf 
October 2015, Volume 19, Number 3 
pp. 65–68 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 65 
REVIEW OF LANGUAGE ONLINE: INVESTIGATING DIGITAL TEXTS 
AND PRACTICES 
Language online: Investigating digital texts and 
practices 
David Barton and Carmen Lee 
2013 
ISBN: 978-04155-24957  
US: $39.95 
224 pp. 
Routledge 
New York 
 
 
Review by Melanie M. Wong, University of British Columbia, Canada 
Recent societal discourse stresses how technology is a central part of contemporary life. This discourse 
asserts that the ways in which we use language and communicate have evolved as new technologies have 
emerged. With this changing global landscape, new technologies have afforded new virtual learning 
spaces. These technology-mediated spaces have provided individuals with opportunities to connect with 
transnational peers, code-switch between various languages (e.g., Lam, 2004), and engage in unique 
literacy practices (e.g., Black, 2008; Gee, 2007; Rama et al, 2012). As these technologies continue to 
transform how individuals communicate and use language, there is a pressing need for scholars to gain a 
better understanding of the literacy practices within these digital learning spaces and the potential impact 
they have on language and learning. Language Online: Investigating Digital Text and Practices by David 
Barton and Carmen Lee provides individuals with insights into this growing phenomenon of online 
learning spaces and contributes to a field that is still in its infancy.  
In the preface of the book, Barton and Lee (2013) indicate that they have aimed at two distinct audiences: 
“...for linguists it argues that understanding the online world is essential for the study of language...to 
social scientists studying and researching the internet, it argues that an understanding of the role of 
language is essential” (p. IIX). This book is also an ideal resource for novice researchers with limited 
understanding of the online environment. The book focuses on both the practices and texts in the context 
of internet writing spaces, but it also provides an extensive overview of theories present in this field of 
study. Throughout the book, the authors have presented examples from their own research and related 
literature to illustrate how language online has become an integral part of “everydayness” and how 
language travels across various domains of life both offline and online (p.178). The concept of travelling 
between the online and offline social contexts presented in this book echoes what other scholars such as 
Erstad (2012) have previously contended: that people are moving between different contexts of learning, 
both online and offline, in a constant flow of activities. The boundaries between these learning contexts 
are never clearly defined. The authors elaborate throughout their book that the concept of individuals’ 
moving literacy practices between the various learning spaces is what is fascinating about this particular 
phenomenon.  
The introductory chapters of the book provide the reader with a comprehensive explanation of the 
Melanie M. Wong                           Review of Language Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
literature and the theoretical underpinnings that guide the empirical work that is presented in the 
remainder of the book. As Barton and Lee (2013) discuss in their first chapter, there are three key 
directions that have been taken with regards to language online research by linguists: structural features of 
computer-mediated communication, social variation of computer-mediated discourse, and language 
ideologies and metalanguage. These key directions are viewed as stages of development, with each 
previous stage building on the earlier stages. The authors suggest there is a fourth emerging stage. This 
stage favours concepts such as Blommaert and Rampton’s concepts of supermobility and superdiversity 
(as cited in Barton & Lee, 2013), and provides insights into global changes and language online. It is this 
stage that is explored in the remaining chapters of the book. In the final section of the chapter, the authors 
address some of the misconceptions and issues that are present within the language online discourse. 
Notable is their discussion with regards to the problems in the terminology that is being utilized (e.g., 
online vs. offline, Web 1.0 vs. Web 2.0, etc.). Barton and Lee clarify that although they refer to online 
and offline, this book does not assume a strict dichotomy between the two social contexts, but rather is 
focused on the overarching online social context.  
In Chapter 2, the authors provide ten reasons why studying the online world is critical to understanding 
language. Several arguments are presented to illustrate how language has changed as a result of the 
introduction of digital technologies (e.g., texts are no longer stable and fixed, multilingual individuals 
negotiate and strategically use language, there are new identities and representations of self online, the 
internet provides space for reflection on communication and language, etc.). Following this discussion in 
Chapter 3, the authors introduce seven key concepts (literacy practices, texts, affordances, multimodality, 
stance, affinity groups, globalization, writing spaces online) that are relevant when considering how 
language is used online. These seven concepts are of importance to the research findings that are 
discussed in the remainder of the book. There is a comprehensive explanation for each key concept, 
which is ideal for an individual with a limited understanding of the field but redundant for others. Barton 
and Lee also provide the readers with a brief introduction to the writing spaces online that are of 
significance to their work (Flickr, Facebook, YouTube, and Instant Messaging).  
Starting in Chapter 4, the authors begin a comprehensive discussion of their own research findings and 
other relevant studies. The main focus of Chapter 4 is to introduce readers to how individuals utilize their 
multilingual resources to communicate within online writing spaces. Multilingual practices are discussed 
and illustrated from a variety of different examples. For individuals not familiar with various online 
platforms, this chapter illustrates some of the affordances that online writing spaces have using examples 
and data. Expanding on the discussion that occurred in the previous chapter, Chapter 5 continues to 
explore the affordances of using multiple languages within online writing spaces. However, the primary 
focus turns to a discussion on online translingual practices and how new media has provided new 
possibilities for interaction in various languages.  
Perhaps one of the more fascinating concepts introduced in chapter 6 is that of techno-biographies. 
Techno-biographies are technology life stories. The primary focus of these biographies is on an 
individual’s experiences with technology during different times and spaces throughout one’s life. Two 
examples of techno-biographies are presented (Tony and Yan). As expected, each techno-biography was 
unique and demonstrated that digital technologies play different roles in different people’s lives. Home-
school experience with technologies played a critical role in how these two individuals were socialized to 
use technologies. Both participants had access to technology at school and home. The researchers note 
that these experiences were significant as they changed the participants’ attitudes towards the affordances 
of media and created awareness of genres online. However, the greater questions that readers are left with 
involve how these techno-biographies differ or how they might be similar to those individuals who did 
not have the same prior home and school experiences that Tony and Yan had. Although digital 
technologies are becoming somewhat ubiquitous within the social fabric of society, many individuals may 
not have techno-biographies similar to those described in this chapter.  
Melanie M. Wong                           Review of Language Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
It is postulated in Chapter 7 that stance is indexed through different forms of language but also through 
various resources for meaning making. Stance is both an intersubjective and interactive act and is argued 
to be a key discursive practice within interactions online. Barton and Lee include the stance analysis 
framework that they utilized in their Flickr research in the appendix of their book, and this is helpful for 
readers to gain a better understanding of the methodology used. Two multimodal stance-taking case 
studies (both from Flickr) are shared from Barton and Lee’s research. In each example, the researchers 
share their own personal reading paths and provide a discussion about the interpretation of visual images 
and how participants engage in stance taking within this online writing space. It may have been helpful if 
multimodal stance-taking data from other online spaces, such as Facebook, avatar creation, or other 
multimodal genres, were contrasted with the Flickr data presented in the book. 
Chapters 8–10 continue in a similar organization as the previous chapters, with a brief discussion of a 
phenomenon online and then an incorporation of research data. In Chapter 8, the authors further their 
discussion of online research by highlighting the types of online metalinguistic discourse, which is argued 
to be a situated practice. They argue that these examples “[reveal] the ways in which new media sites 
such as Flickr provide the affordances and writing spaces that enable users to create a collaborative, 
supportive environment to express their vernacular theories of language through self-generated content” 
(p.123). The central focus in Chapter 9 is learning. Barton and Lee discuss how people learn language 
online. Drawing from Lave and Wenger’s (1991) work, there is discussion on how learning can occur 
through participation in online practices. In particular, there is reference to how one of the key features of 
Web 2.0 activities is that it is user-generated, which results in the process of learning being embedded as 
part of using the internet. It is also postulated that learning is about taking on new identities. The learning 
that occurs in networked spaces is not controlled and is often incidental. Chapter 10 expands on the idea 
of vernacular practices and how individuals draw upon various new media to carry out activities in their 
lives. Vernacular literacy practices are described to be “rooted in everyday experiences and serve 
everyday purposes” (p. 138). One of the key features of these literacies is that they are self-generated and 
voluntary. As elaborated in the text, creating a photo album is a vernacular practice. As technologies have 
become more readily available, photography has become a digital practice, and social practices have 
changed to access the affordances available within the online environment. In the data presented, it 
becomes prevalent that Web 2.0 tools such as Flickr enable individuals to share photos in ways that were 
not possible in the past. Again, one of the shortfalls of this book is that much of the data presented comes 
from Flickr research, and readers may be interested in how findings from this environment differ or are 
similar to other online learning spaces.  
In Chapter 11, Barton and Lee comment on how the book does not have an explicit education agenda, but 
it is a natural progression that the language-focused research discussed in the book would lead to 
questions surrounding how this research informs practice. The suggestions that are provided are suitable 
for a university setting, assuming students have the available access to and a preference for these 
technologies. The authors suggest setting up a Facebook group for a university course. As this is an 
environment that may be familiar and comfortable for many students, it is suggested that rich discussion 
maybe facilitated. However, as Facebook was created for informal interaction, it may not necessarily be 
the right learning space to have school-based discussions (e.g., privacy concerns). Educators should 
consider their learners prior to implementing these ideas into the classroom, as not all learners prefer 
learning in online spaces.  
Chapter 12, the second to last chapter of the book, addresses researching language online. This chapter is 
helpful for the novice researcher as an introduction to conducting online research. It provides an overview 
of the research steps that were undertaken to conduct the online research featured in the book. Issues 
surrounding ethics and privacy are also briefly addressed. The final section of the chapter expresses the 
need for researchers to be reflexive, especially when conducting an empirical study.  
The final chapter of the book expands on how language has flowed from the online environment to the 
Melanie M. Wong                           Review of Language Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
offline one. They highlight how Netspeak has become part of the text within public spaces (e.g., 4 UR 
Convenience, etc.). Their examples illustrate that the emergence of technology has influenced language 
and how we communicate.  
In conclusion, Barton and Lee’s (2013) book provides a detailed discussion of the practices and texts in 
the context of online writing spaces. It is not only a useful resource for the audience of linguists and social 
scientists targeted by Barton and Lee, but also for novice researchers who are new to this field of study. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Melanie Wong is a doctoral candidate at the University of British Columbia (UBC), Canada. Her 
dissertation research investigates elementary English Language Learners within technology-enhanced 
classrooms She is an experienced K-12 educator working for the Calgary public school district, and she 
has taught undergraduate classes at UBC. 
E-mail: melanie@melaniewong.ca 
 
  
REFERENCES 
Black, R. W. (2008). Adolescents and online fan fiction. New York: Peter Lang. 
Gee, J. (2007). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy: Revised and updated 
edition. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Erstad, O. (2012). The learning lives of digital youth—beyond the formal and informal. Oxford Review of 
Education, 38(1), 25–43. doi: 10.1080/03054985.2011.57794 
Lam, W.S. (2004). Second language socialization in a bilingual chat room: Global and local 
considerations. Language Learning & Technology, 8(3), 44–65. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num3/pdf/lam.pdf 
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.  
Rama, P. S., Black, R. W., Van Es, E., & Warschauer, M. (2012). Affordances for second language 
learning in "world of warcraft". ReCALL, 24(3), 322–338. doi: 10.1017/S0958344012000171 
