Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/kozlovapriven.pdf 
February 2015, Volume 19, Number 1 
pp. 83–101 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 83 
ESL TEACHER TRAINING IN 3D VIRTUAL WORLDS 
Iryna Kozlova, Carleton University 
Dmitri Priven, Algonquin College 
Although language learning in 3D Virtual Worlds (VWs) has become a focus of recent 
research, little is known about the knowledge and skills teachers need to acquire to provide 
effective task-based instruction in 3D VWs and the type of teacher training that best 
prepares instructors for such an endeavor. This study employs a situated learning approach 
to teacher training and explores what online teaching skills emerge in the process of 
collaborative situated learning, how these skills develop, and whether collaborative 
situated learning is an effective method of training instructors to teach in 3D VWs. Six 
English as a second language (ESL) teacher trainees enrolled in the Teaching English as a 
Second/Foreign Language (TES/FL) program participated in the study. During the pre-
teaching stage, teacher trainees developed language tasks to implement during the 
teaching stage with eight EFL students in 3D VWs. Blackboard wikis used for designing 
tasks allowed for observing the acquisition of five 3D-specific, integrated skills. The 
analysis of teaching sessions recorded through screen capturing software Camtasia Relay 
in conjunction with the teacher trainees’ wikis and journals demonstrates that for this 
group of teachers, a situated learning approach was an effective method of teacher 
training.  
Keywords: 3D Virtual Worlds, Teacher Training, ESL 
APA Citation: Kozlova, I., & Priven, D. (2015). ESL teacher training in 3D virtual 
worlds. Language Learning & Technology, 19(1), 83–101. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/kozlovapriven.pdf 
Received: December 8, 2013; Accepted: October 30, 2014; Published: February 1, 2015 
Copyright: © Iryna Kozlova, & Dmitri Priven 
INTRODUCTION 
More than a decade ago, editors of the special issue of Language Learning and Technology on 
Technology and Teacher Education stated that as modern technologies become “much more complex and 
powerful” (Zhao & Tella, 2002, p. 3), the teacher training process also “becomes more complex”. One 
such “complex and powerful” technology is 3D VWs (e.g., Second Life), which are defined as “persistent 
virtual environments in which people experience others as being there with them and where they interact 
with them” (Schroeder, 2008, p. 2). 3D VWs are probably the most complex among modern educational 
technologies on several levels. First, 3D VWs support synchronous, multimodal communication via 
several communication channels including audio, text chat, collaboration boards, and webcam video. 
Second, 3D VWs provide users with a simulation of real-life experiences by embodying them in a 
graphical form as an avatar (Gerhard, Moore, & Hobbs, 2004) and with “realistic immersion” in the 
worlds resembling real-life locations that “usually reflect a theme, specific location, or country” 
(Peterson, 2011, p. 68). Third, they create learning spaces conceptually different from the face-to-face 
classroom and web-conferencing environments, (e.g., Blackboard Collaborate).  Learning is immersed in 
a simulated real-life context, which suggests a shift in language pedagogy towards learning through 
“experiential problem solving and complex and spatially distributed forms of collaboration” (Cornille, 
Thorne, & Desmet, 2012, p. 245). Thus, instructors preparing to teach in 3D VWs, in addition to learning 
how to use 3D technology, need to learn how to embed this real-life language experience in the classroom 
context. 
Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven ESL Teacher Training in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
Although 3D VWs attract the attention of language educators as a potential environment for computer-
assisted language learning (Peterson, 2006), only a handful of studies (e.g., Deutschmann, Panichi, & 
Molka-Danielsen, 2009; Peterson, 2006, 2010; Sutcliffe & Alrayes, 2012; Svensson, 2003; Toyoda & 
Harrison, 2002; Varli, 2013) explore language learning in 3D virtual environments. Authors working in 
this area of inquiry agree that language learning in 3D should be collaborative and task-based (e.g., 
Peterson, 2010; Varli, 2013). However, little is known about the knowledge and skills teachers need to 
acquire to provide effective task-based instruction in 3D VWs and the type of teacher training that best 
prepares instructors for such an endeavor. This study takes the first steps in this direction and uses 
Compton’s (2009) framework for online language teaching skills as a departure point.  
Online Language Teaching Skills 
Compton’s (2009) framework for online teaching skills is the most comprehensive theoretical framework 
to date and includes three sets of skills: technological, pedagogical, and evaluative. Technological skills 
include instructors’ abilities to use software and hardware and to deal with technology-related issues. 
Pedagogical skills refer to instructors’ knowledge of teaching approaches, learning theories, and 
implementation of learning activities. Evaluative skills are “an analytical ability to assess the tasks and 
overall course and make necessary modifications to ensure language learning objectives are met” 
(Compton, 2009, p. 81). The skills in each set are located on a continuum from basic to more advanced 
skills. Compton (2009) divides skills in each set into three levels: novice teacher, proficient teacher, and 
expert teacher. The novice teacher level is associated with knowledge of basic technological skills, the 
ability to use and identify features of different software, basic knowledge of pedagogy-related issues, 
(e.g., language learning theories, online teaching strategies), and basic knowledge of task and course 
evaluation. The proficient teacher level correlates with instructors’ ability to choose technology that 
matches the goal of the learning tasks, to understand its affordances and constraints, to apply pedagogical 
knowledge in teaching, to use one or more frameworks for task and course evaluation, and to make 
necessary modifications. The expert teacher level is the most advanced and is associated with instructors’ 
creativity in using and adapting technology, the ability to develop web-pages, knowledge of basic 
programming language, creativity in the instructional design of learning activities, and an almost 
subconscious evaluation of learning tasks and online courses using a combination of several methods of 
evaluation.  
Compton (2009) treats acquisition of the online teaching skills as both concurrent and sequential 
processes. Skills from the same set of one level can be acquired concurrently. For example, technological 
skills at the novice level, competence in specific software, and learning how to deal with its affordances 
and constraints can be acquired while learning how to use the software. These skills are pre-requisites for 
the proficient teacher level, which are the next in the sequence. By dividing the skills into three levels, 
Compton accentuates the instructors’ professional growth from being a novice to becoming an expert.  
In spite of its strengths, Compton’s (2009) framework has some limitations. First, Compton built her 
framework on a synthesis of literature in CALL and teacher education, which excludes research on 
language teaching in 3D VWs. Although Compton highlighted that expert teachers would be able to 
explore Second Life in order to learn how to provide learners with more opportunities to practice 
language, she did not specify that teaching in 3D VWs may require instructors to develop some skills 
specific to the 3D virtual environment. Second, while Compton maintained that some skills within the 
same level could be developed concurrently, she did not explain whether the skills from different sets 
could be acquired concurrently. Finally, Compton’s framework seems to be an idealization and does not 
take into account cases when individuals have developed pedagogical skills at a proficient or an expert 
teacher level, but are in the process of exploring new software thus being at a novice level on that set of 
skills.  
This study uses Compton’s (2009) framework as a general guideline to study the knowledge and skills 
Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven ESL Teacher Training in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
required for teaching in 3D VWs. The goal of this study is to identify the skills needed specifically for 
teaching in 3D VWs, or 3D-specific skills, to observe how these skills are developed, and to find an 
effective method of teacher training that facilitates the skill-acquisition process and makes it more 
meaningful and rewarding.  
Theoretical Framework for Teacher Training    
As modern technologies develop rapidly and new technologies quickly replace the old ones, finding an 
effective method of teacher training is extremely important to quickly respond to the technological 
changes. One of the teacher training methods that was advocated by research in CALL is situated learning 
in the teaching context (Egbert, 2006; McNeil, 2013; Wang, Cheng, & Levy, 2010). From the perspective 
of social constructivist pedagogy, learning is an activity situated in a social practice, which is 
characterized as “legitimate peripheral participation” (Lave & Wenger, 1991, p. 29). Peripherality is 
defined as “a way of gaining access to sources for understanding through growing involvement” (Lave & 
Wenger, p. 37) and legitimacy as “ways of belonging” to the community in which learners participate. 
Thus, through participation in the communities of practice, learners gain knowledge and skills and “move 
towards full participation in the sociocultural practices of a community” (p. 29). While Lave and 
Wenger’s theory of learning is in line with Vygotsky’s (1978) sociocultural theory in that both view 
learning as a social practice, the theory of legitimate peripheral participation situates learning in a broader 
context of the social world.  It interprets Vygotsky’s concept of the zone of proximal development not as 
the distance between an individual learner’s problem-solving ability with versus without the assistance of 
an expert, but as the “distance between the everyday actions of individuals and the historically new form 
of the societal activity that can be collectively generated as a solution to the double bind potentially 
embedded in …everyday actions” (Engeström, 1987, p. 174 as cited in Lave & Wenger, 1991, p. 49). 
This definition emphasizes the interdependency between members of the community of practice, the 
changing nature of their relations, the collective nature of learning and knowing, and the permutability of 
shared practice as a result of the changing relations between members of the community of practice.   
Herrington and Oliver (2000) operationalized the theory of situated learning by developing a framework 
consisting of nine elements of the situated learning design. This design provides learners with an 
authentic context that reflects the way knowledge will be used in real life, authentic activities, access to 
expert performance and modeling of the process, and multiple roles and perspectives. It also fosters 
collaborative construction of knowledge, coaching, and scaffolding by the instructor as needed, it 
facilitates reflection and articulation to shape and explicate learned concepts, and ensures authentic 
assessment of learning within the task.  
One of the key elements of Herrington and Oliver’s (2000) framework is a collaborative construction of 
knowledge. Collaboration is defined as “work[ing] together interactively to accomplish shared goals” 
(Alesandrini & Larson, 2002, p. 118). Collaboration is different from cooperation in that it goes beyond 
the group members’ “positive interdependence” and “individual accountability” (Donato, 2004, p. 229) 
by “acknowledg[ing] the importance of goals, the mutuality of learning in activity, and collective human 
relationships” (p. 230).  While collaboration involves acknowledgement of individual contributions for 
the sake of achieving the shared goal, it co-constructs new knowledge, which is not just a sum of 
individual learners’ contributions, but a new jointly constructed product unique to this particular group of 
learners (Alesandrini & Larson, 2002; Donato, 2004).  
The strength of the situated learning framework is that when being engaged in a collaborative goal-
oriented activity, each teacher trainee can take on the role of both an expert and a learner by sharing 
previous experiences, coaching others, and providing formative assessment and self-assessment of the 
jointly constructed and constantly evolving product. A collaborative goal-oriented activity in the context 
of situated teacher training could be the teacher trainees’ teamwork on development of teaching materials 
and learning how to teach using these materials, both of which are pedagogical skills in Compton’s 
Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven ESL Teacher Training in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
(2009) framework.  
Task-based Approach to Language Teaching in 3D VWs 
For developing teaching materials, it is critical to understand which pedagogical approach best fits the 3D 
virtual environment. Studies on online language learning in synchronous web-conferencing environments 
consistently report that a task-based approach is beneficial for language learners as they have an 
opportunity to develop language skills while participating in goal-oriented, meaningful activities 
(Hampel, 2006; Kozlova, 2013; Kozlova & Zundel, 2013; Rosell-Aguilar, 2005). 3D VWs could be even 
more effective for language learning as they simulate a face-to-face experience as students interact with 
other learners’ avatars. Students may get “the impression that they are in a face-to-face setting and, thus, 
enhance their sense of being a part of a group and of participating in realistic face-to-face interactions” 
(Cooke-Plagwitz, 2008, p. 549). Since in real life we always participate in various communicative tasks, 
(e.g., solving problems, brainstorming, sharing opinions, etc.), shifting tasks to 3D WVs, which “are 
designed to be social and collaborative environments” (Sadler & Dooly, 2013, p. 165), can be viewed as a 
logical extension of the real-world practices to the virtual reality.   
Studies on task-based learning in 3D VWs revealed that learners’ engagement in the task depends on the 
type of task and communication mode. Peterson (2006) found that in a chat-based VW, decision-making 
tasks generate more negotiations of meaning than jigsaw tasks, which tend to elicit more negotiations in 
the face-to-face environment (Pica, Kanagy, & Falodun, 1993). Deutschmann, Panichi, and Molka-
Danielsen (2009) found that role-play tasks did not elicit much participation from the students who 
interacted with the instructors taking part in the role-plays. In addition, the instructors spent too much 
time on explaining the task and used locations that required a lot of imagination.  
Peterson’s (2006) and Deutschmann, Panichi, and Molka-Danielsen’s (2009) studies demonstrate that the 
effectiveness of the task in 3D VWs depends not on the task-type alone, but on the task-type in 
conjunction with the 3D technology used. This suggests that skills required for teaching in 3D VWs are 
rather integrated. Since Compton’s (2009) framework is built on a synthesis of the literature, it cannot 
explain how technological, pedagogical, and evaluative skills develop in relation to each other. This 
study, in which teacher training is situated in an authentic teaching context, allows for focusing on the 
process of the skill acquisition and development.  
The two research questions that this study strives to answer include:  
1. What 3D-specific skills emerge in the process of collaborative situated learning and how do they 
develop?  
2. Is collaborative situated learning an effective method of training instructors to teach in 3D VWs?  
METHOD 
This section provides the background for the study, specifically, a description of the teacher-training 
context and technology used. It also includes information on the participants and the stages of the teacher 
training and explains the rationale for task design, methods of data collection, and data analysis.  
Teacher Training Context 
The teacher-training context for this study was an international project administered jointly by the 
Language Institute of one of the Canadian colleges and the English Language School of a university in 
Turkey.  Since the Turkish university uses English as a medium of instruction, students entering the 
university are required to demonstrate at least an intermediate-high English proficiency level of the 
American Council on Teaching of Foreign Languages (ACTFL) guidelines. Students who have not 
reached this level of proficiency are required to study English at the English Language School. Because 
English is taught as a foreign language in Turkey, the English Language School was looking for 
Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven ESL Teacher Training in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
partnership with colleges from the English-speaking countries so that students could improve their 
speaking skills working with native speakers of English online.  
Participants  
Six teacher trainees, five female and one male, volunteered to participate in the project. Their age ranged 
from 31 to 53 years old. The teacher trainees were pursuing graduate certificates in Teaching English as a 
Second/Foreign Language (TES/FL) in the college administering the project in Canada. The teacher 
trainees were enrolled in a course on Educational Technology in Second/Foreign Language Teaching 
taught by the first author who also coordinated teacher training for the project. The project, however, was 
not part of the course work. The teacher trainees were located in Canada whereas eight EFL students were 
participating from Turkey. 
When logging in to the environment, the teacher trainees used pseudonyms instead of their real names. 
Female teachers, all English native speakers, were logging in as Gerri, Simone, Diane, Lynn, and Joan. 
Jack, a male teacher, was a native speaker of Korean and a near-native speaker of English. By the time of 
entering TES/FL certification program, he had completed four years of post-secondary studies in Canada 
and was exempted from the entry requirements for an English language proficiency test.  
All of the teachers but Jack had completed teaching practicum by the time they started the project. Three 
of the six teachers, Gerri, Simone, and Diane, had previous teaching experience in the face-to-face 
classroom. Gerri had taught college-level business management courses for four years and various non-
credit courses for municipality and community organizations for about thirty years. Simone had taught 
ESL in Korea for six years to students of all ages from kindergarten to adult. Diane worked with special 
needs students from kindergarten to high school for eight years. Although Jack, Lynn, and Joan had not 
taught in the face-to-face classroom, they had leadership experience. Jack conducted employee training 
when working for one of the airlines. Lynn worked as a programmer/analyst for a high-tech company and 
also as a project manager at another organization. Joan worked as an administrator and a volunteer for a 
non-profit organization where she was mentoring girls and adults. While the teacher trainees did not have 
experience teaching online courses, Jack used Skype for tutoring Korean students in English.  
Eight EFL students participating in the study, six female and two male, were 18 years old. They were 
enrolled in upper-intermediate English courses in the English Language School in Turkey. They also used 
pseudonyms when logging in to the environment.      
Both teacher trainees and EFL students were computer literate and used computers on a daily basis for 
personal purposes, work, and course work. While neither participants nor the course instructor had 
previous teaching and learning experience in 3D VWs, the course instructor had experience teaching 
language courses in synchronous multimodal web-conferencing environments. All of the participants had 
a one-hour session with a 3D technology consultant who introduced the 3D VWs. They were also 
provided with a navigation guide so that they could further explore the VWs on their own.  
3D Virtual Worlds Used for Teacher Training 
Two virtual worlds - Algonquin College Campus and Tipontia Island -- were used as learning 
environments for this project. These VWs were created on a cloud-based platform AvayaLiveTM Engage, 
which has immersive real-time collaboration and web-conferencing tools. Algonquin College Campus 
partially replicates the real-life campus and features a study hall, several office buildings, and two 
amphitheaters. Tipontia Island has a vast territory with mountains, trees, a lake, a river with waterfalls, 
and several landmarks, e.g., a campfire, a lighthouse, tree houses.  
Participants log in to the VWs as personalized avatars. In addition to being able to walk, run, and jump, 
avatars can perform gestures such as clapping, raising a hand, nodding, pointing, waiving hello and good-
bye, refusing, shrugging, speech gestures, and showing enthusiasm. The VWs are multimodal 
Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven ESL Teacher Training in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
environments where participants can interact via audio- and text-based chat as well as share web-cam 
video. Users can choose to send text-based chat messages to those in close proximity or globally, to single 
recipients or to everyone. The environments also have screens that can be used as presentation tools for 
posting documents, as computers to use the internet, and as collaboration tools allowing multiple 
participants to use the screens in a wiki-type format. 
Teacher Training Stages  
The teacher training consisted of two stages: a four-week pre-teaching stage and a six-week teaching 
stage. During the pre-teaching stage, teacher trainees explored the affordances and the constraints of the 
VWs, developed language-learning tasks, and tested the tasks with their peers and the instructor (see 
Table 1).  
Table 1.  The Pre-teaching Stage. 
Activities Participants Environments Feedback 
Explore the 3D VWs, 
their locations & tools 
Teacher trainees; 
instructor 
Algonquin Campus 
Tipontia Island 
N/A 
Develop language- 
learning tasks 
Each teacher trainee was 
responsible for one task 
Wikis (Blackboard) Peer and instructor 
written feedback on each 
teacher trainee’s task 
Test tasks (dry runs) Each teacher trainee ran 
their task with their peers 
& the instructor assumed 
roles of EFL students  
Algonquin Campus 
Tipontia Island 
Peer and instructor 
written feedback on each 
teacher trainee’s task 
Although the teacher trainees were responsible for one task each, they were instructed to collaborate on 
task development by providing written feedback to each member of the team on Blackboard wikis. All 
teacher trainees were familiar with the task-based approach to language teaching, which was chosen as 
the theoretical background for the language instruction in 3D VWs based on the findings of previous 
research on teaching in 3D VWs (e.g., Peterson, 2006; Deutschmann, Panichi, & Molka-Danielsen, 
2009). Since the teacher trainees had different experiences and professional backgrounds, by drawing on 
their previous knowledge and experiences, they could approach the task development from multiple 
perspectives and take on the roles of both learners and experts when collaboratively constructing the new 
products. The instructor also provided feedback on the teacher trainees’ work and participated in the 
exploration of the VWs and their tools. Although it was planned to complete the development of all of the 
six tasks by the teaching stage, two teacher trainees, Simone and Diane, who were teaching in the fifth 
and sixth weeks, continued working on their tasks until the fifth week of the teaching stage. In spite of the 
fact that they had not completed their tasks by the teaching stage, they actively collaborated on their 
peers’ task development.  
When the tasks were completed, teacher trainees participated in dry runs, or teaching simulations. The 
goal of the dry runs was to practice teaching and to test whether all components of the task and the 
technology worked as planned. After the dry runs, necessary changes were made and the tasks were 
finalized.     
As shown in Table 2, during the teaching stage, teacher trainees participated in the following activities: 
they implemented tasks in the online class sessions with the EFL students, observed their peers’ teaching, 
participated in the post-teaching feedback sessions, and reflected on their teaching in the journals on 
Blackboard.  
Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven ESL Teacher Training in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
Table 2. The Teaching Stage 
Aсtivities Participants Environments  Feedback 
Task 
implementation  
Teacher trainees 
 
Algonquin Campus 
Tipontia Island 
 
Teaching 
observation 
Teacher trainees; 
instructor 
Algonquin Campus 
Tipontia Island 
Teacher trainees and the instructor 
observed all other tasks facilitated by 
their peers  
Post-teaching 
feedback sessions 
Teacher trainees; 
instructor 
VWs and face-to-
face 
Teacher trainees and the instructor 
provided feedback during the feedback 
sessions 
Reflections on 
teaching 
Teacher trainees Journals 
(Blackboard) 
Teacher trainees reflected on their 
teaching 
Each class session was an hour and a half long. Each trainee was to teach two sessions with two different 
groups of four students in one of the six weeks; however, only Jack, Lynn, and Joan followed this 
schedule. Due to circumstances and to the changes made to some of the tasks, Gerri and Diane, who were 
teaching during the first and the sixth weeks, respectively, conducted only one session with all eight 
students, whereas Simone, who taught in the fifth week, conducted two sessions with all eight EFL 
students.  
While most changes to the tasks were made after the dry runs, the actual teaching, especially in the first 
two weeks, revealed some issues that we could not have foreseen during the task-development stage. To 
address these issues, necessary changes were made to the tasks used in subsequent class sessions.  
Data Collection and Analysis 
This qualitative study takes an interpretive approach to data analysis. Interpretive studies focus on 
construction and co-construction of meanings by individuals who interact in order to come to share some 
understandings in the specific context (Erickson, 1986) and employ several sources of data in order to 
gain deeper understanding of the issues they explore (Davies, 1995). To observe what 3D-specific skills 
emerge in the process of collaborative situated learning and how they develop, the data from teacher 
trainees’ wikis and journal entries, recordings form the online class sessions, and the instructor’s notes 
were used. The effectiveness of the situated learning approach was evaluated by teacher trainees’ ability 
to learn from each other. The following was taken as evidence of learning: (1) incorporation of peers’ 
suggestions and borrowing peers’ ideas when developing tasks on wikis, (2) providing feedback and 
incorporating peers’ feedback during dry runs, (3) critical self-reflection on teaching sessions in journals, 
and (4) making necessary changes to the tasks after observing peers’ teaching sessions and reading 
reflections in the journals.  
Wikis 
Six wiki pages were created on the virtual learning platform Blackboard and assigned to teacher trainees 
to develop their tasks. The teacher trainees had access to their peers’ wikis and were instructed to provide 
feedback to each other on the task development. Since the Blackboard wiki tool archives all changes and 
provides statistics on the number of changes made by each of the participants, it allowed for tracking the 
changes that teacher trainees made and for identifying the skills that they employed or developed at 
different stages of the task-development process. 
 
 
Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven ESL Teacher Training in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
Screencasts 
All online class sessions were recorded using the screen-capturing software Camtasia Relay and totaled 
12 hours of screencasts. Screencasts also provided chronological evidence of online teaching skill 
development, student performance on the tasks, and teacher trainees’ professional growth. Screencasts of 
the online teaching sessions were transcribed using the transcription conventions adapted from Jefferson 
(1984; see Appendix).  
Journals 
Journals were also created on Blackboard and were used by the teachers to reflect on their teaching, to 
share their thoughts on what could have been done differently, and to provide suggestions on the possible 
changes in the tasks planned for the subsequent weeks. 
Data Analysis 
Data from the wikis were analyzed in conjunction with the teacher trainees’ journals, screencasts of the 
online sessions, and their transcripts to observe the chronology of task development in relation to 
development of online teaching skills and to evaluate effectiveness of the teacher training. Both authors 
first analyzed wikis, screencasts, and journals individually to identify the skills emerged in the data and 
coded the emerged skills manually. After that, they compared their coding, discussed and sorted out some 
discrepancies, and finalized the coding categories. To keep track of teacher trainees’ collaboration, each 
teacher trainee’s comment was coded in relation to the emerging skill and arranged chronologically as it 
appeared in the wikis and journals.  
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Data analysis demonstrates that technological, pedagogical, and evaluative skills develop concurrently to 
form 3D-specific, integrated online teaching skills. These skills develop through continuous self- and 
peer-evaluation, articulation of thoughts, peer- and instructor-scaffolding, and incorporation of peers’ 
suggestions. The following sections discuss what 3D-specific skill emerge and develop during the pre-
teaching and teaching stages, and the effectiveness of the collaborative situated learning.  
Pre-teaching Stage 
Teacher trainees’ wikis show that it is difficult to sort 3D-specific skills into discrete technology, 
pedagogy, and evaluation sets. The skills are so tightly intertwined and intrinsically connected that they 
can be viewed as 3D-integrated skills. The following five integrated skills emerged from the data over the 
course of the teacher trainees’ collaboration on the task: framing the task, providing input to learners, 
managing students’ collaboration, giving instructions, and providing feedback to students. Table 3 
summarizes the chronology of the emergence of 3D-integrated skills on wikis for the instructors who 
completed development of their task by the teaching stage. The table does not include the skill of 
providing feedback because it was developed during the teaching stage. The table includes the dates on 
which wikis were edited by the teacher trainees and the content of the changes and feedback coded by the 
name of the skills. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven ESL Teacher Training in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
Table 3. Chronology of the Development of 3D Integrated Online Teaching Skills.  
Dates Gerri Jack Joan Lynn 
02/08/13  Adapting task  
from face-to-face 
classroom 
Framing* 
Framing (Lynn)** 
 
02/09/13   Framing  
Framing (Lynn) 
 
02/10/13    Framing  
02/11/13    Framing  
02/12/13 Framing  
Framing & Input 
(Simone) 
  Framing 
(Simone) 
02/13/13 Collaboration 
(Lynn) 
Framing (Lynn) 
 
Framing  
Framing (Lynn) 
Framing 
Collaboration  
02/14/13    Collaboration  
02/15/13  Framing (Lynn) 
Input (Diane & Gerri) 
Collaboration  
(Diane) 
 
02/17/13  Input (Lynn)   
02/18/13   Instructions  
02/20/13 Instructions     
02/21/13   Instructions  Input  
02/22/13  Collaboration 
Instructions 
Instructions  Instructions  
02/23/13  Instructions Input   
Notes. * Comments by the teachers responsible for the task; ** Names of the collaborators who made comments are included in 
parentheses  
Skill of Framing the Task 
Framing the task, or developing a scenario, incorporates choosing a task topic, an environment or location 
in the environment, a task-type, micro-tasks through which the goal of the task is achieved, and tools to 
mediate language production. Development of this skill begins with exploring 3D VWs and 
understanding how language can be taught in this environment. Knowing the environment helps 
instructors to quickly match the following: a task topic with the locations used for the task realization, 
communication tools that mediate learners’ language production with the goal of the task, and the location 
and communication tools with the discourse patterns that are more likely to emerge in the chosen 
location. Since 3D VWs are complex technological systems, framing 3D tasks requires the fine-tuning of 
various task components while at the same time integrating technology and pedagogy in this process of 
continuous re-evaluation. This results in a big picture view of how these components fit together in the 
complex system of the 3D learning task.  
Joan and Lynn seemed to be the teacher trainees who led the group in the beginning of the process of task 
development on the wiki pages. The first step in this process was framing the task. Joan posted three 
potential topics to be implemented on Tipontia Island to her wiki page for peer feedback: a nuclear 
Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven ESL Teacher Training in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
disaster, the island as a travel destination, and tracking a massive storm (02/08/13, wiki). Lynn provided 
some ideas on the task-types and discourse patterns, which students were more likely to produce while 
being engaged in the task. She suggested that the natural disaster scenario offered students an opportunity 
for interaction, teamwork, and problem solving whereas the island as a travel destination scenario allowed 
for interaction with the environment (02/08/13, wiki). Lynn’s feedback prompted Joan to combine several 
ideas in the rough draft of the task scenario:   
There has been some sort of disaster on the mainland (at the nuclear power plant perhaps?), and 
people are being sent to the island for safety. Our group (doctor, police officer, journalist, Red 
Cross volunteer? - theme is everyday heroes) needs to coordinate a relief project before people 
start to arrive. (Joan, 02/09/13, wiki) 
Lynn believed that Joan’s scenario had “a sense of urgency that ma[de] it exciting” and further suggested 
that Joan could “throw some curve balls during the game” (Lynn, 02/09/13, wiki) by telling students that 
people would arrive a few hours earlier or weather would impede rescue efforts. She also asked Joan 
about her role in the scenario.  
The next day, Lynn posted her own scenario, which also incorporated some ideas for micro-tasks such as 
the students’ open discussion and a short presentation. She also determined her role, a lawyer who will be 
making decisions. Lynn’s scenario featured a very rich aunt who died leaving her money to charity in 
order to complete her dying wish of transforming the island into a health resort. When further developing 
her task, Lynn added the micro-task of “scouting the island”, determined students’ roles (e.g., a grasping 
niece, a family doctor, a weird neighbor), and provided approximate timing of the micro-tasks. She also 
added another micro-task of a group tour of the island (02/11/13, wiki).  
Gerri’s and Simone’s wiki posts from 02/12/13 contained some of Joan’s and Lynn’s ideas. The topic of 
Gerri’s task, which she planned to teach on Tipontia Island, was an art gallery. Similar to Lynn and Joan, 
Gerri also identified students’ roles, which, in her scenario, were a curator, a critic, a reporter, an artist, 
and a buyer. Simone collaborated with Gerri by proposing to focus on Canadian art rather than art in 
general. Simone further framed Gerri’s scenario by adding two micro-tasks of conducting research on 
paintings or an artist and presenting the information as if the students were artists. Although initially Gerri 
planned to implement her task on the island using screens surrounding the campfire to display uploaded 
pictures, she changed her mind and chose the Algonquin Campus VW. She posted pictures of the 
paintings on the walls in the study hall, which reminded her of a gallery and thus looked more realistic.    
Simone posted two scenarios. The first scenario was a media/photo scavenger hunt during which students 
would follow some clues and take screenshots of places as evidence of having visited these locations. The 
second scenario involved the creation of a time capsule in which students decided on what to include in 
the time capsule and where to bury it on the island. Gerri collaborated with Simone by adding a micro-
task in which she adopted Lynn’s idea of students exploring the environment and introduced a new idea 
of populating the environment with people, e.g., teachers, who would interact with students and, thus, 
become a source of language input.  
While Gerri was co-constructing Simone’s task, Simone scaffolded Lynn’s task: “Would this be you 
leading the tour in character and prompting students for ideas? (ex.: "maybe we could build a yoga studio 
here"). I think that would work well and you can give more details about Aunt Aggie as you go” (Simone, 
02/12/13, wiki).  Simone’s suggestion seemed to echo Gerri’s idea of engaging other participants as a 
potential source of language input.  
The skill of framing the task appears to be crucial for designing tasks for 3D VWs because they are 
complex systems of pedagogically motivated activities mediated by online communication tools. If some 
of the system’s components do not match, the task is not likely to be successfully implemented. Jack, 
Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven ESL Teacher Training in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
unlike the other team members, avoided the task-framing process at the beginning. He borrowed his 
scenario from one of the ESL websites and adapted it for use in 3D VWs. The teacher trainees who 
acquired task-development experience through collaborating on the construction of tasks found Jack’s 
task was too complicated, contained too many details, and missed the collaboration component which is 
essential for use in a collaborative immersive 3D environment. In addition, students’ roles were not clear, 
the VW that Jack chose did not match the topic of the task, and the environment and its tools were not 
used effectively. Although later Jack simplified the task and chose a different virtual location, his first dry 
run showed that the task was not feasible for implementation in 3D VWs. Only when Jack chose a more 
realistic scenario and followed his peers’ steps of task development, was he able to develop a task that 
was possible to implement in a 3D VW. While each teacher trainee conducted one dry run, Jack had to do 
it four times. Since at first he did not collaborate on the development of his peers’ tasks, he missed 
important steps in the task-development process and had to go through several dry runs to understand 
which components in his task could not be implemented in 3D VWs.  
Teacher trainees’ collaboration on framing the tasks resulted in six task scenarios. Although the tasks 
differed in topics and the types of language input, they had similar organization and consisted of four 
micro-tasks, which were logical steps towards the completion of the task and focused on the development 
of dialogical and monological skills. The tasks included the following micro-tasks:      
1. Brainstorming: students collaborated on providing ideas on the topic of the task and took notes on 
the public pad; 
2. Research/exploration: in pairs/groups, students collaborated on researching the topic using the 
Internet, gathering information from articles provided by the teacher, exploring the environment, 
gathering information from informants or generating their own ideas;  
3. Preparing presentation: students collaborated on preparing for the presentation by incorporating 
the information they gathered during the research/exploration stage; 
4. Presentation: presenting their projects in groups or individually.  
The tasks were structured in such a way that they provided EFL students with opportunities to use 
language when collaborating on the task, to practice different discourse patterns, to engage in negotiation 
of meaning and form, and to incorporate the language they learned in their final presentations.   
Skill of Providing Input 
One of the features of 3D VWs is that although they simulate real-life experiences, they are not populated 
and, therefore, students do not have access to oral input as it occurs in real life when they interact with 
other people. Other types of input, e.g., texts, video, and audio, also need to be uploaded to the 
environment or students can browse the Internet using collaboration boards directly from the 
environment. The development of this skill began during the pre-teaching stage and extended to the 
teaching stage because observing how students interact with different types of input allowed for better 
understanding of the relationship between the input types and the tools used for input delivery.      
Lynn and Joan both employed oral input for their tasks, which were similar in that both included a micro-
task in which students collected information about how the island could be used while they explored the 
island. At first, Lynn (02/15/13, wiki) incorporated Gerri’s idea (02/12/13, wiki) of having teachers play 
the role of informants so that students could elicit information from them and, then, Joan further 
developed the idea by placing informants in the environment. Joan involved teacher trainees who played 
the role of park workers and held information about the island resources. Later, Lynn opted for engaging 
students in producing self-generated input (03/10/13, wiki) The other types of input used in the tasks were 
text-based input from the Internet web pages in Gerri’s, Jack’s, and Simone’s tasks and student-generated 
input in Diane’s task. Testing the tasks with the teacher trainees did not reveal any problems; however, 
Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven ESL Teacher Training in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
there were some input-related differences during the class sessions, which will be discussed in the section 
on the teaching stage.  
Skill of Designing Collaborative Tasks and Managing Student Collaboration 
The skill of designing collaborative tasks and managing students’ collaboration is another integrated skill 
that emerged from the data. 3D VWs are collaborative environments and, therefore, understanding the 
relationship between the students’ roles and collaboration mediated by the communication tools is 
essential for teaching in a collaborative environment.  
Lynn first focused on the students’ and the teacher’s roles when commenting on Joan’s scenarios 
(02/08/13, wiki). At the beginning stages of task development, teacher trainees assigned students different 
roles. However, as they focused on the practical realization of the collaborative micro-tasks, they agreed 
that students should be assigned similar roles “because it is a realistic premise for people to be working 
together towards a common goal” (Lynn, 02/13/13, wiki) and because “[s]omehow the planning and 
working together will have to be stressed to get [students] to interact” (Diane, 02/15/13, wiki). 
Another point to consider when creating collaborative tasks is what communication tools mediate 
students’ collaboration and how. On their wikis, Joan and Lynn specified that public whiteboards would 
be used for brainstorming, sharing ideas, and collaboration on the task (02/13/13). Lynn proposed that 
students collaboratively create the Power Point slides. Since there was an application allowing desktop 
sharing, the slides could be made visible on each student’s desktop and students could collaborate in such 
a way that “one student will be the scribe …but as all of them can hear each other, they can work on it 
together” (Lynn, 02/14/13, wiki). Although teacher trainees began to bring some ideas on the use of 
collaboration tools, they were still in the process of discovery with these tools. Therefore, the course 
instructor suggested that the teacher trainees explore how to use the public pads, which allowed peer 
editing and collaboration, and then use them as collaboration tools during the teaching sessions.  
Skill of Giving Instructions to Students  
Joan was the first one who added instructions to the task (02/29/13, wiki) and Gerri wrote a detailed script 
of what she would say to students during the online session (02/20/13, wiki). The rest of the team 
borrowed this idea and also wrote similar scripts for their teaching sessions because dry runs showed that 
it was very difficult for teacher trainees to control avatars, explain the task, give directions in the 
environment, and manage the classroom.  
Skill of Providing Feedback to Students 
Although teacher trainees understood that they should provide feedback to students differently from how 
it is provided in a face-to-face classroom, this skill was not well discussed on the wikis because none of 
the teacher trainees had previous teaching or learning experience in 3D VWs. One of the challenges of 
giving feedback in VWs was how to provide feedback without interfering with students’ interaction while 
collaborating on their task. Although the teacher trainees agreed that the less intrusive way of providing 
feedback would be to evaluate students’ performance using a rubric, it was not clear whether teacher 
trainees would be able to take notes during their class sessions because they would be overwhelmed with 
other things such as controlling their avatars, managing the classroom, using communication tools, and, 
possibly, troubleshooting technical problems.  
The data from wikis show that teacher trainees were actively collaborating on the task development and, 
thus, actively learning from one another. Their collaboration led to the co-construction of new knowledge, 
specifically, the development of five integrated skills. Collaboration also allowed them to create six 
language-learning tasks, or new products, unique to this particular group of people and this environment. 
Since collaborative construction of new knowledge and new products are the key elements of 
collaborative situated learning framework (Donato, 2004; Herrington & Oliver, 2000), the pre-teaching 
Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven ESL Teacher Training in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
stage can be considered an effective part of the teacher training.  
Teaching Stage 
After each teaching session, teacher trainees wrote journal entries reflecting on their teaching experience. 
In their journals, they wrote what went well, what problems they had during the tutoring sessions, and 
provided suggestions for improvement for the teacher trainees who taught in the following weeks. 
Although during the pre-teaching stage teacher trainees were able to develop skills that allowed them to 
create and implement language-learning tasks that engaged students in collaborative learning, during the 
first two weeks of teaching, they encountered some previously unidentified challenges. These challenges 
are addressed in the subsequent sections.  
Challenges Related to the Skill of Managing Students’ Collaboration 
Although collaboration was discussed during the task-development stage and teacher trainees had ideas 
on how to implement collaborative tasks, the first class sessions taught by Gerri and Jack showed that 
students either did not collaborate on the task at all or collaborated but predominantly in Turkish. During 
the class session with Gerri, students did not collaborate because they were not familiar with the 
technology and they were not familiar with a collaborative type of learning. In spite of the fact that 
students were working on the task and found the information needed for the final presentation, they 
worked individually and did not share information with their peers. They also did not know how to make 
use of the public pad for collaboration.   
The teaching stage provided support for Lynn’s idea of assigning the role of a scribe to one student to 
facilitate collaboration. During the first class session in the second week, Jack taught students how to use 
the public pad. Although students contributed to the shared document, they did so mostly in silence. Only 
when Jack used Lynn’s recommendation, did students begin to collaborate. This exemplifies that some of 
the skills cannot be fully developed without testing them in the environment with real students. Although 
the teacher trainees tested the tasks in the environment, testing did not reveal the problems they 
eventually encountered in class because their experiences with the technology and collaborative approach 
to learning differed from that of the students.  
We also did not take into account that in the EFL setting, students may not be accustomed to using the 
target language while working on the task. As students reported at the end of Gerri’s teaching session, 
speaking English to their peers was a new experience for them: “I think it was strange because the people 
you know in real world and while you speaking Turkish and when you come here, you have to speak 
English with your native people” (Furkan, 03/05/13, screencast). To help students to overcome the 
language barrier and to have them get used to speaking English, Jack added to his task a “mingling” 
component, a warming up activity when students had an opportunity to have informal conversations with 
their teachers at the beginning of the class.  
These examples show that collaborative situated learning was beneficial for teacher trainees. During the 
teaching stage, teacher trainees were able to revisit peers’ suggestions provided during the pre-teaching 
stage and to make valuable changes to their tasks during the teaching stage when they encountered 
problems.   
Challenges Related to the Skill of Providing Input 
Class sessions also revealed some challenges related to the types of input, the way in which input was 
introduced to students, and how students interacted with the input. The type of input that triggered more 
negotiation of meaning was oral input presented by the park workers in Joan’s task. Student-generated 
input in Lynn’s and Diane’s tasks did not elicit much negotiation of meaning because students used 
familiar vocabulary.  
Gerri’s and Jack’s tasks incorporated text-based input from the Internet web pages. Although students 
Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven ESL Teacher Training in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Language Learning & Technology 96 
were able to gather information from the Internet in the first week, they did not negotiate meaning. Rather 
than using the browser collaboratively on the built-in boards within the VW, students worked individually 
with different texts using browsers on their own desktops (i.e., not shared with the other participants). 
Students may have looked up the meanings of unknown words in the electronic dictionary or may have 
simply omitted the information they did not understand. Jack solved this problem by having students read 
the same information by sending them a link to the Internet page and by having them choose three items 
from a list of ten, which made students process the input and negotiate the meaning of the items on the 
list.   
After observing Gerri’s and Jack’s teaching, Simone revised her task and included a jigsaw reading as one 
of the micro-tasks. She divided eight students participating in the task into four pairs. Each pair of 
students read the same text, collaboratively summarized it to a teacher trainee playing a role of the 
teaching assistant, and then shared the content with the rest of the group.  By having students summarize 
readings, Simone stimulated students’ input processing, as students needed to understand the reading in 
order to share the information with others. 
These examples demonstrate once again that collaborative nature of this training was beneficial to teacher 
trainees. In the process of teacher training, they learned from each other that whether students process the 
input does not depend on the input-type alone. In order to process language input, students need to be 
engaged in an activity that compels them to incorporate information from the input into a new 
collaboratively constructed product, e.g., presentation.  
Challenges Related to the Skill of Giving Instructions 
The skill of giving instructions to students was taken into consideration during the pre-teaching stage, but 
only partially. During her class session, Gerri provided instructions orally. Although her instructions were 
very clear and students seemed to understand the language, they did not understand what they were 
supposed to do for each of the micro-tasks. Since Gerri was floating between the rooms in which students 
were working on the task, some of the teacher trainees played the role of teaching assistants and helped 
the students understand what to do. In her journal entry that she wrote after teaching, Gerri recommended 
that teachers write instructions on the slides and post the slides on the whiteboards so that students could 
see the instructions.   
Jack incorporated peers’ feedback in his task and wrote instructions on the slides, but in his first class 
session, students did not remember all of the instructions because they did not review the slides with the 
instructions after each stage of the task. For his second teaching session, Jack divided instructions into 
two parts and students understood the instructions better. Joan, who taught in the third week, simplified 
the task instructions even further and divided them into five steps corresponding to each part of the task. 
This considerably reduced the teacher talk and provided students with a better understanding of what they 
were required to do at each stage. Although writing clear instructions is important in both face-to-face and 
online teaching contexts, it is especially important for the 3D environments because of the information 
load on the students. In addition to learning a language, students need to adjust to a different type of 
environment, learn how to use communication tools, and to deal with different types of technology 
problems.    
Challenges Related to the Skill of Providing Feedback to Students 
The teaching stage revealed that in order to understand how to provide feedback in the 3D classroom, 
teacher trainees needed to understand how to provide feedback in a student-centered classroom and how 
to use communication tools for this purpose. Since students spent most of their time collaborating, they 
also spent most of their time talking to each other. To provide feedback, teachers would have to interrupt 
the students’ discussions. Therefore, in order to avoid interrupting students, they used the moments when 
students asked for feedback or when they could provide feedback without much interference.  
Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven ESL Teacher Training in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Language Learning & Technology 97 
The screencasts of the teaching sessions exemplify two strategies for providing feedback to students. In 
Example 1 (see Appendix for transcription conventions), Simone non-intrusively corrects Princess, a 
student who mispronounces the word “seagull” (lines 3 & 5) by using the word correctly in her response 
to the student (line 6).    
(1) 
1 Simone: ah, but there is fish ((in the lake)) 
2  (a sound of seagulls) 
3 Princess: um this this is a seagull? Or girl? Seagirl? 
4 Simone: (laughing) 
5 Princess: the bird is seagirl? 
6 Simone: I think, they might be seagulls or eagles as well 
7 Princess: Eagle? Okay (that’s all?) 
Another way of providing feedback to students is to use text-based tools such as chat or collaboration 
boards. In Example 2, students are coming up with a plan of how survivors are going to live on the island. 
Deniz is writing on the public pad whereas Miss Jane and Ozkaya contribute verbally. Deniz misspells the 
word tree house (lines 4, 7) and the teacher corrects him by typing the word in the chat area (lines 10, 13). 
In spite of the fact that the teacher does not interrupt students’ talk, Deniz notices the teacher’s feedback 
and corrects the misspelled word (line 15).  
(2) 
1 Deniz: the [next 
2 Miss Jane:       [tree house 
3 Deniz: um tree house 
4  [3 (then deletes) 
5 Miss Jane: [yes 
6 Miss Jane:         [we can also ((use)) tree houses for 
7 Deniz:         [3house 
8 Miss Jane: Um sleeping [um we put sleeping bank- bags in there and xx 
9 Deniz:                      [sleepin and living 
10 Teacher: Tree house 
11 Ozkaya: ((that’s right)) 
12 Deniz: (adds g to ‘sleeping) 
13 Teacher: Not not 3 house 
14  (4.0) 
15 Deniz: (deletes 3 and types tree) 
By the end of the sessions, teacher trainees had developed and effectively used the skill of providing 
feedback to students. They understood how interactions occur in 3D VWs and how communication tools 
could be used for feedback purposes.  
 
Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven ESL Teacher Training in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Language Learning & Technology 98 
Summary of Findings 
The data from the teacher trainees’ wikis demonstrate that online teaching skills do not develop in the 
linear order as presented in Compton’s (2009) framework. As evident from the examples, the skill of 
framing a task integrates technological and pedagogical skills. These skills develop concurrently 
throughout the process of evaluation and re-evaluation of each of the participants’ ideas and making the 
necessary changes to the task. Evaluation skills do not seem to develop separately from technological and 
pedagogical skills, but develop along with them and are the vehicle of teacher trainees’ professional 
growth.  
The situated learning model of teacher training also challenges Compton’s (2009) framework in terms of 
classifying online teaching skills into levels. Since Compton builds her framework on the synthesis of 
CALL literature, her model is separated from the context in which they develop. Although online teachers 
need to have basic knowledge of language learning theories to be able to apply this knowledge in online 
teaching, they are not likely to develop this ability without hands-on experience with the technology in 
order to understand how a specific technology can facilitate language learning. Theorizing the 
development of online teaching skills outside of the teaching context leads to inaccurate understanding of 
the developmental processes that occur in teachers. For example, Compton includes a pedagogical skill of 
creativity in creating new online materials in the set of skills acquired later, at the expert level. However, 
this study shows that teacher trainees started the project with creating teaching materials and were 
mastering this skill during their pre-teaching stage. Similarly, creativity in facilitating online socialization 
is also acquired at the expert level in Compton’s model; however, the teacher trainees in this study began 
to form this skill when constructing collaborative tasks and mastered it during the teaching stage. 
The development of online teaching skills is also a spiral process because the skills developed in the pre-
teaching stage are revisited and refined during the teaching stage. Since teacher training was situated in an 
authentic context, the development of the teaching skills occurred naturally from the formation of more 
general skill of framing the task to the more specific skills such as providing input and managing 
collaboration.  
The findings of this study indicate that collaborative situated learning was a rather effective form of 
teacher training for the participants of the study. Since 3D VWs are complex systems that require 
understanding of how the environment and its tools are used for realization of pedagogical goals, it is 
difficult, time consuming, and practically impossible for novice teachers to explore the environment and 
to learn how to teach in such environment on their own. Teacher trainees’ collaborative situated learning 
allowed for co-construction of their own model of the task and teaching practices in the 3D VW as a 
result of the joint activity and incorporation of socially spread knowledge. Since co-construction of new 
knowledge and transformation of individual practices into the shared practice is the goal of collaborative 
situated learning, the teacher training discussed in this study can be considered successful as it realized its 
pedagogical goal.   
CONCLUSIONS  
This study advocates for a two-staged spiral teacher-training model that consists of pre-teaching and 
teaching stages. As we learned from the teacher trainees’ wikis, online teaching skill development starts 
at the pre-teaching stage when teachers are engaged in the development of teaching materials and testing 
them in the environment. However, the teaching stage is extremely important because only the skill of 
framing the task was developed during the pre-teaching stage. The other four skills began to develop 
during the pre-teaching stage and extended to the teaching stage. Despite the fact that teacher trainees 
raised the question of how to provide feedback to students during the pre-teaching stage, they could not 
learn how to do it because mastering of this skill required practicing this skill in the teaching context.    
The study also suggests that collaborative situated learning was an effective method of teacher training, at 
Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven ESL Teacher Training in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Language Learning & Technology 99 
least for the participants of this study. Throughout the project, teacher trainees were able to incorporate 
peers’ suggestions and borrow peers’ ideas when developing tasks on wikis, to providing feedback and 
incorporating peers’ feedback during the dry runs, to critically reflect on their own teaching sessions in 
journals, and to make necessary changes to their tasks after observing peers’ teaching sessions and 
reading reflections in the journals. Their collaboration allowed them to develop 3D integrated skills and to 
create new products, language-learning tasks, during a short period of ten weeks of teacher training.  
While this study is the first step towards identification of the skills required for teaching in 3D VW and 
understanding how these skills develop in an authentic context, the next step in this direction should be 
more detailed exploration of each of the integrated skills. Although this study provides positive results of 
the collaborative situated teacher-training process, the results of the study should be taken with caution 
because it focused on only one group of learners. More research is needed to observe whether this type of 
teacher training is equally effective for other groups of teacher trainees and whether the same online 
teaching skills consistently emerge across the learners and teacher training contexts.   
 
APPENDIX. Transcription Conventions 
Princess: Voice-based utterances are typed in regular font 
Tree-house Utterances typed on the collaboration board are in italics  
[yes Square brackets indicate the onset of overlapping utterances 
(then deletes) Utterances in single parentheses indicate transcriber’s comments 
((use)) Utterances in double parentheses include transcribers best guess 
bank- Dash indicates interrupted utterances 
(4.0) A four-second long pause 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We wish to thank all of the participants of the study and, especially, the teacher trainees whose 
enthusiasm and hard work on the project made it a rewarding experience for both the participants and the 
project team. We would like to thank the other two members of the project team, Nuket Nowlan, a 3D 
technology consultant (Canada), and Yeşim Eraslan, Director of the English Language School (Turkey),  
for their collaboration on the project. We are grateful to the anonymous reviewers and the editors of the 
special issue of the journal for providing valuable comments and suggestions on the earlier drafts of this 
manuscript.   
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Dr. Iryna Kozlova is a part-time instructor at Carleton University, Canada. Some of her research interests 
include language learning pedagogy and teacher training in synchronous multimodal web-conferencing 
environments. She has extensive experience in designing and teaching online language courses and 
courses in applied linguistics.  
E-mail: iryna.kozlova@carleton.ca 
Dmitri Priven teaches in and coordinates the Teachers of English as a Second/Foreign Language program 
at Algonquin College in Ottawa, Canada. His research interests include the use of technology in ESL/EFL 
teacher training, as well as first language attrition and minority language education. 
E-mail: privend@algonquincollege.com 
Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven ESL Teacher Training in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Language Learning & Technology 100 
REFERENCES 
Alesandrini, K., & Larson, L. (2010). Teacher’s bridge to constructivism. The Clearing House: A Journal 
of Educational Strategies, Issues and Ideas, 75(3), 118–121. 
Compton, L. K.L. (2009). Preparing language teachers to teach language online: A look at skills, roles, 
and responsibilities. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 22(1), 73–99.  
Cooke-Plagwitz, J. (2008). New directions in CALL: An objective introduction to Second Life. CALICO 
Journal, 25(3), 547–557. Retrieved from 
http://www.equinoxpub.com/journals/index.php/CALICO/article/view/23095 
Cornille, F., Thorne, S.L., & Desmet, P. (2012). Digital games for language learning: From hype to 
insight? ReCALL, 24(3), 243–356. 
Donato, R. (2004). Aspects of collaboration in pedagogical discourse. Annual Review of Applied 
Linguistics, 24, 284–302. 
Deutschmann, M., Panichi, L., & Molka-Danielsen, J. (2009). Designing oral participation in Second 
Life: A comparative study of two language proficiency courses. ReCALL, 21(2), 206–226. 
Davis, K. A. (1995). Qualitative theory and methods in Applied Linguistics research. TESOL Quarterly, 
29(3), 427–457. 
Egbert, J. (2006) Learning in context: Situating language teacher learning in CALL. In Hubbard, P. and 
Levy, M. (Eds.), Teacher Education in CALL. (pp. 167–181), Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins. 
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by Expanding. Helsinki, Finland: Orienta-Kosultit Oy. 
Erickson, F. (1986). Qualitative Methods in Research on Teaching. In M. C. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of 
Research on Teaching (pp. 119-161). New York, NY: Collier Macmillian. 
Felix, U. (2003). Pedagogy on the line: identifying and closing the missing links. In U. Felix (Ed.), 
Language learning online: Towards best practices (pp. 147–170). Lisse, The Netherlands: Swetz & 
Zeitlinger 
Gerhard, M., Moore, D., & Hobbs, D. (2004). Embodiment and copresence in collaborative interfaces. 
Human-Computer Studies, 61(4), 453–480. 
Hampel, R. (2006). Rethinking task design for the digital age: A framework for language teaching and  
learning in a synchronous online environment. ReCALL 18(1), 105–121. 
Herrington, J., & Oliver, R. (2005). An instructional design framework for authentic learning 
environments. Educational Technology Research & Development, 48(3), 23–48. 
Jefferson, G. (1984). Transcript Notation. In J. M. Atkinson, & J. Heritage (Eds.), Structures of social 
action: Studies in conversation analysis, (pp. ix-xvi), Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press and 
Editions de la Maison des Sciences de l'Homme. 
Kozlova, I. (2013). Online pedagogy: Development of the communicative skills in russian online courses. 
OLBI Working Papers, 5, 57–70. 
Kozlova, I, & Zundel, E. (2013). Synchronous online language teaching: Strategies to support language 
development. In C. Meskill (Ed.), Online reaching and ;learning (pp. 99–116). London, UK: Bloomsbury 
Academic. 
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
McNeil, L. (2013). Exploring the relationship between situated activity and CALL learning in teacher 
Iryna Kozlova and Dmitri Priven ESL Teacher Training in 3D Virtual Worlds 
 
Language Learning & Technology 101 
education. ReCALL, 25(2), 215–232. 
Peterson, M. (2006). Learner interaction management in an avatar and chat-based virtual world. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning,  19(1), 79–103.  
Peterson, M. (2010). Learner participation patterns and strategy use in Second Life: An exploratory case 
study. ReCALL, 22(3), 273–292. 
Peterson, M. (2011). Towards a research agenda for the use of three-dimensional virtual worlds in 
language learning. CALICO Journal, 29(1), 67–80. Retrieved from 
http://www.equinoxpub.com/journals/index.php/CALICO/article/view/22967 
Pica, T., Kanagy, R., Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second language 
instruction and research. In G. Crookes & S. M. Gass (Eds.), Tasks and language learning: Integrating 
theory and practice (pp. 9–34). Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters.  
Rosell-Aguilar, F. (2005). Task design for audiographic conferencing: Promoting beginner oral 
interaction in distance language learning. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 18(5), 417– 442. 
Sadler, R., & Dooly, M. (2013). Language Learning in Virtual Worlds. In M. Thomas, H. Reinders, & M. 
Warschauer (Eds.), Contemporary computer-assisted language learning. London, UK: Bloomsbury 
Academic. 
Schroeder, R. (2002). Social interaction in virtual environments: Key issues, common themes, and a 
framework for research. In R. Schroeder (Ed.), The social life of avatars: Presence and interaction in 
shared virtual environments (pp. 1–18). London, UK: Springer-Verlag. 
Sutcliffe, A., & Alrayes, A. (2012). Investigating user experience in Second Life for collaborative 
learning. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 70, 508–525. 
Svensson, P. (2003). Virtual worlds as arenas for language learning. In U. Felix (Ed.), Language learning 
online: Towards best practices (pp. 123–143). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger.  
Toyoda, E., & Harrison, R. (2002). Categorization of text chat communication between learners and 
native speakers of Japanese. Language Learning & Technology, 6(1), 82–99. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/toyoda/default.html 
Varli, O. (2013). An exploration of 3D virtual worlds through ESL/EFL teachers’ perspectives in Second 
Life. In C. Meskill (Ed.), Online teaching and learning (pp. 61–76). London, UK: Bloomsbury 
Academic. 
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. M. Cole, V. 
John-Steiner, S. Scribner and E. Soubeman (Eds.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press 
Wang, Y., Chen, N., & Levy, M. (2010). Teacher training in a synchronous cyber face-to-face classroom: 
Characterizing and supporting the online teachers' learning process. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 23(4), 277–293. 
Zhao, Y., & Tella, S. (2002). From the special issue editors. Language Learning & Technology, 6(3), 1–4. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num3/speceditors/  
