Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2015/yanghsieh.pdf 
June 2015, Volume 19, Number 2 
pp. 69–84 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 69 
NEGOTIATION OF MEANING TO COMPREHEND HYPERTEXTS 
THROUGH PEER QUESTIONING 
Yu-Fen Yang, National Yunlin University of Science and Technology 
Pei-Yin Hsieh, National Yunlin University of Science and Technology 
Many college students who study English as a Foreign Language (EFL) are less-proficient 
readers as they have few opportunities to negotiate their perspectives for creating meaning 
through peer questioning in onsite instruction. This study reports on using online peer 
questioning to enhance less-proficient college students’ negotiation of meaning in 
comprehending texts. A sample of 50 college students was divided into two groups based 
on the pre-test, into a more- proficient group and a less- proficient group, with 25 students 
in each group. The results of this study reveal that the less-proficient students made greater 
progress in reading comprehension than the more-proficient students after using the 
strategy of online peer questioning. The less-proficient students were able to explicitly 
observe how the more-proficient peers used integration questions, agreed or disagreed 
with peer responses, and finally constructed new understandings of the hypertexts. 
Particularly, the less-proficient students learned from the more-proficient peers on how to 
engage in critical thinking to express and share multiple perspectives. Using online peer 
questioning, both the more- and the less-proficient students frequently engaged in 
negotiation of meaning, interaction, and teaching one another. Their reading progress was 
reflected in the post-test, the types of questions and responses, and their perceptions 
toward using online peer questioning. 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English as a Foreign Language (EFL) 
Keywords: Negotiation of Meaning; Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning; Peer 
Questioning; Reading Comprehension; Language Knowledge Construction  
APA Citation: Yang, Y. F., & Hsieh, P. Y. (2015). Negotiation of meaning to 
comprehend hypertext through peer questioning. Language Learning & Technology, 
19(2), 69–84. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2015/yanghsieh.pdf 
Received: March 4, 2014; Accepted: June 12, 2014; Published: June 1, 2015; Revised: July 23, 2015 
Copyright: © Yu-Fen Yang & Pei-Yin Hsieh 
INTRODUCTION 
Many college students who study English as a Foreign Language (EFL) are less-proficient readers, and 
often are unable to cope with the high demands of college level reading courses and the academically-
oriented English texts assigned by professors to obtain domain-specific knowledge (Beatie, Martin, & 
Oberst, 1984; Yang, 2010). The inability of college students to meet high academic demands is mainly 
due to little strategic intent in selecting effective and efficient reading strategies (Wood, Motz, & 
Willoughby, 1998) and the one-way teaching methods of language knowledge transmission (Dreyer & 
Nel, 2003). College students often do not engage in monitoring their reading process unless the teacher 
asks them to think about what they have learned through activities or instruction (Yang, 2010). To 
monitor reading processes, college students are encouraged to participate in continuous dialogues to 
negotiate different perspectives for creating meaning from new language experiences (Lee, 2001). 
Kumaravadivelu (1993) has indicated that negotiation of meaning means “[Learners] should be 
encouraged to ask for information, seek clarification, express an opinion, agree and/or disagree with peers 
and teachers” (pp. 12-13). The exchange of ideas and negotiation of meaning not only engages an 
individual in-group discussion to negotiate multiple perspectives, but also helps to create new language 
Yu-Fen Yang and Pei-Yin Hsieh Negotiation of Meaning through Peer Questioning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  70 
learning experiences (Kessler & Bikowski, 2010). As a result, online peer questioning has become an 
emerging strategy to help students participate in negotiation of meaning for comprehending hypertexts 
without the restriction of time and space (Chiu & Hsiao, 2010). 
Online Peer Questioning and Responses 
Peer questioning has been commonly used to enhance negotiation of meaning and improve reading 
comprehension in small groups (Chiu, Wu, & Cheng, 2013; King, 1994; King & Rosenshine, 1993). 
Palincsar and Brown (1984) explicitly describe peer questioning as a strategy where students are 
encouraged to generate questions to help them comprehend the text, and answer their peers’ questions for 
exchanging multiple perspectives and negotiating meanings on the same issues. Different responses to the 
same issues may lead to meaningful learning when students resolve conflicts through discussions (Cho, 
Lee, & Jonassen, 2011; Dekhinet, 2008). Citing Vygotsky’s ideas on social constructivism (1978), Pea 
(1993) has proposed that knowledge construction is a social and dialogical process in which different 
perspectives are incorporated. Dialogues serve as an instrument of thinking in terms of clarifying and 
elaborating ideas and thoughts in negotiation process (Brown & Palincsar, 1989). Particularly in an online 
learning environment, students are able to ask further questions or to respond to peers’ questions after 
reflective thinking on ideas and opinions (Cho, Lee, & Jonassen, 2011). That is, negotiation of meaning in 
online peer questioning could be optimized as students actively engage in sharing multiple perspectives 
and negotiate meanings in small group discussions (Golanics & Nussbaum, 2008). 
To negotiate meanings in small group discussions, King (1994) divides questions into three types: factual, 
comprehension, and integration questions. Factual questions focus on the recall of information explicitly 
found in the text (e.g., Does Tina like to read English novels?). Comprehension questions help students 
make logical connections between facts (e.g., How did child abuse affect his mental process?). Integration 
questions help them connect prior knowledge with information learned from the text, thus integrating 
several concepts into new knowledge (e.g., What does the article imply in gender discrimination?). Three 
types of responses corresponding to the three types of questions are also identified (King, 1994). 
Knowledge restating refers to students’ simple concepts or information read in the text. Students can 
easily find answers with a surface reading of the text. Knowledge assimilation refers to students’ logical 
thinking where they make judgments about the information in the text. Knowledge integration is 
identified when students can integrate several concepts and make inferences beyond the stated 
information. 
Statement of the Problem 
While previous studies have examined peer questioning to improve college students’ reading 
comprehension in a face-to-face environment, few studies have been done focusing on how college 
students negotiate their different perspectives in online peer questioning to improve hypertext 
comprehension. Peer questioning has mostly been examined in onsite learning environments; however, 
peer questioning in online learning environments may provide more interactive learning activities (Cho, 
Lee, & Jonassen, 2011). In traditional teacher-centered instruction, students have few opportunities share 
different ideas or negotiate their agreements or disagreements, as the teacher usually guides questioning 
in lectures (Samson, Strykowski, Weinstein, & Walberg, 1987). 
Students’ processing of question generation and the provision of responses are largely unobservable 
during onsite instruction. The lack of process data (log files) in onsite instruction makes it hard for 
teachers to observe and monitor their students’ reading process and then participate in students’ reading 
comprehension process. This may result in teachers having difficulties in providing appropriate 
scaffolding when their students encounter reading problems. Similarly, students are often unable to 
compare their reading processes with those of more-proficient students. They cannot obtain different 
perspectives and employ more-proficient students’ reading strategies to discover their own deficiencies 
(Yang, 2012). 
Yu-Fen Yang and Pei-Yin Hsieh Negotiation of Meaning through Peer Questioning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  71 
Study Background 
This study reports on the use of online peer questioning to enhance less-proficient college students’ 
negotiation of meaning in comprehending hypertexts. In traditional classroom settings, the teacher usually 
provides students with direct instruction and asks one or two questions to check on students’ reading 
comprehension while reading academic English texts. This instruction leads students to become passive 
receivers as they merely receive the teacher’s knowledge transmission. Students do not have many 
opportunities to monitor their own comprehension, share experiences with peers, negotiate their different 
perspectives, and consequently improve their reading comprehension. 
Different from traditional settings, where students are asked only one or two questions by the teacher, this 
study encourages students to generate questions and to provide their peers with responses online. Each 
student was first guided by the teacher’s explicit modeling on how to generate three types of questions 
(factual, comprehension and integration) and responses (knowledge restating, assimilation and 
integration). After receiving onsite instruction on questioning strategies, the students were expected to 
generate their own questions and provide their peers with multiple suggestions and comments online for 
enhancement of reading comprehension (Jalkanen & Vaarala, 2013).   
With the focus of this study centering on whether online peer questioning can improve less-proficient 
college students’ negotiation of meaning in reading comprehension, four research questions were posed:  
1. What progress do college students make with their reading after using online peer questioning?  
2. What types of questions and responses do college students ask and respond to between the more- 
and less-proficient groups?  
3. How do less-proficient college students demonstrate their negotiation of meaning and reading 
comprehension through online peer questioning?  
4. What are college students’ perceptions toward using online peer questioning to enhance 
negotiation of meaning in reading comprehension? 
METHODOLOGY 
Participants 
A sample of 50 college students from a university of science and technology in central Taiwan voluntarily 
registered for a reading program where they received a blended instruction of questioning. The 50 college 
students were from different departments and colleges. Before enrolling in the reading program, the 
students were made to take the reading section of a standardized English language test, The Test of 
English for International Communication (TOEIC), as the pre-test to determine the students’ English 
reading proficiency level. The maximum score on the reading section of the TOEIC is 495, and the 
reliability of the TOEIC test is reported to be 0.90 (Chun Shin Limited, 2009). The task of online peer 
questioning is related to student reading proficiency (Cho, Lee, & Jonassen, 2011). If the less-proficient 
students are unable to identify key ideas in a reading passage, they may fail to generate high-quality 
questions (Tsai, 2004; Weinstock, Neuman, & Glassner, 2006). 
As Cho, Lee, and Jonassen (2011) have noted, reading proficiency may affect students’ comprehension 
and fail to generate higher level questions. Their study divided students into higher and lower groups 
based on different English language proficiencies, to investigate how students generate questions and 
provide responses to their peers, when carrying out meaning negotiation tasks. Similar to their research, 
this study grouped 50 college students into the more-and the less-proficient groups of 25 students in each 
group, in order to observe how they generated different types of questions and responses, and how they 
created new language experiences by learning from each other through online peer questioning. The 
more-proficient students’ mean score and standard deviation on the pre-test were 289 and 12.43, 
Yu-Fen Yang and Pei-Yin Hsieh Negotiation of Meaning through Peer Questioning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  72 
respectively while the less-proficient students’ mean score and standard deviation on the pre-test were 
164 and 34.72, respectively. The paired sample t- test also showed a significant difference between these 
two groups (t=5.67, p < .05). 
System Development 
The computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) system was developed in this study to help the 
students improve their negotiation of meaning through using online peer questioning. The system is 
divided into two modules, a student interface and a teacher interface. Four functionalities including a 
dialogue box, discussion forum, chat room, and annotation tool are incorporated into the system to 
encourage interaction between the teacher and students and among students themselves. Using these four 
functionalities, students are able to post questions and provide responses and further regulate their own 
reading. 
The Student Interface 
The student interface of the CSCL system encourages students to use the questioning strategy in order to 
become independent readers. For instance, students can generate one or more questions for their peers in 
the discussion forum. In the discussion forum, questions are posted and replied to by other students and 
the teacher (see Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1. The interface of the discussion forum. 
In addition, students’ question generations and responses are ranked in the CSCL system by the clicking 
rate. The clicking rate refers to the frequency that students click to read a question. Based on the clicking 
rate, students are able to compare their questions and responses with other peers to diagnose their own 
reading difficulties and adjust reading strategies (see Figure 2). 
Yu-Fen Yang and Pei-Yin Hsieh Negotiation of Meaning through Peer Questioning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  73 
 
Figure 2. Student clicking rates in posting and in responding to questions. 
The Teacher Interface 
The teacher can monitor students’ interactions and reading process through the log files in the CSCL 
system (see Figure 3). The log files automatically record students’ actions in the system such as reading, 
making annotations, asking questions, and answering questions in the discussion forum, and consulting 
the dictionary in order to look up unknown words. The system also provides the teacher with overall 
statistics regarding the actions that students take in the system. In other words, through reading students’ 
log files, observing students’ questions and replies in the discussion forum, and viewing the statistics of 
students’ action details in the CSCL system, the teacher is able to diagnose students’ reading difficulties 
in generating questions and comprehending the hypertexts.   
 
Figure 3. Student action logs in the system. 
Procedure of Data Collection 
This study, comparing online peer questioning between the more- and the less-proficient groups among 
college students, was conducted for twelve weeks. The students of the two groups were asked to read one 
academic text per week, with a total of 10 intermediate-level academic texts in 450 words, chosen from 
an English textbook (Anderson, 2007), for this study. Before the reading instruction began, the TOEIC 
pre-test was conducted to identify students’ reading proficiency. The teacher provided the students with 
question prompts (e.g., question types) and examples (see Appendix) as the instruction began to help the 
students engage in collaborative and interactive discussions (Ainsworth, Gelmini-Hornsby, & O’Malley, 
2011).  
After receiving six weeks of onsite instruction (3hrs per week), the students were asked to take another 
TOEIC test (mid-test) to evaluate their reading progress; another version of the TOEIC test was used to 
Yu-Fen Yang and Pei-Yin Hsieh Negotiation of Meaning through Peer Questioning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  74 
avoid repetition of the same test items. After this, the students were introduced to the CSCL system and 
were encouraged to generate questions and provide peers with responses in the discussion forum for the 
final six weeks. The teacher guided the students to play the three roles of questioner, responder, and 
commentator in the small groups for the online instruction. As questioners, the students had to generate 
questions to ask their peers after reading a text. The students then provided responses to their peers’ 
questions in the role as responders. After receiving peers’ responses, they played the role of 
commentators (Yang, Yeh, & Wong, 2010), which involved giving personal comments to their peers’ 
responses. In playing these three roles, students were afforded ample opportunities to interact and to teach 
one another. 
In the CSCL environment, the students received online instruction for enhancing their interactions and 
participation with peers by using the questioning strategy. At the end of the twelve weeks of the reading 
instruction, a total of ten students, five from each of the two groups, were selected by simple random 
sampling. Each student was given a random number with the same probability to be chosen by the 
researcher in this semi-structured interview for investigating student perceptions toward using the 
questioning strategy in the blended instruction. A TOEIC post-test, different from the previous two 
versions, was also given to examine the 50 college students’ reading improvement after the 12-week 
instruction.  
Procedure of Data Analysis 
Data in terms of the TOEIC pre-, mid-, and post-test scores, students’ action details in the log files, and 
their responses on the semi-structured interview were analyzed using both quantitative and qualitative 
methods. First, a paired sample t-test was compared to examine students’ reading progress in onsite 
instruction (pre- and mid-tests), online instruction (mid- and post-tests), and the 12-week of blended 
instruction (the pre- and post-tests). Second, the different types of questions and responses of the more-
and the less-proficient students recorded in the discussion forum of the CSCL system were counted by 
frequency and analyzed by means of the ANOVA. That is, in the coding scheme, three types of questions, 
namely factual, comprehension, and integration questions, were included while three types of responses, 
knowledge restating, assimilation, and integration, were also coded. The three types of questions and 
responses, and students’ original reading proficiency (i.e., the scores of the TOEIC pre-test) made up the 
independent variables while students’ scores on the TOEIC post-test made up the dependent variable in 
this study. Finally, the students’ action logs recorded in the CSCL system, students’ questions and 
responses, and a semi-structured interview, were analyzed by an in-depth qualitative content analysis.  
Four steps of content analysis, including coding, categorization, description, and interpretation, followed. 
First, the researcher and the research assistant used highlights to code the meaningful statements from 
students’ questions and responses, as well as from the semi-structured interview expressing their 
perspectives toward the onsite and online instructions (coding). Next, students’ meaningful statements in 
terms of their questions were divided into three types, including factual, comprehension, and integration 
questions. Their responses were also divided into three types, namely, knowledge restating, assimilation 
and integration. In addition, their statements in the semi-structured interview expressing their perspectives 
were categorized (categorization). Then, the researcher and the research assistant described the statements 
by summarizing the main ideas (description). Finally, the main ideas were interpreted by providing 
explanations, making inferences, and drawing conclusions (interpretation). The inter-rater reliability, 
which was the degree of agreement among raters, was conducted by Kappa statistics to describe students’ 
questions and responses recorded on the worksheets (onsite instruction), their questions and responses 
recorded in the log files (online instruction), and their perspectives expressed in the interview were 0.83, 
0.84, and 0.86, respectively. The disagreement between the two raters (the researcher and the research 
assistant) was resolved by discussion. Data interpretation driven by these research methods is further 
explained in the following sections. 
Yu-Fen Yang and Pei-Yin Hsieh Negotiation of Meaning through Peer Questioning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  75 
RESULTS 
To investigate online peer questioning to improve the less-proficient college students’ negotiation of 
meaning in reading comprehension, four categories of results are presented. First, students’ reading 
progress is presented by the TOEIC pre-, mid-, and post-test scores. Second, the different types of 
questions and responses between the more- and the less-proficient groups were analyzed by the ANOVA 
to reveal how the students at different reading proficiency levels improved their reading comprehension 
after receiving online peer questioning. Third, a sample case L1 was randomly selected from the less-
proficient group to illustrate how the less-proficient students negotiated meanings and improved 
comprehension through peer questioning in the CSCL system. Finally, the students’ perceptions toward 
online peer questioning on improving negotiation of meaning and reading comprehension were revealed 
through the semi-structured interview. 
The Students’ Reading Progress between the Two Groups 
In this study, the paired sample t-test was adopted to evaluate the students’ reading progress of the two 
groups after receiving online peer questioning. The TOEIC pre-test aims to determine the students’ 
reading proficiency level before the reading instruction began. The more-proficient students made no 
progress in reading as their mean scores decreased from 289 in the pre-test to 288 in the mid-test. No 
significant difference is shown between the pre- and mid-tests in reading (t = .06, p>.05). On the contrary, 
the less-proficient students made reading improvement when their mean scores increased from 164 in the 
pre-test to 178 in the mid-test, with medium effect size (ES=0.68). There is a statistically significant 
difference between the pre- and mid-tests in reading (t = -2.60, p< .05).  
During the 12 weeks of the blended reading instruction, the more-proficient students made reading 
improvement when their mean scores increased from 289 in the pre-test to 304 in the post-test. A 
significant difference between the pre- and post-tests is shown in reading (t = -3.82, p< .05). A small 
effect size is found (ES=0.48).  The less-proficient students made even more significant reading progress 
than the more-proficient students, as their mean scores increased from 164 in the pre-test to 198 in the 
post-test. A significant increase between the pre- and post-tests is shown in reading (t = -4.93, p< .00). 
There is also a large effect size (ES=0.82) in reading improvement. In other words, the strategy of online 
peer questioning was significantly more effective for the less-proficient students than for the more-
proficient students after receiving blended reading instruction. 
Different Types of Questions and Responses between the Two Groups 
To investigate online peer questioning to improve college students’ negotiation of meaning in reading 
comprehension, a series of ANOVA results were adopted. The independent variables were the three types 
of questions (i.e., factual, comprehension, and integration questions) and students’ original reading 
proficiency (e.g., the TOEIC pre-test scores) for one set of ANOVAs and the three types of responses 
(i.e., knowledge restating, assimilation and integration) and students’ reading proficiency for the second 
set of ANOVAs. A separate series of ANOVAs looked at individual proficiency groups by question and 
response type. For all of the analyses the dependent variable was the TOEIC post-test scores.  
As shown in Table 1, no significant interaction is found between using factual questions and the students’ 
reading proficiency (F =7.41; p= .25). However, there is a significant interaction between (a) reading 
proficiency and comprehension question (F = .27; p = .05), and (b) reading proficiency and integration 
question (F = 6.67; p = .01).. That is, an interaction effect was found between students’ reading 
proficiency levels and questions types in comprehension and integration questions on their post-test 
reading comprehension, compared to factual questions. 
 
 
Yu-Fen Yang and Pei-Yin Hsieh Negotiation of Meaning through Peer Questioning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  76 
Table 1. ANOVA Results of Question Type and Post-test Reading Comprehension (N=50) 
Source SS DF MS F p 
Reading proficiency (A) 
Factual question (B) 
(A)*(B) 
6304.49 
1868.90 
1914.51 
1 
2 
2 
354.60 
658.39 
724.14 
40.80 
7.23 
7.41 
.00** 
.16 
.25 
Reading proficiency (A) 
Comprehension question (B) 
(A)*(B) 
4007.90 
335.02 
46.35 
1 
2 
2 
4007.90 
167.51 
46.35 
23.61 
 .98 
 .27 
.00** 
.04* 
.05* 
Reading proficiency (A) 
Integration question (B) 
(A)*(B) 
1787.19 
586.56 
581.55 
1 
2 
2 
1787.19 
293.28 
581.56 
20.51 
3.37 
6.67 
.00** 
.04* 
.01** 
Note. *p < .05, **p < .01  
With respect to the students’ responses, results are shown in Table 2. There is a significant interaction 
between both knowledge assimilation (F = 4.07; p = .05) and knowledge integration (F = 2.02; p = .02) 
and reading proficiency, but no significant interaction with knowledge restating is found (F = .81; p = 
.45). In other words,  an interaction effect was found between students’ reading proficiency levels and 
response types in knowledge assimilation and integration, compared to knowledge restating.  
Table 2. ANOVAResults of Response Type and Post-test Reading Comprehension (N=50) 
Source SS DF MS F p 
Reading proficiency (A) 
Knowledge restating (B) 
(A)*(B) 
2472.05 
202.97 
270.57 
1 
2 
2 
2472.05 
101.49 
135.29 
14.82 
 .64 
 .81 
.00** 
.55 
.45 
Reading proficiency (A) 
Knowledge assimilation (B) 
(A)*(B) 
2321.95 
2085.12 
464.30 
1 
2 
2 
2324.95 
1042.56 
464.30 
20.38 
9.14 
4.07 
.00** 
.03* 
.05* 
Reading proficiency (A) 
Knowledge integration (B) 
(A)*(B) 
2876.76 
1956.76 
469.42 
1 
2 
2 
2876.76 
978.38 
234.71 
24.79 
8.43 
2.02 
.00** 
.01** 
.02* 
Note. *p < .05, **p < .01  
Table 3 depicts different question types on the reading progress between the more- and the less-proficient 
students after receiving the blended course of reciprocal peer questioning. For the more-proficient 
students, a significant effect is found on using integration questions (F = 3.05; p= .02), but no significant 
correlation is found on asking factual questions (F = 9.12; p = .29) and comprehension questions (F = 
1.14; p = .12). That is to say, the more-proficient students understood how to integrate their prior 
knowledge with knowledge they gained from the text, so they generated integration questions rather than 
merely factual and comprehension questions. 
In contrast, for the less-proficient students, the significance of using factual questions (F = 2.44; p = .05) 
and comprehension questions (F = 6.34; p = .01) is found, but no significance is found in using 
integration questions (F = .88; p = .36). This result indicates that some of the less-proficient students were 
able to recall the facts from the reading materials and make simple connections between their prior 
Yu-Fen Yang and Pei-Yin Hsieh Negotiation of Meaning through Peer Questioning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  77 
knowledge and the text they had read, but they could not integrate several concepts to form new 
knowledge while they read the text. These less-proficient students still had to learn from the more-
proficient students on how to generate integration questions.  
Table 3. ANOVA Results of Questioning between the Two Groups 
   SS df MS F p 
The more-
proficient 
students 
Factual question Between groups 
Within groups 
Total 
2062.67 
5201.36 
7264.03 
1 
23 
24 
2062.67 
226.14 
9.12 .29 
Comprehension 
question 
Between groups 
Within groups 
Total 
343.51 
6920.49 
7264 
1 
23 
24 
343.51 
300.89 
1.14 .12 
Integration 
question 
Between groups 
Within groups 
Total 
850.69 
6413.31 
7264 
1 
23 
24 
850.69 
278.83 
3.05 .02** 
The less-
proficient 
students 
Factual question Between groups 
Within groups 
Total 
253.23 
183.17 
736.40 
1 
23 
24 
1.42 
32.51 
2.44 .05* 
Comprehension 
question 
Between groups 
Within groups 
Total 
253.23 
483.81 
737.04 
1 
23 
24 
126.62 
21.99 
6.34 .01** 
Integration 
question 
Between groups 
Within groups 
Total 
27.307 
709.73 
737.04 
1 
23 
24 
27.31 
30.86 
.88 .36 
Note:* p < .05, ** p < .03 
The results providing different responses between the more-and the less-proficient students are shown in 
Table 4. For the more-proficient students, there is a significant effect on knowledge integration (F = 
10.19; p = .01). However, no significant effect is found for knowledge restating (F =1.61; p = .22) and 
assimilation (F = 1.49; p = .24). In other words, the more-proficient students tended to provide peers with 
statements of knowledge integration going beyond the given information in the text. They were able to 
offer their peers more explanations, inferences and connections. They clarified their less-proficient peers’ 
reading problems and decreased the proficiency gap between the more- and the less-proficient groups. 
For the less-proficient students, knowledge restating (F= 3.28; p = .05) and assimilation (F= 6.34; p= .01) 
highlight significant effects on reading comprehension, but no significant effect on knowledge integration 
(F = 1.65; p = .21) is found. The results indicate that they were able to make simple and logical judgments 
to show their basic understanding when responding to peers’ questions; however, they were unable to 
provide detailed explanations or combined prior knowledge with current learning experiences in the text.  
 
 
 
 
Yu-Fen Yang and Pei-Yin Hsieh Negotiation of Meaning through Peer Questioning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  78 
Table 4.  ANOVA Results of Responses between the Two Groups 
   SS df MS F p 
The more-
proficient 
students 
Knowledge 
restating 
Between groups 
Within groups 
Total 
920.56 
6589.58 
7510.14 
1 
23 
24 
460.26 
286.50 
 1.61 .22 
Knowledge 
assimilation 
Between groups 
Within groups 
Total 
869.17 
6394.83 
7264 
1 
23 
24 
434.56 
290.74 
1.49 .24 
Knowledge 
integration 
Between groups 
Within groups 
Total 
2292.37 
5034.64 
7327.01 
1 
23 
24 
2229.37 
218.89 
10.19 .01** 
The less-
proficient 
students 
Knowledge 
restating 
Between groups 
Within groups 
Total 
365.4 
372 
737.4 
1 
23 
24 
84.62 
25.81 
3.28 .05* 
Knowledge 
assimilation 
Between groups 
Within groups 
Total 
169.24 
567.8 
737.04 
1 
23 
24 
126.62 
21.99 
6.34 .01** 
Knowledge 
integration 
Between groups 
Within groups 
Total 
48.17 
669.83 
718 
1 
23 
24 
48.17 
29.12 
1.65 .21 
 Note:* p < .05, ** p < .03 
The Less-proficient Students’ Negotiation of Meaning through Online Peer Questioning 
In this study, the less-proficient students, referred to as “L”, and the more-proficient peers as “M”, show 
their interactions and negation of meanings through online peer questioning. The sample case L1 was 
selected from the less-proficient group to show her reading process using paper-based and online peer 
questioning. In onsite instruction, L1 read an English text, generated one question and received two peers’ 
responses. Negotiation of meaning in written form could become powerful as peers were able to give a 
fuller elaboration in order to successfully convey meaning (Koschmann, Kelson, Feltovich, & Barrows, 
1996). Though L1 generated questions in written form after onsite instruction, the process of how she 
shared knowledge, negotiated with peers, and exchanged different perspectives through interactions, 
could not be documented. Without the process data (log files) to record the negotiation of meaning with 
peers, the students were unable to compare their reading processes with those of their more-proficient 
peers and reflect on their reading problems. Similarly, the teacher was unable to identify his students’ 
reading difficulties to further assist them in enhancing reading comprehension.  
To counter the drawbacks of onsite instruction, online peer questioning was employed to document L1’s 
negotiation process with her peers in the log files (Figure 4). L1 was asked to read a text “Changing 
Roles: Stay-at-home dads” and to make hypertext annotations in order to grasp the main idea from each 
paragraph. Before generating her own questions, she first responded to M2’s question “No, I do not think 
so. Stay-at-home dads are also very hard to support a family.” Then M1 provided a further response that 
men lose face if they were unable to work in Eastern cultures. L1 proposed that she learned from M1 
since she did not take social and cultural insights into consideration before. As L1 posted her questions, 
“What do you think about stay-at-home dads?” online, M3 responded that stay-at-home dads broke the 
stereotype that men should make a living for the family. However, M2 proposed that men still worked for 
the family if wives could not make enough money. According to the online negotiation in the discussion 
forum, the results indicate that the less-proficient students learned different perspectives on the same 
issues from the more-proficient peers’ responses. They not only understood that social and cultural 
insights were very important when responding to peers’ questions, but also were helped by the more-
Yu-Fen Yang and Pei-Yin Hsieh Negotiation of Meaning through Peer Questioning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  79 
proficient peers to engage in critical thinking for expressing multiple perspectives on comprehending 
social and cultural issues.  
According to L1’s actions in the log files of the CSCL system, her interactions with peers were 
investigated (Figure 5). L1 first responded to other peers’ questions (students M1and M2) and then 
received three peers’ responses (students L2, M2 and M3). The collaborative interactions of online peer 
questioning and responses were found to extend to other students. The CSCL system enabled L1 to 
observe the more-proficient peers asking questions, exchanging multiple perspectives, agreeing or 
disagreeing with peers’ responses, and finally constructing new language understandings to comprehend 
the hypertexts. L1 mentioned that, “I liked to read the more-proficient peers’ perspectives since I was able 
to engage in critical thinking after viewing their statements. I also clarify my reading problems as I posted 
the questions to clarify the difficult sentences.” 
Figure 4. An example of online peer questioning. 
 
Figure 5. L1’s interactions with peers in the CSCL system. 
Yu-Fen Yang and Pei-Yin Hsieh Negotiation of Meaning through Peer Questioning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  80 
Students’ Perceptions toward Blended Learning of Peer Questioning 
In the semi-structured interview, five students were randomly selected from the more-proficient and the 
less-proficient groups, giving a total of 10 students. They were asked about their reading difficulties, 
negotiation of meaning, and the effectiveness of peer questioning in onsite and online instruction. 
According to Table 5, all of the interviewees from the more-proficient group had claimed they engaged in 
online peer questioning to interact and negotiate with their peers multiple perspectives in small group 
discussions. There were four interviewees (80%) who agreed that they were able to engage in critical 
thinking since they could ask integration questions (social and cultural issues) to show their better 
understandings of the texts. They also paid attention to their use of words and sentences to express correct 
viewpoints. On the contrary, all the interviewees from the less-proficient group confirmed that negotiation 
of meaning through online peer questioning could enhance their comprehension and enlarge their 
vocabulary size as they had to post questions and respond to their peers very often. There were four 
interviewees who proposed that they had improved their reading comprehension as they interacted and 
negotiated with the more-proficient peers to clarify their reading problems. However, some of them still 
had difficulties posting questions in terms of insufficient grammatical knowledge.  
Table 5. More- and Less-proficient Students’ Negotiation of Meaning to Improve Reading Comprehension  
Students (N=10) Frequency 
More-
proficient  
 1. I think I can interact with my peers by frequently posting questions and 
giving responses in negotiation of meaning. 
5 
 2.   I deeply engage in thinking when generating questions because I want to 
post integration questions beyond the given information and show my 
better understanding.  
4 
 3.   I engage in deep thinking on how to use correct English words and 
sentence structures to express my viewpoints while asking questions. 
4 
 4.   I like to provide responses to less-proficient peers’ perspectives for 
integrating social and cultural insights to enhance their reading 
comprehension. 
3 
Less-
proficient  
 1. I had no experience generating questions and providing responses to my 
peers before using the CSCL system. I am very excited and interested in 
doing this to enhance my negotiation and reading comprehension. 
5 
 2. I can enlarge my vocabulary size as I have to look up words in the online 
dictionary while asking questions. 
5 
 3. I have a better understanding of the text because I can negotiate with 
more-proficient peers and observe their perspectives in the CSCL system.  
4 
 4.   I have difficulty generating questions because of my limited grammatical 
knowledge in writing English sentences. 
2 
All of the interviewees in the two groups had positive attitudes toward the use of online peer questioning 
(Table 6). The students preferred to use online peer questioning and responses because they could interact 
with their peers in anonymity. Some students (50%) claimed that onsite peer questioning was time-
consuming and laborious as they had to waste time waiting for their peers’ responses. This might reduce 
students’ motivation to interact or discuss with their peers. However, for online peer questioning, the 
students expressed that they had much more time to think about how to express their perspectives, to view 
different peers’ responses, and to learn new language knowledge through intensive interactions with 
others. 
Yu-Fen Yang and Pei-Yin Hsieh Negotiation of Meaning through Peer Questioning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  81 
Table 6. Students’ Perceptions toward Peer Questioning in the Blended Instruction (N=10) 
Description Frequency 
1. I like to provide online responses because of anonymity. Many of us are too shy to 
ask peers questions during onsite instruction. 
10 
2. In online instruction, I have more opportunities to view different types of questions 
and responses in the discussion forum. I can understand other peers’ questions and 
responses by spending time reading them. It is a great opportunity for me to enhance 
my reading. 
10 
3. In online instruction, I can gain new language knowledge from peers’ responses. 
Everyone has different ideas toward the same issue, and this is very interesting to me. 
7 
4. Sometimes I think onsite questioning and responses were time-consuming and 
laborious. I have to wait for my peers’ responses for a long time.  
5 
5. I could think more deeply about my questions and responses online and practice my 
English writing at the same time. 
4 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
The results of this study have shown that online peer questioning should be recommended (Roscoe & Chi, 
2007) to improve less-proficient college students’ negotiation of meaning in enhancing reading 
comprehension (Choi, Land, & Turgeon, 2008; Yang, 2010). Particularly, in the CSCL system, the log 
files represented how the students asked questions, exchanged multiple perspectives, agreed or disagreed 
with others’ responses, and constructed new language knowledge to comprehend the hypertexts without 
the limitations of time and location. This was very different from onsite teacher-centered instruction, in 
which the teacher usually guided the questioning and the students were only able to generate one or two 
questions due to very limited instructional hours.  
First, the investigation of the more- and the less-proficient students on different types of questions and 
responses yielded various differences. The more-proficient students tended to ask integration questions to 
present their understanding beyond the given hypertexts and combined several concepts to form new 
language knowledge. They also utilized knowledge integration as they provided their peers with detailed 
explanations to help their peers acquire deeper understandings of the hypertexts. In contrast, the less-
proficient students adopted factual and comprehension questions to show a fundamental understanding of 
the hypertexts. They made simple connections between their prior knowledge and the text. Regarding 
responses, they used knowledge restatements and knowledge assimilation to respond to their peers’ 
questions based on their recollections of the text. 
Second, the less-proficient students made greater reading progress after receiving online peer questioning 
than the more-proficient students.  L1 was one of the sample cases used to show her reading process on 
frequent negotiation of meaning and interactions with more-proficient peers. According to L1’s 
negotiation of meaning in small group discussions, it was found that the less-proficient peers mostly 
generated factual and comprehension questions, and provided knowledge restating and assimilation based 
on their prior knowledge and personal experiences to ask and respond to peers’ questions. In terms of 
their inability to ask and respond to questions very often, the more-proficient peers’ support was 
necessary to help them take social and cultural insights into consideration and to provide multiple 
perspectives with agreement or disagreement in negotiation of meanings. The less-proficient students 
were better able to engage in critical thinking and improve their reading comprehension as they observed 
how the more-proficient peers generated and responded to questions combined with multiple perspectives 
in social and cultural issues. By helping the less-proficient peers, the more-proficient students also 
Yu-Fen Yang and Pei-Yin Hsieh Negotiation of Meaning through Peer Questioning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  82 
enhanced their comprehension with the clarification and elaboration of their own and the less-proficient 
peers’ reading problems.  
Finally, from the semi-structured interview, the more-proficient students benefited from online peer 
questioning since they were able to clarify and elaborate their own and the less-proficient peers’ reading 
problems. The less-proficient students; however, still relied on the more-proficient peers’ help to 
comprehend the difficult sentences or paragraphs for bettering reading comprehension. For the 
investigation of onsite and online peer questioning, most of interviewees proposed that they would like to 
use online peer questioning since they had more opportunities express multiple perspectives and share 
with their peers in anonymity. They also had much more time engage in critical thinking and think about 
how to generate and respond to other peers’ questions.  
This study has some limitations. First, since only 50 college students participated in this study, the sample 
size was not big enough to explain how all college students in Taiwan would benefit from using online 
peer questioning to enhance negotiation of meaning and reading comprehension. Second, the duration of 
strategy training may have been too short for the students to have sufficient time practice asking questions 
and providing responses. Finally, the teachers’ perceptions as they take part in reading hypertexts with the 
students should be investigated so that teachers are better able to diagnose their students’ reading 
difficulties and help them find solutions. 
 
APPENDIX. The question prompts (King, 1994) 
Question type Questions provided 
Factual  Does Tina like to read English novels? 
Factual  When did Jack come back from Japan? 
Factual  Where did Mary study abroad? 
Comprehension  How did you decide to invest in property? 
Comprehension  What is the main idea in this text? 
Comprehension  How did child abuse affect his mental process? 
Integration  What would happen if we had food crisis? 
Integration  What does the article imply in gender discrimination? 
Integration  Why has the Mediterranean diet attracted many nutritionists’ attention? 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This article was partially supported by the National Science Council in the Republic of China, Taiwan 
(NSC 101-2410-H-224-029-MY2 and NSC 102-2511-S-224-005). The authors would like to also thank 
the participants for their engagement in this study.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Yu-Fen Yang is currently a distinguished professor in the Graduate School of Applied Foreign Languages 
at National Yunlin University of Science and Technology in Taiwan. Her research focus is mainly on 
learning psychology of reading and writing, computer-assisted language learning (CALL), language 
education for special needs, and language assessment. Along with the development of CALL systems, she 
Yu-Fen Yang and Pei-Yin Hsieh Negotiation of Meaning through Peer Questioning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  83 
has published many articles in journals such as Language Learning and Technology, Computer-Assisted 
Language Learning, British Journal of Educational Technology, Computers and Education, Computers in 
Human Behavior, and Educational Technology and Society. 
E-mail: yangy@yuntech.edu.tw 
Pei-Yin Hsieh is a graduate student in the Graduate School of Applied Foreign Languages at National 
Yunlin University of Science and Technology in Taiwan. 
E-mail: peiyineh@yuntech.edu.tw 
 
REFERENCES 
Ainsworth, S., Gelmini-Hornsby, G., & O’Malley, C. (2011). Guided reciprocal questioning to support 
children’s collaborative storytelling. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative 
Learning, 6(4), 577–600. 
Anderson , N. J. (2007). Active skills for reading: Book 3. Boston, MA: Heinle. 
Beatie, B. A., Martin, L., & Oberst, B. S. (1984). Reading in the first-year college textbook: A syllabus 
for textbook authors, publishers, reviewers, and instructors. The Modern Language Journal, 69(3), 203–
211. 
Brown, A., & Palincsar, A. (1989). Guided, cooperative learning and individual knowledge acquisition. 
In L. B. Rensick (Ed.), Knowing, learning and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser (pp. 393-
451). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Chiu, C. H., & Hsiao, H. F. (2010). Group differences in computer supported collaborative learning: 
evidence from patterns of Taiwanese students’ online communication. Computers & Education, 54(2), 
427–435. 
Chiu, C. H., Wu, C. Y., & Cheng, H. W. (2013). Integrating reviewing strategies into shared electronic 
note-taking: Questioning, summarizing and note reading. Computers & Education, 67(21), 229–238. 
Cho, Y. H., Lee, J., & Jonassen, D. H. (2011). The role of tasks and epistemological beliefs in online peer 
questioning. Computers & Education, 56, 112–126. 
Choi, I., Land, S. M., & Turgeon, A. (2008). Instructor modeling and online guidance for peer 
questioning during online discussion. Journal of Educational Technology Systems, 36(3), 255– 275. 
Chun Shin Limited. (2009). Test of English for International Communication (TOEIC). Retrieved from 
http://www.toeic.com.tw/ 
Dekhinet, R. (2008). Online enhanced corrective feedback for ESL learners in higher education. Journal 
of Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(5), 409–425. 
Dreyer, C., & Nel, C. (2003). Teaching reading strategies and reading comprehension within a 
technology-enhanced learning environment. System, 31, 349–365. 
Golanics, J. D., & Nussbaum, E. M. (2008). Enhancing collaborative online argumentation through 
question elaboration and goal instructions. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 24, 167–180. 
Jalkanen J., & Vaarala, H. (2013). Digital texts for learning finish: shared resources and emerging 
practices. Language Learning & Technology, 17(1), 107–124. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2013/jalkanenvaarala.pdf 
Kessler, G., & Bikowski, D. (2010). Developing collaborative autonomous learning abilities in computer 
Yu-Fen Yang and Pei-Yin Hsieh Negotiation of Meaning through Peer Questioning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  84 
mediated language learning: attention to meaning among students in wiki space. Journal of Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 23(1), 41–58. 
King, A. (1994). Guiding knowledge construction in the classroom: effects of teaching children how to 
question and how to explain. American Educational Research Journal, 31(2), 338–368. 
King, A., & Rosenshine, B. (1993). Effects of guided cooperative questioning on children’s knowledge 
construction . Journal of Experimental Education, 61, 127–148. 
Koschmann, T., Kelson, A., Feltovich, P., & Barrows, H. (1996). Computer-supported problem-based 
learning: a principled approach to the use of computers in collaborative learning. In T. Koschmann 
(Ed.), CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm (pp. 83-119). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum. 
Kumaravadivelu, B. (1993). Maximizing learning potential in the communicative classroom. ELT 
Journal, 47(1), 12–21. 
Lee, L. (2001). Online interaction: negotiation of meaning and strategies used among learners of Spanish. 
ReCALL, 13(2), 232–244. 
Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and 
comprehension-monitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117–175. 
Pea, R. D. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. Solomon (Ed.), 
Distributed cognitions (pp. 47–87). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press. 
Roscoe, R. D., & Chi, M. T. H. (2007). Understanding tutor learning: knowledge-building and 
knowledge-telling in peer tutors’ explanations and questions. Review of Educational Research, 77(4), 
534–574. 
Samson, G. E., & Strykowski, B., Weinstein, T., & Walberg, H. J. (1987). The effects of teacher 
questioning levels on student achievement: A quantitative synthesis. The Journal of Educational 
Research, 80(5), 290–295. 
Tsai, C. C. (2004). Beyond cognitive and metacognitive tools: the use of the Internet as an 
epistemological tool for instruction. British Journal of Educational Technology, 35, 525–536. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Weinstock, M., Neuman, Y., & Glassner, A. (2006). Identification of informal reasoning fallacies as a 
function of epistemological level, grade level, and cognitive ability. Journal of Educational Psychology, 
98, 327–341. 
Wood, E., Motz, M., & Willoughby, T. (1998). Examining students’ retrospective memories of strategy 
development. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90, 698–704. 
Yang, Y. F. (2010). Developing a reciprocal teaching/learning system for college remedial reading 
instruction. Computers & Education, 55(3), 1193–1201. 
Yang, Y. F. (2012). Blended learning for college students with English reading difficulties. Journal of 
Computer Assisted Language Learning. 25(5), 393–410. 
Yang, Y. F., Yeh, H. C., & Wong, W. K. (2010). The influence of social interaction on meaning 
construction in a virtual community. British Journal of Educational Technology, 41(2), 287–306. 
