Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/review2.pdf 
February 2015, Volume 19, Number 1 
pp. 54–58 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 54 
REVIEW OF A CONSTRUCTIVIST APPROACH TO THE NATIONAL 
EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY STANDARDS FOR TEACHERS 
A Constructivist Approach to the National 
Educational Technology Standards for Teachers 
V. N. Morphew 
2012 
ISBN: 978-1-56484-313-5 (paperback) 
ASIN: B008SD4LCO 
US $40 (paperback) 
US $13 (Kindle) 
370 pp. 
International Society for Technology in Education 
Eugene, OR 
 
 
Review by Deborah Healey, University of Oregon 
BACKGROUND 
The International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE) has been a strong player in disseminating 
research on and policy for the use of technology in education for over 25 years. The ISTE National 
Educational Technology Standards (ISTE NETS) were initially formulated in 1998 (NETS for Students) 
and 2000 (NETS for Teachers) and the standards were revised in 2007–2008. ISTE NETS have been 
widely accepted by United States school districts as their technology standards, and in some schools 
internationally. 
The 2007–2008 versions of the ISTE Standards are a major upgrade. A Constructivist Approach to the 
National Educational Technology Standards for Teachers (here referred to as ACA) uses the acronym 
NETST to refer to ISTE StandardsT, most likely due to the familiarity most US-based teachers have 
with ISTE NETS. The new standards have a more constructivist, less technology-centered view, and are 
more international in outlook than the 1998–2000 versions.  
ACA is an ISTE publication designed to help teachers implement the ISTE StandardsT. The author, 
Valerie Morphew, is a teacher educator who specializes in instructional technology at Fairmount State 
University in the US. She taught at middle school and high school in the US, as well as at the 
undergraduate and graduate level. She brings a strong teacher educator and instructional technology focus 
to the book.  
Constructivism has a long history in teaching with its bases in Dewey in the 1900s (Dewey, 1902), 
Vygotsky in the 1930s (Vygotsky, 1986), and Piaget in the 1940s (Piaget, 1976), as the best-known 
Deborah Healey                           Review of Constructivist Approach to NETS for Teachers 
 
Language Learning & Technology                                                                                                                                                     55 
writers. ACA gives three major elements of a constructivist learning as a) meaningful experiences, b) 
interactions, and c) prior knowledge (p. xiii). These serve as points of reference for suggested activities 
related to each of the standards. 
ORGANIZATION 
ACA is organized by standards, with one chapter for each standard, plus an introduction and a conclusion. 
Each chapter in ACA starts with the standard in brief, a list of the performance indicators, a bit of 
background information about the standard, then the learning outcomes for the chapter. The chapter is 
then divided into the four performance indicators for that standard. With each performance indicator 
comes a lengthy explanation of the relationship between that performance indicator, theory, and practice. 
The earlier chapters and performance indicators have more general explanatory material about 
constructivism and technology use than later chapters. With each performance indicator come suggested 
activities and technologies that can be used to meet that performance indicator. Also included in each 
section are “In your experience,” where readers are encouraged to respond to a question based on the 
performance indicator, using their previous experience; “Explorations,” where readers have five or more 
suggested activities to build their skill in the areas referenced in that section; and “Review,” which serves 
as a brief recap of the information in that section. Figures and tables provide a visual representation of 
information, although some figures add little to the content. Resource Lists interspersed throughout the 
chapters offer related websites. The end of each chapter has a summary of the chapter, endnotes, and 
references for the chapter. 
COMMENTS 
This is a very useful book for those new to the ISTE Standards, constructivist teaching, and appropriate 
use of technology in teaching. The reflective questions and activities in the Explorations for each 
performance indicator serve to strengthen understanding of the core concepts in that section. For example, 
performance indicator t1a for Standard 1 focuses on facilitating and inspiring student creativity. One of 
the Explorations is to “Create a graphic organizer that represents your understanding of creativity and the 
creative process.” (p. 26). If the chapters had been built around the Explorations rather than the other way 
around, the organization may have felt tighter and the focus on constructivism clearer.  
General background information is packed into each section, especially in the first two chapters. Bloom’s 
revised taxonomy (Anderson & Krathwohl, 2001) and Gardner’s Multiple Intelligence theory (Gardner, 
1999) are explained and used as the basis of Standard 1’s creativity focus. A description of research 
methods in general, steps for sourcing technology, and differentiated instruction are included as part of 
Standard 2: “Design and develop digital-age learning experiences and assessments.” The added 
background information can make the organization hard to follow and sometimes also results in 
irrelevancies. For example, a discussion of performance indicator t1b about exploring real-world issues 
included Ninteno’s baseball wii game. It is a good example of turning a non-computer game into a 
computer game, but hardly related to a real-world problem. 
As one of the members of TESOL’s Technology Standards Task Force and a co-author of TESOL’s 
Technology Standards: Description, Implementation, Integration, I was very interested in reading more 
about the revised ISTE standards and how they can be applied in a constructivist way. The work of the 
TESOL Task Force was informed by the 1998 ISTE NETS for Students (ISTE, 1998) and the 2000 ISTE 
NETS for Teachers (ISTE, 2000), as well as the United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization’s (UNESCO’s) Information and Communication Technologies Competency Standards for 
Teachers (UNESCO, 2008). Both the ISTE and the UNESCO standards assume a centralized system of 
education and age-appropriate literacy. These are not universally true in English language teaching 
settings. In developing the TESOL Technology Standards, the Task Force examined ways that different 
regions of the world implement technology in teaching. The result was an emphasis in the TESOL 
Deborah Healey                           Review of Constructivist Approach to NETS for Teachers 
 
Language Learning & Technology                                                                                                                                                          56 
standards on “available technology” and locally appropriate practice. The TESOL standards include 
vignettes that show implementation of the standards and performance indicators in high-, medium-, and 
low-resource contexts internationally, and in a variety of teaching settings: with children, teens, and 
adults; with learners at a range of literacy and English proficiency; for a variety of purposes.  
I was quite happy to see the emphasis on transfer in the new Standard 3’s performance indicator t3a, 
“Demonstrate fluency in technology systems and the transfer of current knowledge to new technologies 
and situations.” The ability to take prior knowledge and adapt it to a new situation is really the heart of 
being an effective technology-using teacher in a world of constantly-changing technologies. 
Also heartening was Standard 5’s performance indicator t5b: “Encourage leadership by demonstrating a 
vision of technology infusion, participating in shared decision making and community building, and 
developing the leadership and technology skills of others.” As in the TESOL Technology Standards, 
teachers are urged to make technology an integrated part of teaching, and administrators are encouraged 
to provide training and resources for teachers so that they can use technology effectively. This is certainly 
constructivist in its community building emphasis. Infused technology is also a hallmark of “normalized 
CALL” (Bax, 2003). 
The revised ISTE standards are certainly appropriate to current teaching, including constructivist 
language teaching. However, I was hoping to see much more of an international perspective both in the 
new standards and in ISTE publications about them. In many places around the world, access to 
technology resources is limited. The resource lists and examples of technology tools in the text do not 
mention whether they are commercial or free resources. This is an important distinction for many teachers 
without a technology budget. Listing that information would also help the author and editor be aware 
when a resource list consists almost entirely of commercial products, and non-commercial options could 
be added before publication. 
Standard 3 calls on teachers to act in ways “representative of an innovative professional in a global and 
digital society.” Both performance indicator 3b and 3c emphasize collaboration and communication with 
digital tools. ACA’s only concern in communicating with parents is whether or not they have Internet 
access. This misses a substantial concern about language, especially when the parents speak a language 
that the teacher does not. Multilingual environments are the norm in a global society. 
Standard 4 makes reference to global societal issues and responsibilities, which could have enabled some 
discussion of international concerns related to technology use. The discussion about copyright is US-
based, with references to US copyright law. A few resources that do not reference the US should have 
been included, such as RightsDirect and the World Intellectual Property Organization. It would also be 
helpful to note that many parts of the world do not see plagiarism the way that the US does. 
Performance indicator 4d asks teachers to: “Develop and model cultural understanding and global 
awareness by engaging with colleagues and students of other cultures using digital-age communication 
and collaboration tools.” The explanation of collaboration tools and projects offers information about 
resources that have a global reach. Global SchoolNet is a good choice; sadly, ThinkQuest is not longer 
available. A missing but worthwhile resource is TakingITGlobal, a portal for international projects and 
collaborations with a focus on teens and young adults. The Explorations are interesting and useful, but 
they assume that teachers have a basic knowledge of what “global awareness” is and how to promote it. 
The overall impression given in this section is that use of these resources will automatically mean global 
awareness and understanding. Students and teachers still need to know how to communicate effectively 
with those who are culturally different and who may be located halfway around the world. 
Of greatest concern are two related areas. One is the general tone of the book. Technology is almost 
always seen as a solution. In Chapter 5, teachers are encouraged to participate in lifelong learning in a 
number of ways, including formal learning with distance education and teacher-to-teacher learning. 
Deborah Healey                           Review of Constructivist Approach to NETS for Teachers 
 
Language Learning & Technology                                                                                                                                                         57 
Second Life is used as an example of a virtual world for learning. Consistent with the rest of the book, 
this section provides advantages of learning in these different modes without mentioning potential 
drawbacks. Distance learning is a very good approach for autonomous learners, for example, but does not 
work well for those who need a more high-touch, personal environment. Virtual worlds can be wonderful 
for those who know where to go and what to do. Newcomers without a guide to the virtual world may 
find physical text-based information more accessible. 
In keeping with the view that technology is a solution, the problems that technology can cause are rarely 
mentioned. This plays into the myth that all technology change is progress, and all progress is positive. 
We know that there are large risks created by technology, including loss of privacy, misrepresentation and 
theft of personal information and data, dissemination of harmful or hateful information to a broad 
audience, and the ability to make life substantially worse for a very large number of people quickly due to 
the links among computer-based systems. For teachers, technology does not always work seamlessly, and 
creating a Plan B for technology failure takes additional time.  
The other area of concern is the frequent focus on technology and technology resources rather than on a 
teacher’s use of the technology. For example, the author states, “Creating rubrics is easy if technology is 
used” (p. 121). Technology does not create good rubrics; a knowledgeable teacher creates good rubrics 
that fit specific classroom objectives, and then uses technology to help with formatting the rubrics 
appropriately.  
It is very easy for all of us as technology-using educators to slip into a technology-focused perspective. At 
this point in time, however, we should no longer be trying to encourage teachers to use technology. Our 
focus instead should be on giving teachers helpful approaches to wise use of technology. Much of ACA 
does just that. Those who work through the reflections and the explorations will have an opportunity to 
build expertise in making decisions about when, where, and how to use technology, both appropriately 
and constructively. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Dr. Deborah Healey has taught English and trained teachers for over 35 years. She currently offers online 
courses for teachers internationally through the University of Oregon’s American English Institute and 
teaches in the University of Oregon’s Master’s program in Linguistics. She has presented extensively 
throughout the Middle East, North Africa, Asia, and Latin America on technology in education. She is a 
co-author of TESOL Technology Standards: Description, Implementation, Integration and lead linguist 
for the ELT game, Trace Effects. Her Ph.D. is in computers in education. 
E-mail: dhealey@uoregon.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Anderson, L. W., & Krathwohl, D. R. (Eds.). (2001). A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing: A 
revision of Bloom’s taxonomy of educational objectives. New York, NY: Addison Wesley Longman. 
Bax. S. (2003). CALL – past, present, and future. System, 31, 13–28. 
Dewey, J. (1902). The child and the curriculum. [out of print; free ebook]. Retrieved from 
http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/29259.  
Gardner, H. (1999). Intelligence reframed: Multiple intelligences for the 21st century. New York, NY: 
Basic Books. 
Deborah Healey                           Review of Constructivist Approach to NETS for Teachers 
 
Language Learning & Technology                                                                                                                                                           58 
Healey, D., Hanson-Smith, E., Hubbard, P., Ioannou-Georgiou, S., Kessler, G., & Ware, P. (2011). 
TESOL technology standards: Description, implementation, integration. Alexandria, VA: TESOL. 
ISTE. (1998). National educational technology standards for students. Eugene, OR: ISTE. 
ISTE. (2000). National educational technology standards for teachers. Eugene, OR: ISTE. 
Piaget, J. (1976). To understand is to invent: The future of education. G-A Roberts (Trans.) Où va 
l'éducation?, 1948. New York, NY: Penguin Books. Retrieved from 
http://www.montclair.edu/crc/piaget.html  
UNESCO. (2008). ICT competency standards for teachers: Competency standards module. Paris, France: 
UNESCO. 
Vygotsky, L. (1986). Thought and language. A. Kozulin (Trans. & Ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
(original work published 1934) 
