Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2015/review3.pdf 
June 2015, Volume 19, Number 2 
pp. 44–49 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 44 
REVIEW OF MOBILE LEARNING: LANGUAGES, LITERACIES, AND 
CULTURES 
 
Mobile Learning: Languages, Literacies, and Cultures 
Mark Pegrum 
2014 
ISBN: 9781137309792 
US $95.00 
276 pp. 
Palgrave Macmillan 
London, UK 
 
 
Review by Jack Burston, Cyprus University of Technology  
While the targeted audience of Mark Pegrum’s Mobile Learning: Languages, Literacies and Cultures is 
not made explicit, its content is best suited to those endeavoring to understand MALL (Mobile-Assisted 
Language Learning) within the broader context of mobile learning. In this regard it is much more 
contemporary than historical, with nearly two thirds of its references dating from the past six years 
(2008–2013). The work is commendable for the background it provides on mobile learning across a wide 
instructional spectrum. Of particular note is the attention paid to initiatives in developing countries 
endeavoring to exploit mobile technologies to remedy high native-language illiteracy rates and overcome 
the educational disadvantages of women, especially in rural communities. This information is all the more 
valuable in that it derives mostly from international project reports, which is otherwise largely absent and 
unobtainable from published academic research sources. What the work gains in breadth in regard to 
mobile learning in general, however, it loses in depth in respect to MALL in particular. Of the book’s 
seven chapters, the first three are entirely devoted to general issues concerning mobile learning. In fact, 
only the fourth and fifth chapters focus explicitly upon language teaching. The sixth chapter concerns 
literacy in its broadest possible interpretation, of which reading and writing are but two of eight abilities 
discussed. Lastly, while taking most of its examples from language-based projects, the focus of the final 
chapter of the book is very much on the general issue of teacher and student training needed in the digital 
age.  
As a reference text, the book has much to recommend it. Given the acronyms that abound in the mobile 
learning field, readers are sure to find convenient the list of abbreviations that precede the text. So, too, 
the book is very well indexed. Also, though a monograph, every chapter contains short contributions from 
other authors that serve to provide a broader perspective on the topics covered. This unusual feature takes 
Jack Burston                           Review of Mobile Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  45 
two forms: vignettes and case studies. The vignettes are personal reflections by well-established scholars 
in the field of mobile learning. The case studies describe at greater length specific project 
implementations. The end of the book contains a useful section of Recommended Reading of recent book-
length publications for getting up to date as well as mobile learning websites for keeping informed. The 
references at the end of the book are quite extensive and include nearly 640 entries. Once again, however, 
the broadness of mobile learning coverage comes at the expense of a more limited focus on MALL. Of 
the recommended readings and websites, only two relate directly to MALL. Likewise, only about 20% of 
the bibliography relates to language learning or teaching.  
Chapter 1, The Mobile Landscape, provides a broad overview of mobile learning between 2002 and 2013. 
Most notable in this chapter is the pervasive contrastive presentation of information. It begins with a 
review of the evolution and spread of mobile devices in developed and developing countries. The 
following subsection describes the features that distinguish m-learning from e-learning. The technological 
divide between developed and developing countries is addressed again in a subsection that discusses the 
issue of affordability versus affordances. Another subsection opposes the global aspects of mobile device 
usage, its anytime/anywhere accessibility, with context-sensitive and individualized applications. Another 
opposition is highlighted in a subsection dealing with the episodic, bite-sized, informal learning typically 
targeted with mobile devices compared to extended applications entailing the synthesis of pedagogical 
activities into a coherent, formal, learning experience. So, too, the personal usage of mobile devices is 
opposed to their use within social networks, especially Personal Learning Networks (PLN) and Personal 
Learning Environments (PLE). The last section of this chapter provides an informative discussion of 
mobile learning relative to three parameters of mobility: the devices, the learners, and the learning.  
Chapter 2, Agendas for Mobile Learning, is organized around three very far-ranging themes relating to 
the promotion of digital technologies in education: transforming teaching practices, developing digital 
skills, and fostering social justice. Although greatly a proponent of the exploitation of digital 
technologies, Pegrum takes a very measured and critical stance in this regard. Quickly passing in review a 
number of post-behaviorist learning theories which in turn are related to several methodological 
approaches, Pegrum adopts the Substitution, Augmentation, Modification, Redefinition (SAMR) model 
proposed by Puentedura (2011) to measure the extent to which these learning theories and pedagogical 
applications may be judged to transform educational practices. While favoring modern approaches, 
Pegrum does not exclude the usefulness of more traditional behaviorist, transmission model practices. 
Ever mindful of the local cultural and educational practices in developing countries, he also urges caution 
and sensitivity before trying to apply such constructivist, learner-centered approaches in non-western 
contexts. M-learning is seen as a promising means of promoting numeracy, local, and national language 
literacy, and English as a language of economic development and social advancement as well as digital 
literacy skills. Despite the positive attitudes expressed towards the transformative benefits of m-learning, 
Pegrum cautions against technological determinism and the risks of attempting to impose foreign cultural 
values and pedagogical approaches that are at variance with local cultural ecologies.  
In chapter 3, The Technological Ecosystem, Pegrum returns to technical considerations raised briefly in 
the first chapter, focusing particularly upon the role of mobile devices within the framework of current 
digital technologies. It is organized into two main sections dealing with hardware and software plus a 
concluding section devoted to the challenges that mobile technologies present. Mobile software issues are 
discussed in subsections devoted to network connectivity, operating platforms, and pedagogical 
applications. The vast majority of educational apps are judged to be very traditional, predicated on 
transmission model learning and behaviorist drill and practice approaches. Notwithstanding, Pegrum 
concedes that such pedagogical approaches may be well regarded, indeed expected, in non-western 
cultural and educational settings around the world, especially in contexts of limited educational resources. 
In concluding this chapter, as a counterbalance to techno-enthusiasm, Pegrum runs through a 
comprehensive list of the limitations and caveats that must be kept in mind when adopting mobile 
Jack Burston                           Review of Mobile Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  46 
technologies. 
The fourth chapter, How to Teach Language with Mobile Devices, is organized into three main sub-
sections. The first focuses on second language acquisition theories and related pedagogical approaches. 
The second describes the kinds of uses to which MALL has been applied. The third deals with the 
assessment of MALL. Pegrum begins by summarizing, all too briefly, the learning theories and 
pedagogical methodologies that underlie CALL and MALL applications. Behaviorist versus 
communicative approaches to language teaching are dealt with in one paragraph each while a third 
paragraph even more sketchily presents eight sociocultural-related pedagogical approaches. Although he 
foresees Intelligent CALL (ICALL) and Intelligent MALL (IMALL) taking communicative language 
teaching in new sociocultural, context-aware, socially sensitive directions, he cautions that such 
interactive, learner-centered, approaches may not necessarily find favor everywhere, citing examples 
where students preferred passive learner roles and where simple content delivery was more highly valued.  
MALL applications are described relative to four, increasingly interactive, pedagogical approaches which 
progress from behaviorist through communicative and sociocultural paradigms: content delivery, tutorial 
exercises, artifact creation, and interpersonal communication. Like content delivery, behaviorist mobile-
based tutorial exercises are said to lend themselves well to autonomous learning outside of the classroom. 
Pegrum considers that the greatest promise of tutorial MALL lies in IMALL applications that permit 
exercises to be tailored to individual oral and written competency levels and provide recommendations for 
practice. As ever, however, he is quick to return to current realities in developing countries and the 
constraints imposed by technological infrastructure and cultural expectations that favor old-fashioned 
behavioristic drill exercises.  
In the final subsection of this chapter, Pegrum discusses at some length the challenges that assessment 
poses for MALL. He points out that a great deal of formative feedback and guidance is provided by 
mobile technologies themselves, such as digital records generated by applications, transcripts of online 
discussions, and recordings of voice chats. Moreover, he envisages in the foreseeable future the 
application of automated learning analytics to the processing of such data, from which IMALL programs 
can be used to generate individual profiles based on user-generated materials in real-world learning 
contexts. This very optimistic, not to say rosy, prognosis of formative assessment in MALL is, however, 
counterbalanced by his down-to-earth appraisal of the fundamental problem that the requirements of 
summative assessment pose to realizing the pedagogical potential of MALL. In his view, the integration 
of MALL into the curriculum remains fundamentally at odds with deep-seated testing regimes, which 
pose a major obstacle to the innovative pedagogies made possible by mobile technologies. 
Of all the chapters in this book, chapter 5 (What Language to Teach with Mobile Devices) goes into the 
greatest detail regarding the content of MALL applications, with a focus on successful MALL projects. It 
considers the linguistic areas that MALL has targeted: vocabulary and grammar, reading and writing, 
listening and speaking, and integrated skills. It thus covers MALL project implementations in some 
breadth, with reasonable depth, but not without some notable shortcomings. Critical details are omitted, 
for example, the preponderance of Japanese and Taiwanese projects, the domination of ESL studies, and 
the primary focus on adult tertiary level learners. In highlighting MALL successes, the chapter takes at 
face value published claims of language improvement without regard to research design flaws (i.e., small 
group sizes, short treatment durations, uncontrolled variables, lack of statistical analyses). Likewise, no 
mention is made of the paucity of reliable accounts of learning gains, nor is any sense given of the 
marginal status of MALL in the foreign language curriculum. 
In summarizing MALL applications for the teaching of vocabulary and grammar, this subsection follows 
an essentially chronological progression from basic through more sophisticated technology (i.e., mobile 
phone, PDA, smartphone, tablet) and passive behavioristic drilling to active constructivist and 
collaborative approaches.  MALL programs targeting grammar are treated in a single paragraph, it being 
Jack Burston                           Review of Mobile Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  47 
explained that they are essentially like those that use SMS for vocabulary acquisition. While mindful that 
the reading of digital texts requires the acquisition of different sets of skills, Pegrum stresses the increase 
in comprehensible input that can be gained from mobile-based applications which provide vocabulary and 
grammar assistance. More active mobile-based reading applications allow students not only to incorporate 
their own annotations and translations, but also to collaboratively share them with other learners. Though 
limited by screen size and keyboarding constraints, mobile devices are said to lend themselves well to 
short note taking and to offer learners essential scaffolding through the incorporation of spelling and 
grammar checkers. 
Pegrum draws attention to the abundance of online listening materials intended for native speaker access 
in real time (e.g., radio broadcasts, news reports) or via download (e.g., audio books, podcasts). Examples 
are given of MALL listening projects that provide such features as vocabulary and content support, access 
to translations, and playback speed control. Video provides further scaffolding to support the 
comprehension of pragmatic, paralinguistic, and sociocultural aspects of language within listening 
activities. Among the mobile-based speaking activities which Pegrum notes, are simple pronunciation 
practice and the recording of task-based activities such as reports, interviews, role-plays, audio blogs, and 
situated audio commentary with location-aware devices. The most active and challenging form of speech 
production involves oral interaction, which can be undertaken asynchronously via audio discussion 
boards and blogs or in real-time via automated conversations or with other speakers via VoIP services that 
can include video and text as well.  
Chapter 6, Teaching Literacies with Mobile Devices, discusses the potential of mobile devices to address 
issues of literacy, which is taken to include not just reading and writing in one’s native language but also 
a whole range of digital literacies.  Returning to the needs and resources in developing countries, Pegrum 
stresses the important contribution that even basic mobile telephones can make in tackling widespread 
illiteracy. In developed countries, the focus is placed upon the need to complement reading and writing 
skills with multiple digital literacies that are integral to social life and employment prospects. As he 
explains, owing to their multimedia nature, digital documents are not just printed words but collages of 
text, audio, graphics and video which students need to learn to interpret, interact with, create and, 
ultimately, critically evaluate. However, beyond effective text processors, he insists that users of digital 
technologies need to be informed consumers, possessing at least a basic understanding of how computer 
hardware and software work. So, too, with the shift from acquired knowledge to information retrieval 
brought about by digital technologies, he stresses that learners must be able to identify sources of 
information, compare what they discover for consistency and coherence, and track the development of 
information over time, a task made all the more demanding given the constant flux of digital resources. 
While stressing the importance of digital technologies in fostering the development of intercultural 
literacy through constructive interaction with interlocutors across different cultural contexts, Pegrum 
cautions that this demands of students a level of technological preparedness and social readiness that even 
now cannot be taken for granted.  
Chapter 7 (Preparing for a Mobile Educational Future) covers much of the same ground as the preceding 
one, but from the perspective of the professional development required of teachers in the 21st century. The 
discussion, largely based on case studies and vignettes, is organized into four subsections dealing with 
digital training, digital literacy, digital networking, and educational research. 
The discussion of teacher training requirements focuses on two complementary contexts, firstly that 
within the educational environment and secondly that within the wider community. For classroom 
teachers, Pegrum bases his recommendations for training in new technologies upon the twin scaffolds of 
the Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge (TPCK) framework of knowledge integration (Mishra 
& Koehler 2006) and the SAMR model (Puentedura 2011) of technological transformation. The most 
transformative exploitation of digital technologies necessarily entails a pedagogical shift from teacher-
centered transmission and behaviorist approaches to learner-centered communicative and collaborative 
Jack Burston                           Review of Mobile Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  48 
methodologies. This frequently requires a fundamental mindset change, which Pegrum is at pains to point 
out may be slow-in-coming in developing countries. He stresses that many factors outside of the 
classroom require the development of academic, social, and political leadership skills essential for the 
effective implementation of new technologies.  
As discussed in the previous chapter, literacy is broadly taken to encompass a range of digital skills, 
which teacher training can provide through practical contact with mobile technologies. Unfortunately, in 
dealing with this issue, Pegrum focuses only on the developing world, neglecting to mention any of the 
dozens of documented projects, primarily in the US and Europe, that could illustrate the exploitation in 
teacher training of mobile technologies and digital literacy at higher levels. Network literacy is discussed 
in the context of PLN viewed as an adjunct to pre-service and in-service professional mobile education 
development. Mobile technology adds to this an anywhere, anytime, access dimension that makes mobile 
social networking sites an ideal platform for a PLN. Again, despite the many examples of existing 
mobile-accessible PLN that could have been referenced in developed countries, Pegrum restricts his 
attention to a single Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) mobile phone-based project that was still on the 
drawing board at the time of writing.  
The last subsection of this chapter is in effect an epilogue of the entire book, which focuses on multiple 
research parameters associated with the promotion of mobile education. It begins with an ambitious call 
for classroom-based action research as a way for practicing teachers to contribute to the knowledge base 
of effective mobile technology applications and student’s use of technologies for learning, and in so doing 
provide research-based evidence to inform educational leaders. However, Pegrum is quick to add that, in 
order to realize the full global potential of mobile education, micro-scale studies need to be 
complemented by large-scale, funded, development projects integrated into a network of governmental, 
non-governmental, educational, and commercial organizations. Such projects need to generate research 
leveraged to inform and persuade political, corporate, social, and educational leaders and influence future 
policy and project implementation for sustainable, long-term development.  
CONCLUSION 
The great strength of Mobile Learning: Languages, Literacies and Cultures is the very broad coverage it 
gives to the overall mobile learning context in which MALL is embedded. As frequently noted, within 
this framework, particular attention is paid to the real-life situations in developing countries in which 
constraints relating to technological infrastructure as well as social and cultural issues have to be carefully 
considered. So, too, the discussion of mobile-based language learning profits greatly from general 
reflections on the impact of mobile technologies upon teaching and testing, literacies, and the professional 
development of teachers.  While it does suffer from a few shortcomings, notably its cursory presentation 
of learning theories and pedagogical methodologies and its failure to vet claimed learning improvements 
in cited studies, overall Pegrum handles issues of theory and pedagogy well and strikes a very good 
balance between techno-enthusiasm and the realities, positive and negative, of digital technology 
implementations. In sum, the book is well worth considering for anyone with an interest in MALL.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Jack Burston holds the position of Honorary Research Fellow in the Language Centre of the Cyprus 
University of Technology.  He is a language-teaching specialist with a formal background in theoretical 
and applied linguistics, second language acquisition and testing.  His current research focuses primarily 
on MALL.  
E-mail: jack.burston@cut.ac.cy 
Jack Burston                           Review of Mobile Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology  49 
 
REFERENCES 
Mishra, P., & Koehler, M. ( 2006). Technological pedagogical content knowledge: A framework for 
teacher knowledge.  Teachers College Record, 108(6), 1017–1054. 
Puentedura, R. (2011). A brief introduction to TPCK and SAMR. Freeport workshop slides, 8 December. 
Ruben R. Puentedura’s Weblog. 
http://hippasus.com/rrpweblog/archives/2011/12/08/BriefIntroTPCKSAMR.pdf 
