Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2015/review2.pdf 
October 2015, Volume 19, Number 3 
pp. 61–64 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 61 
REVIEW OF LANGUAGE MOOCS: PROVIDING LEARNING, 
TRANSCENDING BOUNDARIES 
Language MOOCs: Providing Learning, Transcending 
Boundaries 
Elena Martín Monje and Elena Bárcena Madera 
2014 
ISBN: 978-3-11-042250-4  
e-ISBN: 978-3-11-042006-7 
Open access 
300 pp. 
De Gruyter 
Warsaw/Berlin 
 
 
Review by Gabriel Guillén, Middlebury Institute of International Studies at Monterey 
The reading of Language MOOCs: Providing Learning, Transcending Boundaries, edited by Elena 
Martín Monje and Elena Bárcena, leaves one inspired to design a revolutionary, informed, and 
aesthetically attractive Language Massive Open Online Course (LMOOC), more than to research about 
this subject. And this is precisely the most desirable outcome, as Colpaert provocatively concluded in the 
last chapter: “I have the impression that this emergence of MOOCs has also more to do with people 
speaking about them, and creating expectations, than people actually designing and developing them” (p. 
171). 
The book is fully accessible online and contains an assortment of guidelines for designing successful 
LMOOCs; empirical evidence; and discussions about outcomes, participant profiles, motivation, 
instructors’ roles, accessibility/usability, and ethical/aesthetical considerations. An LMOOC philosophy 
emerges from the amalgam of articles, in spite of the heterogeneity of themes and perspectives. Six 
researchers are from Spain (including the two editors of the volume), three are from the United Kingdom, 
two are from the US, and the remaining three researchers are from Belgium, France, and Portugal. 
The main challenge for LMOOCs is clearly stated in the introduction (Chapter 1) by Bárcena and Martín-
Monje. Language learning is viewed as skill-based, more than as knowledge-based, and LMOOCs require 
proactive, engaged, flexible, and autonomous learners. Ideally, an LMOOC should function as a 
connectivist MOOC (cMOOC), the original MOOC, which was built on the interaction of participants 
and the creation of knowledge as part of a decentralized learning network. 
Language MOOCs provides information about general and specific issues such as the need for preparing 
participants for the MOOC learning experience during the first week of classes, the creation of subsequent 
modules that are independent from each other and scalable, the critical role of volunteers, the importance 
of forums and videos for explicit knowledge and input, and the connection between MOOCs and the 
Open Educational Resources (OERs) movement. Finally, they discuss the paradox of LMOOCs, in that 
they are designed to offer open access to language learning, but most learners who take them are well-
educated and employed. In fact, most of the examples in the book correspond to the xMOOC model, 
which entails teacher-centered massive courses based on the traditional university curriculum. Several 
Gabriel Guillén                           Review of Language MOOCs: Providing learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
authors propose a hybrid format (xMOOC and cMOOC), using a familiar learning structure (platform), 
together with social media and peer feedback tools. 
In Chapter 2, Sokolik describes the instructor presence as essential in order to create community. She 
views MOOCs as an opportunity to transform the language pedagogy by maximizing engagement and 
interaction, facilitating self-organized learning, providing videos for engagement, and matching the goals 
with assessment and course content. 
Moreira Teixeira and Mota propose a design for collaborative LMOOCs based on the IMOOC model 
(Open University of Portugal) in Chapter 3. A number of simple principles inspire this model: open 
courses, free resources, learner-centeredness, and a robust platform. They describe how learning happens 
mostly through networks, through the use of Personal Learning Environments (PLEs) for artifact 
exchange and for conversations with other participants (creating communities of practice in the case of 
LMOOCs). 
Beaven, Codreanu and Creuzé report on an innovative experiment on motivation in an LMOOC (Chapter 
4) and show that participants tend to be intrinsically motivated, self-determined, and well-educated in this 
environment. Learners in their study reported that the course became more useful as they progressed 
further through it. Finally, the authors of this chapter advocate for an instructional design model that can 
accelerate and improve the iteration of LMOOCs. 
Castrillo de Larreta-Azelain describes the competences of the LMOOC instructor in Chapter 5. Before the 
course, teachers have different roles such as structure designers, content experts, and evaluators. They 
have to create modules for a total of 6-12 weeks, estimate the hours of study for each module (4-8 hours 
of weekly work), sequence and create content (including videos), create self- and peer-assessment tools, 
produce precise rubrics—although the example given in Table 5.2. (p. 78) does not seem to be very 
specific—, and provide feedback for both correct and incorrect answers. Instructors also design the use of 
communication tools, namely mass mailing, blogs, wikis, online forums, webconferences, and chats—
despite the fact that the author does not recommend using synchronous tools. 
During the LMOOC, teachers become curators, facilitators, leaders and administrators, solving issues, 
suggesting materials, moderating forums, motivating students, and overseeing the whole learning 
experience. Finally, before, during, and after the MOOC, instructors are researchers, collecting and 
analyzing learners’ data. As inferable, different instructors and teacher assistants could and should 
perform different tasks within this framework. 
Chapter 6 focuses on a specific aspect of design: the architectonics of a LMOOC. The author, Read, 
returns to the idea of creating a hybrid model of cMOOC (social media) and xMOOC features (the 
platform), using a spiral metaphor: learners will go from the MOOC to the social media, seeking authentic 
input and interacting with target language speakers who are not necessarily part of the course, and then 
they come back to the platform to talk about their findings. Within this framework, the structure of an 
xMOOC helps offset some of the limitations of social media for second language learning. However, the 
overwhelming abundance of resources available online does not guarantee autonomy and proficiency 
development. 
In Chapter 7, Rodrigo focuses on accessibility and the inclusion of external spaces in the LMOOC 
syllabus. Locutions, subtitles, audio-descriptions, common font types and sizes, downloadable files, clear 
naming of files and modules, and specific information about type of task and time on task are only a few 
examples of the accessibility aspects that designers need to add or take into account. In terms of 
videolectures, areas to consider for accessibility include numbering, titles, length, marking watched 
videos, and creating shortcuts. All documents need to be searchable (converting scanned images to text), 
to contain labels, to remain easy to follow, to offer descriptions for images, links and forms, and to 
provide information about the language of the document. In sum, Rodrigo suggests that LMOOC creators 
Gabriel Guillén                           Review of Language MOOCs: Providing learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
need to create learning experiences that are not only accessible but also usable and receptive to 
personalization. 
Chapter 8 deals with the ethics and aesthetics of LMOOCs. In this section, Inma Álvarez explains how 
LMOOCs could change the horizon for the language learning agenda in terms of openness, intercultural 
competence (inclusion, equality, and diversity), and aesthetic awareness. The beauty of LMOOCs does 
not derive only from the access to language learning as an instrument of socioeconomic promotion, but 
also from the non-instrumental and personal experience of learning a language, which can be seen as an 
end in itself. Álvarez argues in favor of language programs (i.e. LMOOCs) that focus on cultural 
transformations (knowing others and knowing ourselves) and in support of “an education that makes them 
[learners] aware of how language choices reveal moral and aesthetic perspectives, or how successful 
social interaction with others depends on their behavior” (pp. 130–131). 
Chapter 9 by Rubio contains a relevant and optimistic study that contrasts the comprehensibility gains of 
learners who were enrolled in a Spanish pronunciation LMOOC (six weeks) with students who were 
participating in a face-to-face course (15 weeks). Both groups showed significant improvement, and the 
LMOOC had higher effect sizes after the treatment. Learners were able to progress in terms of 
pronunciation with no face-to-face feedback interaction and a large enrollment. This is the only 
experiment with a control group and a thorough reflection on feedback from an empirical perspective in 
this book. Effective feedback in the context of this LMOOC implied telling students how they are 
performing, how they should perform, and what they need to do in order to improve. As seen with the 
earlier study on motivation in this collection, the most successful students were those who completed all 
of the assignments. They also viewed their feedback more frequently, but they did not differ in regards to 
accessing theoretical explanations and pronunciation model from native speakers. 
In the last chapter, Colpaert challenges the definition of LMOOCs and the apparent disconnect with the 
literature in this field. This author proposes the use of what he calls education engineering as an 
instructional model for LMOOCs and suggests a path for LMOOCs. The hypothesis is divided into four 
requirements for LMOOCs: modularity, specialization, adaptation, and co-construction. Modularity 
implies creating Open Educational Resources (OERs) units that are independent from each other and that 
could be easily exported and imported between courses and contexts. Specialization seeks the creation of 
courses that meet concrete goals, rather than simply serve large groups of students and have generic titles. 
The third requirement, adaptation, involves the use of learner analytics (beyond personal intuitions), 
accessibility assessment, and personalization in terms of tasks, feedback, content, and learning styles. 
Finally, co-construction considers LMOOCs as sequels to the OER movement, allowing instructors and 
learners to share content and leading to “50% less work and 200% more results for language teachers” (p. 
169). 
Colapert’s four premises for LMOOCs fit seamlessly with the most salient mantra of this compilation of 
articles: merging the affordances of cMOOCs and xMOOCs into an original space for healthy and 
boundless learning. Professionals should welcome this volume and start thinking about their next 
contribution to this arena if they are interested in the critical role of language learning for human 
development. 
One could challenge the format, an academic book, which does not invite the co-creation of knowledge 
around the topic beyond the traditional academic correspondence: responses, citations, and reviews. A 
book setup also paves the way for the obsolescence of its content, particularly in the case of articles with 
technical information (i.e. Chapter 7, on accessibility). Nonetheless, this pioneering compilation of 
articles delivers on all counts. It would not be a surprise if this volume becomes a milestone for the 
emerging field of LMOOCs, given that it is “the first book on LMOOCs” (p. 7), published before the 
CALICO Vol. 13 Researching Language Learner Interactions Online: From Social Media to MOOCs 
(2015). 
Gabriel Guillén                           Review of Language MOOCs: Providing learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Gabriel Guillen is an Assistant Professor at the Middlebury Institute of International Studies (MIIS) at 
Monterey. He holds an M.A. in Applied Linguistics for the Teaching of Spanish (Nebrija University, 
Spain), and a Ph.D. in Spanish Linguistics with a Designated Emphasis on Second Language Acquisition 
(University of California, Davis).  
E-mail: gaguillen@miis.edu 
