Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/chao.pdf 
February 2015, Volume 19, Number 1 
pp. 102-118 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 102 
RETHINKING TRANSFER: LEARNING FROM CALL TEACHER 
EDUCATION AS CONSEQUENTIAL TRANSITION 
Chin-chi Chao, National Chengchi University 
Behind CALL teacher education (CTE) there is an unproblematized consensus of transfer, 
which suggests a positivist and tool-centered view of learning gains that differs from the 
sociocultural focus of recent teacher education research. Drawing on Beach’s (2003) 
conceptualization of transfer as consequential transition, this qualitative study seeks a 
cross-contextual understanding of language teacher learning with digital technology as the 
teachers in this study moved from a CTE course back to their own teaching contexts. Near 
the end of a CTE course, 19 in-service language teachers were asked to build connections 
between their experiences in the course and their teaching by creating a presentation. Four 
types of connections were identified, including thoughtful action planning, past experience 
refinement, and limited and reluctant use. In-depth interviews eight months later with four 
of the teachers found that they could seldom use the tools in the ways they had planned. 
However, they each experienced consequential transition as they struggled to reflect on 
their CTE course experience in everyday teaching. These results challenge the view that 
transfer in CTE must be about using technology. It is suggested that a focus on critical 
reflection of technology use may encourage teachers to continue reflective engagement in 
the ever-changing and complicated digital learning and teaching context. 
Keywords: Teacher Education, Sociocultural Theory, Language Learning Methodology 
APA Citation: Chao, C.-c. (2015). Rethinking transfer: Learning from CALL teacher 
education as consequential transition. Language Learning & Technology, 19(1), 102–118. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/chao.pdf 
Received: October 17, 2013; Accepted: August 5, 2014; Published: February 1, 2015 
Copyright: © Chin-chi Chao 
INTRODUCTION 
One feature of computer assisted language learning (CALL) teacher education (CTE) studies is that there 
is a high expectation for teachers to actually use the technological knowledge, skills, and tools taught in 
the CTE courses to achieve transfer (Egbert, Paulus, & Nakamichi, 2002; Kessler, 2007) and classroom 
integration (Hegelheimer et al., 2004; Hong, 2010, Oxford & Jung, 2007). Hong (2010), for example, 
directly and clearly stated that, “the ultimate goal of CALL teacher education is to enable L2 teachers to 
integrate CALL technology into their classroom with confidence and knowledge” (p. 53). Technology use 
as the ultimate goal of CTE is therefore assumed and often accepted as unproblematic. 
This emphasis on technology use as the ultimate goal of CTE, however, requires careful examination so 
that tools do not become the only focus: tools cannot be the only focus. With the rapid development of 
technology, it makes little sense to simply transfer and use what was learned some time earlier in a CTE 
class, because newer development often leads to the obsolete of past learning.  For example, some earlier 
CTE courses taught teachers how to make a webpage from scratch (i.e., using html codes). Now, with 
word processing software, blogs, FaceBook, and course management applications—to name just a few—
anyone can easily publish information on the web using menu-driven functions without knowing any of 
the complicated codes and processes that go on behind the scenes. Thus, the newer and more convenient 
technology has made it so that web-page creation skills are not as useful as they used to be. Furthermore, 
human teachers, working closely with learners, play the fundamental role, not the technology itself. As 
Seymour Papert (1990), a pioneer in educational technology who coined the word technocentrism based 
Chin-chi Chao Rethinking Transfer 
 
Language Learning & Technology 103 
on Piaget's ‘egocentrism,’ put it, “The question is not ‘What will the computer do to us?’ The question is 
‘What will we make of the computer?’ The point is not to predict the computer future. The point is to 
make it” (n. p.). 
Thus, instead of expecting transfer to be simply using specific types of technology in specific ways, 
teacher educators may need to help teachers think more deeply about their attitudes and positions toward 
technology, particularly at a time when digital devices have already occupied an indispensable part of 
every day classroom life and when newer ones are expected to emerge at a high speed. If not tools, what 
else might be useful to help teachers meet the challenges of engaging language learners with the 
technology? Furthermore, if teachers need to think critically and creatively about how to work with or 
around barriers that exist now and are yet to come (Hubbard & Levy, 2006), then the ways in which 
teachers build connections as they move between a CTE class and their own teaching contexts  be the 
focus of investigation.  
Current thinking in second language teacher education emphasizes teachers’ ways of knowing as situated, 
interpretative, and reflective. Teachers are considered “legitimate knower[s], as producer[s] of legitimate 
knowledge, and as capable of constructing and sustaining their own professional development over time” 
(Johnson & Golombeck, 2002, p. 3). If this is the case, teachers will be building their own connections 
during and after a CTE class. In fact, with the prevalence of network computers and digital devices, many 
teachers entering CTE classes already have rich experience with technology in their teaching or personal 
contexts, or have existing classroom practices that they could build upon. However, there has been little 
understanding of how teachers produce personal knowledge as they build on such experiences with their 
learning from CTE classes. 
This study, therefore, aims to develop a cross-contextual understanding of CALL teacher learning: how 
language teachers build connections with their existing teaching practice during a CTE class and how 
they engage in a critical review of CALL knowledge afterwards. Most importantly, to what extent do the 
teachers’ experiences support, problematize, or suggest an alternative to the transfer, tool-centered, and 
product-oriented assumptions of CALL teacher learning? The research questions are stated as:  
1. In what ways do language teachers build connections and develop pedagogical solutions during a 
CTE course?  
2. Eight months after the CTE course, to what extent has what the teachers learned or experienced 
influenced their language teaching practice? 
LITERATURE REVIEW  
Much interest in researching CTE has been observed in recent years, including two dedicated volumes on 
this topic: Hubbard and Levy (2006) and Kassen, Lavine, Murphy-Judy, and Peters (2007), as well as 
special journal issues published by Innovation in Language Learning Technology (White & Reinders, 
2009), ReCALL (Guichon & Hauck, 2011) and Computer Assisted Language Learning (Thang & Gobel, 
2012). Other papers are also published in major journals that routinely publish papers in CALL or 
second/foreign language education. According to Hegelheimer et al. (2004), CTE studies tend to address 
two major issues: teachers’ views on technology (including their attitudes, assumptions, and beliefs) and 
transfer from teacher education (including integration and impact). Guichon and Hauck (2011) identified 
four key topics: (a) how teachers use technologies, (b) what attitudes they hold towards technologies, (c) 
what counts as competences for teachers to teach a language with technologies, and (d) how they reflect 
on the teacher education or professional development experiences. It is clear that interest in the effect of 
CTE is strong and that there has been a high expectation for teachers to use the knowledge and skills 
learned in a CTE class, preferably, in Ertmer’s (2005) term, “high-level use” (p.25), or using technology 
in a student-centered or constructivist way. 
Chin-chi Chao Rethinking Transfer 
 
Language Learning & Technology 104 
There have been many different conceptions of transfer over more than a hundred years of research 
(Tuomi-Gröhn & Engeström, 2003), including concepts of transfer that are based on tasks, cognitive 
processing, situations, social participation, and many others. The underlying theoretical framework for 
most of the transfer studies in CTE can be considered as classic transfer, which aims for direct transfer of 
knowledge and skills between similar tasks or contexts. For example, Egbert et al. (2002), one of the most 
widely cited studies on the transfer of CTE, asked teachers who had taken a CALL class during the 
previous ten years to fill out a survey. There were also interviews, trying to understand how teachers used 
the knowledge and skills obtained in the class experience over the years. They identified four separate but 
related factors for transfer to happen: (a) how teachers learn technology, (b) the interaction between 
coursework and the classroom, (c) factors affecting technology use, and (d) professional development in 
technology use (pp. 108-109). Ertmer (1999), on the other hand, argued that well-designed professional 
development experiences can lead to technology integration. Particularly, challenges related to teachers’ 
beliefs, assumptions, and knowledge levels can be resolved by school-based professional development 
experiences. Hong (2010) also considered insufficient teacher education to be one factor that can hinder 
technology use. As can be gleaned from these studies, it is clear that transferring what is learned in a CTE 
class to classroom practice is expected, although many contextual challenges are involved. Specifically, 
sufficient and appropriate resources, materials, on-site support, curriculum flexibility, time, technical 
knowledge, skills, and attitudes are all crucial for transfer to happen (Egbert et al., 2002). 
But, the core of the matter is actually cross-contextual challenges, such as how teachers’ agency interacts 
with the particular context that they work in as they move from the university CTE class to their own 
classrooms. While in the university CTE classroom, they may develop views that are more consistent 
with the teacher educator’s. But, in the school classroom, teachers would surely have their own views 
toward CALL that are based more on the particular teaching context they are situated in. Their agency as 
CTE learners can be very different from that as CALL teachers in the classroom. This does not mean they 
fail to transfer what is learned in the CTE course; on the contrary, it could be a deeper level of learning. 
This thought is inspired by the sociocultural view of transfer. Acknowledging the importance of 
sociocultural contexts for transfer, Beach (2003) proposed a new conception called consequential 
transitions—critical changes that come about through deep and struggling reflection. Examples of 
consequential transitions all involve some kind of boundary crossing, such as moving from school to 
work after graduation, taking part-time jobs after school, experienced teachers responding to educational 
reform, as well as becoming an apprentice. Such changes often involve identity shifts and have lasting 
impacts as the individual moves across different contexts and learns to be a professional. 
There has not been much research on language teachers’ knowledge construction and identity shift as they 
move from a CTE class to a school context. Many past studies depended on survey or other self-reported 
data to identify the results of teacher education (e.g., Bai & Ertmer, 2008; Egbert et al., 2002). Other 
studies employed the case study approach, documenting the course design as well as experience and also 
using student comments as evidence for positive outcomes (e.g., Bauer-Ramazani, 2006; Hampel, 2009). 
Fewer CTE studies actually embrace the concept that teachers are agents capable of creating knowledge 
of their own (Johnson & Golombek, 2002). For example, Slaouti and Motteram (2006) focused on 
teachers’ reconstruction narratives that were reflective and based on “a critical review of an area of 
interest to the teachers” (p. 89), but the study does not report any products created by the teachers. Chao’s 
(2006) teacher participants created WebQuests, or web-based inquiry projects, in a CTE course for their 
teaching contexts, but the teachers’ consequent development was not discussed. Studies focusing on both 
teacher-created products in the CTE class and their thoughts developed later in a concrete context would 
better inform the meaning making process based on the CTE course experience in the teachers’ overall 
professional development. Such studies would also lead to a deeper understanding of what is learned a 
certain period of time afterwards, when many personal and contextual factors stand as barriers or are 
perceived by the teacher as affordances. 
Chin-chi Chao Rethinking Transfer 
 
Language Learning & Technology 105 
METHODOLOGY 
This study focuses on teachers’ perspectives on their learning from a CTE class through the lens of a 
qualitative case study. Gall, Gall, and Borg (2007) use four features to define case study research: It is “(a) 
the in-depth study of (b) one or more instances of a phenomenon (c) in its real-life context that (d) reflects 
the perspective of the participants involved in the phenomenon” (p. 447). As will be described later, these 
features are also present in the current study: an in-depth study of CTE learning in the natural context 
focusing first on 19 teachers’ presentations during a CTE course, and later on four of the teacher 
participants’ evolving experiences and perspectives. Through layers of data collection and analysis 
procedures, this study expects to develop an understanding of how the teacher participants made sense of 
their CTE course experience as they moved across the boundary between the CTE course and their own 
teaching contexts. 
 Context and Participants 
The context of the study is a summer graduate-level CTE course for in-service K-12 teachers, taken at a 
university in Taipei, Taiwan. The course focused on multimedia in English language instruction, teaching 
less the technology skills themselves, but rather more a combination of all the components of 
technological pedagogical content knowledge, or TPACK, as discussed by Koehller and Mishra (2008) 
and Mishra and Koehller (2006). In other words, the course aimed to take into consideration the complex 
interaction among language learning content (i.e., reading, writing, speaking, listening, and others), 
pedagogy (i.e., communicative language teaching and task-based approaches), and technology (i.e., 
affordances and constraints of different technological tools). The other emphasis of the course was 
developing attitudes and skills for teaching English in a learner-centered way while also reflectively 
meeting the challenges brought by digital media. In addition to CALL concepts and applications, 
discussions also covered more current concepts, such as multiliteracy and game-based learning mediated 
by Web 2.0 social media and mobile devices. (See Appendix for the course agenda).  
The researcher was the teacher educator and instructor of this course, while the participants were 19 
practicing K-12 English teachers (18 female, 1 male), with teaching experience ranging from two to ten 
years. All of them already had experience using computers in the English classroom prior to the class, but 
mostly with applications such as PowerPoint (PPT), Word, and YouTube. In addition, they generally 
practiced a teacher-fronted instructional style. This CTE class, on the other hand, placed a large emphasis 
on the concept of learner-centeredness and creative language learning encouraged by new digital media. 
The differences between the course emphases and the participants’ existing practices created a tension; it 
was within this tension that the teachers were asked to demonstrate how they connect their classroom 
practices and knowledge development through a presentation at the end of the course. 
The Presentation 
The requirements for the presentation were stated in an open-ended way: 
There is no limitation to the format of your presentations, not even the number of pages, but it 
must show your efforts to connect your world and the [expected] course content. “Your world” 
means who you are as an English teacher, your teaching/learning contexts, your needs, and your 
identity. You are also expected to demonstrate the linkage to the class discussion. It is not 
something you put together off-handedly before the presentation in order to make do. 
Most of the teachers presented projects that they would like to have students engage in using presentation 
software, such as PowerPoint, but others used a word-processing document or a weblog to document their 
own learning and thoughts. The projects the teachers designed for their students, as well as their 
narratives on the projects during the presentation captured by videos constituted the data for the first stage 
of the current analysis. All of the teachers were also required to complete a reflection form after the 
Chin-chi Chao Rethinking Transfer 
 
Language Learning & Technology 106 
presentation. The data sources for the first stage of analysis thus include the video presentations, 
PowerPoint slides, word files, or web pages that the teachers used in their presentations, and the 
completed reflection forms handed in by the teachers at the end of the course.  
Eight months after the course, four of the teachers were contacted for a follow-up visit and with their 
informed consent, we conducted an in-depth interview with each of them. These teachers were chosen 
mainly because their work represented one of the four types of teacher-made connections identified in the 
data, including a thoughtful action planner, a past experience refiner, a limited user, and a reluctant 
practitioner. The purpose of these follow-up interviews was to inquire about teachers’ plans and how their 
thoughts about CALL learning had evolved since the course. The interviews were semi-structured and 
conducted by graduate assistants with training provided by the researcher. The languages used during the 
interviews were either Mandarin or English, depending on the teacher’s preference. Each interview lasted 
from 45 to 60 minutes and took place at a location chosen by the teacher. The interviews were captured 
using a digital recorder and were later transcribed verbatim for analysis.  
Data Analysis 
There were two stages of the data analysis procedure: first, all the presentations were transcribed, then a 
constant comparative analysis (Miles & Huberman, 1994) method was adopted to analyze the data. 
Looking at the videos of the presentations and their transcripts, the researcher and her assistants worked 
to categorize and identify types of connections the participating teachers made. Through repeated 
discussions, debate, and comparison and contrast while triangulating among all the other data sources, it 
was decided that four general types of teacher connections could be identified. Teachers who had a 
thoughtful and concrete plan for application were identified as thoughtful action planners. Those whose 
presentation mainly focused on a past practice and a refinement based on the learning from the course 
were labeled as past-experience refiners. When the teachers’ understanding seemed to have missed the 
point or made seemingly little connection between the project and the curriculum, we identified them as 
limited users. Finally, there was a case of reluctant application because this teacher’s presentation was 
brief, appeared to lack preparation, and did not delve deeply into her concerns. Thus, the first stage of 
analysis yielded seven cases of thoughtful action planning, four cases of past-experience refinement, 
seven cases of limited use, and one case of reluctant application.  
As for the interview data collected eight months after the CTE course, there were also two steps to the 
analysis. The first was reconstructing each of the four participants’ profiles based on their narratives 
detailing how they used technology when teaching English before and after the course. The second step 
followed the content-holistic procedure in narrative inquiry (Lieblich, Tuval-Mashiach, & Zilber, 1998) 
which allowed the study to derive themes through comparing and contrasting the four teachers’ 
experiences. When taken together, both of the analysis procedures helped to address the research 
questions, the results of which are discussed in the sections below. 
RESULTS 
As discussed earlier, four general types of connections were identified among the 19 teachers’ 
presentations during the first stage of analysis, and four teachers were visited and interviewed eight 
months later. They were (a) Athena, a thoughtful action-planner, (b) Pan, a past-experience refiner, (c) 
Lily, a limited user, and (d) Rebecca, a reluctant practitioner. (All names are pseudonyms.) These teachers’ 
profiles and the connections they made at the end of the course are presented in detail below in order to 
provide the reader with a concrete idea of how the teachers’ thoughts evolved. It is important to keep in 
mind that these teachers’ stories are unique and not to be generalized to the other teachers who were not 
interviewed. However, their experiences are valuable in terms of revealing teachers’ CALL knowledge 
construction process in context. 
 
Chin-chi Chao Rethinking Transfer 
 
Language Learning & Technology 107 
Athena: A Thoughtful Action Planner 
Athena’s students were 7th graders who “grew up with the computer.” In her presentation, she stated that 
her goal was to create a learning environment in which students would “learn English holistically and 
comprehensively” through a CALL project that integrated four skills and took into consideration multiple 
intelligences and students’ diverse learning abilities. She wished that her students would be able to 
“communicate, express [themselves], cooperate with others, and possess self-learn[ing] ability” (taken 
from PPT slides). She also hoped they would abandon some of their misconceptions toward the English 
language, such as taking it as merely an academic subject and not as a real language. Athena’s previous 
experience of assigning a picture book project to her students showed her that they had “difficulty 
presenting, with obstacles of delivery, [due to] affective factors [i.e., being nervous] and personality 
reasons [i.e., being shy].” The students’ picture book projects also had “few connection[s] to their lives, 
either [looking] too much [like] a fairy tale or too childish” (taken from PPT slides). Students’ posters for 
promoting a book that they had read also “appeared too wordy and unattractive.” Athena seemed to have 
used many computer tools and project ideas with her students, but she also revealed some dissatisfaction 
with her students’ performance. 
To resolve the issue, Athena derived insight from a discussion on game-based learning in the CTE class. 
In the past she said she had considered computer games as “totally mind-damaging and a great waste of 
time,” involving nothing but lower-level thinking and lots of meaningless mouse clicks. She described 
herself as “eagerly wanting to see students achieve English competence, overnight.” She wished that 
students would “write well-structured essays, give error-free speaking and confident presentations, show 
strong motivation and willingness to communicate, and learn English as a lifelong endeavor.” Through 
the CTE class, she now understood there were actually new kinds of literacies that students might be 
acquiring as they played online games. She also saw the wisdom in the guided design of computer games. 
A guided design model, in her understanding, was when the computer game uses many tactics and small 
successes to familiarize, motivate, and lull the new player into learning the rules and operations required 
to play the game. When looked at in this way, Athena felt that game design offered much insight for her 
as a language educator. 
Following the guided-design model, Athena, in her CTE class presentation, designed multiple tasks 
aiming to guide her students through an e-book project. She planned to have her students read a set of 
young adult novels that depicted lives closely resembling their own. While reading, she would use the 
opportunity to promote reading strategies such as skimming, scanning, looking at the cover, the book’s 
back, and the illustrations as she had usually done. Then, students would read the book with an aim to 
provide both written and spoken reports to the class. The students would work in groups to provide three 
different endings to the story, all of which had to be consistent with the personalities of the characters and 
logic of the storyline. The three endings would then be posted on Facebook for a class poll. All students 
would be required to participate in the poll and provide comments. Using the results from the poll, the 
student teams would decide which of the three endings they would use for their storybook. They would 
then finish the story using Photostory, a tool introduced in the CTE class, and post the story to a 
designated e-book website. In the process, Athena said she would provide many resources to help the 
students, including a timeline with important benchmarks for the project, video tutorials for Audacity, a 
sound recording and editing program introduced in the CTE class, and a sample e-book created by Athena 
herself. At the end of the presentation, she specifically linked her ideas back to the CTE course, carefully 
elaborating on how her project was consistent with the game concepts discussed in the class. She also 
discussed expected benefits and challenges of this newly designed e-book project. With the concreteness 
of the steps and the links between her activity and the CTE class, there seemed no doubt that Athena 
would implement her plans in the following school year; this is why she was considered a thoughtful 
planner at the first stage of analysis. 
Eight months later, when Athena was interviewed, she had not been able to implement her plan and 
Chin-chi Chao Rethinking Transfer 
 
Language Learning & Technology 108 
actually had very little memory of it. She said, 
To tell you the truth, it is really difficult to use [the tools experienced in the CTE class] … 
because school has its own agenda. You can’t say just because I have learned it I have to use 
it. … Students in the third year of junior high … their grammar lessons are becoming a lot more 
challenging, and I know they may not have mastered [what they will be tested on] ... Under this 
circumstance, I cannot have them play multimedia simply because I want to. It is true that there 
are many things [from the CTE class] I cannot use.  
In terms of what Athena felt the point was of learning various applications in the CTE course, she said “I 
got to know the existence of many applications.” She fondly mentioned her experience working on Asia 
Inspirer (1998) with her colleagues in the CTE class, even though this software was not discussed in her 
CTE presentation, nor was it actually used in her current teaching. Even though she could not remember 
the title, and the software was not available at her school, she still found this experience unforgettable. 
She said it opened her eyes to the possibility of encouraging cooperative learning with the combined force 
of a piece of software and some print-based materials—a simple idea that was beyond her experience 
before the course. 
Pan, A Past Experience Refiner 
Pan was identified as a past experience refiner because she used the insights from the course to review, 
refine, or build on her past CALL experiences. Having worked in a subordinate capacity within an 
external research team, she repeatedly said during her presentation, “I finally understand what I have been 
doing with a university-sponsored project since two years ago. … I didn’t know it was something I should 
actually feel proud of.” 
The particular project that Pan discussed in her presentation is called, Tomorrow’s Classroom, a computer 
program that allowed students in her second-grade class to use a touch-screen tablet computer to study 
math and literacy skills. Usually, she said, it would be very difficult to have a second grader write just one 
composition in one semester, but in her school it was not difficult for children to write ten. She thought 
the reason for this was the large number of books in the classroom serving as input as well as the 30-
minute silent reading time every morning. “Everybody would be seriously reading. Nobody would be 
making any sound. The teacher would also be demonstrating silent reading—that’s when I did my own 
graduate school reading for the past year.” After 30 minutes, the students would use Tomorrow’s 
Classroom to record their reading, including how much and what they read in those 30 minutes, what they 
think about, and whether they liked the book (i.e., their review). Tomorrow’s Classroom then kept and 
managed the data, by providing statistic to show group and individual progress, which allowed both the 
teacher and the students to monitor their learning. The program also allowed the pupils to draw on their 
understanding of the text, consistent with the multi-literacy concept discussed in the CTE class. In 
addition, classroom activities could be designed to ask students to report their readings to the class or in 
small groups, or to participate in story-telling competitions. She remarked excitedly, “This activity could 
literally engage the students in the integrated development of all four skills.”  
Pan reported that the design of the program uses the metaphor of a solar system to organize the different 
user functions according to the hierarchy of the school community: it assigns a particular star for a class, a 
cluster of stars for a grade level, and several star groups to form a solar system, which represents the 
entire school. It also assigns tasks for students differentiated according to levels of understanding and 
packaged in a way similar to missions in a computer game. “For example, you could be a prince and you 
need to save a princess from distress by solving the assigned puzzles… or as the owner of a restaurant, 
you need to collect certain ingredients in order to make a curry dish.” The keeping of reading records at 
the individual level also took the metaphor of a bookstore. Pan said,  
Chin-chi Chao Rethinking Transfer 
 
Language Learning & Technology 109 
When you enter a record of a book that has been read, the book icon would show up in your 
personal bookstore. Pretty soon you will have a big collection of books in your store with your 
evaluations and comments. When other readers heed your recommendation, you would earn an 
amount of token money, which allows you to buy ornaments for your store. 
These designs and metaphors did not come easily, Pan explained. She and the other teachers on the team 
had been attending workshops and meetings every Wednesday afternoon for the previous two years, but 
she did not understand the importance of these meetings until the CTE course. As to what was discussed 
in the workshops, she reported that the teachers made suggestions based on their observations and 
experiences. For example, the program used to provide questions with only two options to choose from as 
the answer. If the child failed to answer correctly the first time, she could easily figure out the right 
answer. The teacher team therefore suggested redesigning the questions to give only hints, not the correct 
answer. If the child still had problems with the hint, the program could give the child similar questions to 
make sure that she really had developed the expected capability. “That’s the kind of thing we discussed 
on Wednesday afternoons,” she said.  
At the end of the presentation, Pan revealed her regrets. She said she set a strict rule that whenever the 
computer was in use, nobody should be talking. She would say to her class:  
I don’t want to hear a single sound. If you have questions, the program will give you hints. If you 
still have questions, go check out the textbook. If after consulting the textbook and there are still 
questions, please come ask me. 
Now that she understood many aspects behind the design of a computer game, and also that the 
Tomorrow’s Classroom project was meant to both develop skills and to motivate, Pan explained “I feel 
that I failed to encourage them to work cooperatively.” Pan said that Tomorrow’s Classroom, the whole 
project, was actually the result of close collaboration among many different stakeholders on many 
different levels. Even the parents’ voices could be heard and considered during the discussion. “It’s just 
that my teaching strategy was not made consistent with the key principle of the program. … My own 
understanding of CALL teaching at the time was insufficient.”  
Eight months later, when we interviewed Pan again in her school, Tomorrow’s Classroom was still in use, 
and Pan was still concerned about cooperation and interaction. She noted:  
Before the CTE class I was skeptical. I saw the kids each working on their own and making their 
own progress, and I was concerned that there would be a certain level of remoteness and coldness 
among them. … After the course, my observation shows that this concern may [not be 
warranted]… It all has to do with personality because some children who are eager about 
finishing the tasks would actually work closely with their peers to reach their goals. … Now I 
know the computer does not stop human interaction. It just makes it happen in different ways. 
Another concern was the limitations of the program:  
As a teacher, I hope the kids will learn how to figure out the answer by themselves, but the 
program tends to give it out directly. After the course, I understand that it is the teacher who 
should design different mechanisms or classroom activities to make sure that learning and 
interaction happen.  
Pan also said, “Technology is not a dead artifact. It interacts with you, and it changes with your thoughts. 
I developed a totally different kind of thoughts toward the technology in the class.” As the only member 
of the CTE class who was able to engage in the same project she had discussed in her final presentation, 
Chin-chi Chao Rethinking Transfer 
 
Language Learning & Technology 110 
Pan’s struggle and thoughts were continuously focused on the human aspects of the activity, wanting to 
understand her students better as they worked on the computer. 
Lily, A Limited User  
Lily was a teacher who collected everything experienced in the course; there was little of her personal 
touch in her presentation. As a part-time teacher at a small private kindergarten which had few resources 
or support for the teacher’s use of computers, she knew there would be few opportunities for her to apply 
what she had learned in the CTE course and thus decided from the very beginning to simply collect 
information and thoughts as faithfully as she could by using a web blog. “I want all my experiences ‘to 
go.’ I also want convenient access whenever I need them.”  
The tool that Lily used in her presentation and to show her connection between the CTE class and her 
teaching was a blog, supported by some photos that she took during class, that recorded her experiences 
and thoughts as they emerged in the CTE class. She seemed to take much of her learning from the CTE 
class as knowledge that must remain intact. There was little application, synthesis, or analysis of her own, 
at least not in a way that the other teachers such as Athena and Pen attempted to think about.  
She titled her blog A Treasure Chest of CALL, within which she collected notes, photos, insightful 
statements to remember, and her own thoughts and responses, all organized chronologically. She added,  
I didn’t try to change my earlier thoughts or wording because I could see, as time goes by, how 
my thoughts change from simple to more complex … from shallow to becoming deeper into the 
meaning of technology in language education.  
Eight months later, when the research team interviewed Lily and asked why she thought it was important 
to collect information and thoughts as she had done in her blog, she said she had always felt regretful 
about forgetting what she had learned in the summer courses when she returned to teach. A blog was the 
best way she knew to help her remember.  
When asked what the most impressive experience was from the CTE class, she discussed her insights 
derived from the online game discussion. In addition to the guided-design instruction similar to what 
Athena (the thoughtful action-planner) pondered on, the online game discussion also made Lily reflect on 
her previous teaching practice: 
I have been teaching for a long time… almost 11 years. I was always very clear about pointing 
out whether or not the students did it right. When you are right, you get an apple [sticker] right 
away. When you are wrong, I’d give you a big X. … But, after this CTE course, I started to 
think … it is important to give students opportunities to try. 
This insight came from a discussion on the design of online games in class, which she still remembered 
eight months later: 
…good online games … they never let kids feel strong frustration. Even when you die, you can 
still come back and try again. Thus, when they [students] make a mistake, it is important to help 
them stand up straight again—just like in an online game, as long as you find a way to recharge 
your energy level, you can always come alive and you can still play.  
She concluded by saying, “I no longer feel frustrated about student mistakes. It’s all right to make a 
mistake. We could always try again. I myself became a happier teacher because of this.” Lily also talked 
about how, before taking the class, she saw nothing but the negative side of online games:  
Online games are indeed interesting, but my thought toward them before the class was completely 
Chin-chi Chao Rethinking Transfer 
 
Language Learning & Technology 111 
negative. … Let me put it this way: I had no good impression toward anybody who was addicted 
to games. Before the class it had never occurred to me that there would be some researchers 
trying to figure out the tactics that online games used to lull players into playing the game and 
what these might mean to language educators. This deeper level of thinking about games was 
something I had never thought about. I was very surprised that there were actually rich insights in 
games. 
Although her context did not encourage technology use, Lily actually used many of the tools introduced 
in the CTE class over the next eight months, specifically Audacity and Picpick. She said, “Audacity 
allows me to edit songs for kids, and Picpick is useful for creating pictures for classroom activities.” 
Since it was inconvenient for her and her students to use computers in the classroom, Lily used these tools 
to prepare her teaching material. This use is different from the kind of learner-centered use that the CTE 
class had advocated, but given the confinement of Lily’s teaching context, this usage and her memory 
collection through her blog are both based on the unique features of her context. The connection she made 
might not be as complex as the others’ in terms of technology use, but the reflective thinking she 
demonstrated was certainly no less profound than the other participants’ reflective thinking. 
Rebecca, The Reluctant Practitioner  
Rebecca, a junior high school teacher, was considered a reluctant practitioner when her final presentation 
was analyzed. During her presentation, she spoke in a tone that was rather disinterested, touching on her 
concerns very briefly and quickly; she gave the impression of resistance. For example, when online 
games were mentioned, Rebecca said, 
I asked my students why they liked online games. They said they could get real money, kill time, 
and experience things that were not possible in real life … I also enjoy playing online games, and 
from time to time I think about whether or not one could use it in language teaching. But, I still 
have a lot of doubts. What if they [the students] enjoy the game more than learning English? I am 
still thinking how to overcome challenges like this. Maybe it will be possible in the future. 
As I have already discussed in the previous sections, the point of the online game discussion was actually 
not about “using it in language teaching,” but rather to encourage a deeper insight into language 
instruction. Thus, at the first stage of analysis, Rebecca’s statements, in addition to being short and 
offhanded, also suggested that she did not grasp the meaning of this discussion. In other words, she could 
also be placed under the limited user category. 
Eight months later, when we interviewed her, Rebecca said the CTE course was new and interesting, but 
the final project assignment was difficult and too abstract. She was constantly anxious about what to 
present, to the point that she often questioned why she had taken this course. This comment explained 
why there seemed to be resistance in Rebecca’s presentation. She admitted, “I was not a particularly good 
student at the time.”  
Rebecca also said that she “was not going to accept the invitation for this interview, but then I realized I 
did have a few things to say about what I learned last summer.” In fact, she actually expressed pride 
toward what she had learned:  
English teachers in my school had no idea what we had experienced in the [CTE] course. I am not 
the youngest teacher, but [after the course] I could help the computer teacher to help my 
colleagues. This, I think, is the most remarkable. I thought I wasn’t a good student and didn’t 
learn anything from the course, but the truth is I didn’t know what I had learned until I returned.  
The biggest gain from the CTE course for Rebecca was that she “didn’t know that it was possible to 
Chin-chi Chao Rethinking Transfer 
 
Language Learning & Technology 112 
integrate everything that is fun into language teaching.” She said she was actually more excited about the 
technology than she was about using it for educational purpose. “Even if I was concerned, the digital 
media will still be … continuously developed. I don’t think I have any power to stop it. … Up to now, 
most digital media for me are exciting.” 
Rebecca said that after she returned to school, when she sometimes thought about the CTE course 
experience, she realized that she could revise some of the ideas in minor ways to make them work for her. 
For example, instead of using technology tools for the actual teaching of language, Rebecca used them to 
interact informally with her teenage students. She positioned herself as an adult who enjoyed playing the 
most popular games just as much as her students. This method successfully brought the students close to 
her: 
I play games on computers or on cell phones so I will have some topics to talk [to the students]. I 
encourage them to discuss with me and sometimes to teach me some tactics to pass [through 
challenges in] a game. I would try my best to learn something that interests them so that we have 
some common topics to talk about. I encourage them to speak in English with me when 
discussing games. I think that’s one way [to help them]. Yes, it is helpful … even though I can’t 
use most of the digital media to teach them English. I think this [method] helps me have more 
topics or opportunities to access their lives, and sometimes they are willing to tell me their 
feelings. I think it’s great. 
Very different from the way that she presented at the end of the CTE course, there was a lot of excitement 
and passion in her voice:  
[As a person of] my generation, I am so proud that I am not afraid of digital media, and I always 
try my best to know new things. Yes. I try to learn something [the students] know but [people] of 
my age don’t. 
Rebecca also expressed deeper insights about supporting student learning with digital media: 
Even though [the students’] computer skills are getting better than before, we still need to teach 
them [proper ways] to use digital media. … I think students now only know how to … google. In 
fact, they are not as familiar with some programs [as we think]; they don’t even know. …They 
don’t know they’ve already had Movie Maker on their computer and don’t know how to use it. … 
If we use these tools in our teaching, maybe we can attract [them and raise] their interest more. … 
they can understand more about the English lessons, not just the computer.  
From being reluctant in the course presentation to being excited about what she did eight months later, 
Rebecca’s change could be considered the most dramatic and exciting among the four teachers.  It is 
possible that she was not reluctant at all but needed more time to think about and process what she had 
experienced in the CTE class.  
DISCUSSION 
Based on the results of the study, there are two assertions to be discussed in this section. 
1. The participating teachers seldom used the digital technology neither as they nor as the teacher 
educator had expected. 
The four teachers’ experiences demonstrate that the teachers did not often use the tools in ways that the 
teachers or the teacher educator had expected them to. Consistent with previous studies (Egbert et al., 
2002; Ertmer, 1999), the teachers had few opportunities to use the particular tools or applications as they 
Chin-chi Chao Rethinking Transfer 
 
Language Learning & Technology 113 
had planned or to use the tools with their learners in a learner-centered way, as had been advocated in the 
CTE class, unless one had already been engaged in an organized project before the class, such as Pan, the 
past experience refiner. Transfer did not happen even for Athena, who was considered a thoughtful action 
planner at the end of the course and was thought likely to implement her project. Her reason for not 
implementing her project was that her students had more important goals to achieve (i.e., mastering 
certain grammar points). This comment suggests that Athena perceived conflicting agendas between the 
school and the graduate CTE class, so much so that she now considered her project, which was originally 
highly praised at the end of the course, to be unhelpful for students in achieving the more important 
learning goals.  
For the teacher educator, this response can be disheartening, but it is true that the particular context a 
teacher works in is going to be much more influential and capable of determining whether or not and to 
what extent the teacher uses what is learned from the CTE class. In fact, Lily, the limited-user teacher, 
was confined exactly because she thought about the scarce resources and opportunities that would be 
available to her while she was taking the CTE course. Taking into account what previous researchers have 
found regarding the conditions for transfer to happen (Egbert et al., 2002; Ertmer, 1999; Hong, 2010), this 
result is not surprising. Perhaps CALL teacher educators need to take it as the norm, rather than the 
exception, that teachers will most likely not use the digital technologies, or at least not use them in the 
way that is expected. Instead, newer ways of using the knowledge, skills, and tools will emerge, if the 
teacher is willing. 
2. The teachers continuously engaged in deep reflection regarding their interaction with the digital 
technologies in the context that they teach in, which led to unexpected thoughts, classroom 
practices, and a change of teacher identity. 
If teachers are not going to use the tools or use them in the way teacher educators expect them to, what 
then is the purpose of taking the CTE course? When asked about the meaningfulness of taking the CTE 
course, teachers typically gave a “storage for the future” kind of answer, implying that they thought the 
course did not have a real use. Such answers still justify participating in the CTE course, as it is an 
opportunity to collect a large amount of information to be used later; information that the teacher could 
dig up and use when they identify a need in the unspecified future. However, a different and better reason 
than this was found in the teachers’ narratives.  
What was really surprising in the interview data was the depth of reflection and understanding that the 
four teachers demonstrated eight months after the class, when they were interviewed in each of their own 
teaching contexts. One such case of reflection was provided by the only teacher that was still engaged in 
her project eight months after the course: Pan, the past experience refiner, who had been part of a large-
scale project team before the CTE class and still was during the time of the interview. During the 
presentation, Pan said that thanks to the CTE course, she finally understood what she and her team had 
been doing with the Tomorrow’s Classroom over the previous few years. Pan also revealed her concern 
with collaboration: that students seemed to be working individually and independently in the program. 
During her course presentation, she said she felt guilty about the ways she had been conducting her class, 
including not being able to encourage collaboration when the computer was in use. Eight months later, 
she said she understood how the computer program functions were not a given, and that as a teacher she 
could help make a difference. Only after time had passed did she understand her own position in the 
project: she was no longer a passive teacher member who could only take in whatever the computer gave 
her. 
Through reflection, the other teachers also applied the tools and/or concepts discussed in the CTE course 
in their own ways, although again, not as they had expected. Lily, for example, who is considered a 
memory collector, trying to pack all the knowledge so she could take it “to go,” turned out to feel 
continuously inspired by the game discussion. The CTE advocated learner-centered usage. That is, it is 
Chin-chi Chao Rethinking Transfer 
 
Language Learning & Technology 114 
the students who should be the ones using the technologies in creative projects, not the teacher. However, 
Lily used the tools introduced in the CTE course more than her students did. She used them for preparing 
her lessons, but she could not have the children use the tools in class as the CTE course had advocated. 
Given the limitations of her teaching context—a private language school that did not have convenient 
computer and Internet access in the classroom, and some of the parents’ disapproval of computer use with 
small children—Lily’s application of the tools was useful and indeed made her teaching life easier than 
before. According to a reflection on her context, this was a good use of the technology. On the other hand, 
Rebecca, the reluctant teacher during the presentation, engaged informally in computer games with her 
students in order to understand the students more and strengthen teacher-student relationships. She also 
became more confident and excited because of her enriched capability. 
These various forms of use were unexpected and developed through time and a deep reflection in the 
teachers’ teaching contexts. As these forms of practice were not mentioned in the teachers’ final 
presentations, it is possible to look at these as cases of “transition,” as discussed by Tuomi-Gröhn, 
Engeström, and Young (2003), which “involves reconstruction of knowledge and skills, rather than 
merely application or use of something that has been acquired elsewhere” (p. 3). The teachers were able 
to discuss how their teaching practices and teacher identities had been impacted on multiple levels of 
complexity. The teachers realized both they and their students were surrounded by new digital 
technologies, and were willing to examine their previous assumptions as well as attempt new types of 
teaching practices in order to grow over time and with their students. Particularly, all four teachers 
mentioned that the discussion of game-based learning had inspired them to reflect on the design of their 
previous teaching and to provide sufficient scaffolding to help students succeed, just as a game designer 
would do, including using games as a way to interact with the students on a deeper level. Drawing on 
Beach (2003), it is fair to say that these teachers actually experienced consequential transition. And, 
interestingly, the transition is not limited to CALL learning environments; it motivates teachers to 
examine their teaching even when technology is not involved. 
This result challenges the conventional view that transfer in CTE must be about using technology; 
particularly in the ways that teacher educators advocate for before teachers return to their teaching 
contexts. Based on the four teachers in this study, the experiences that left an impact are related to the 
deeper reflection of language teaching concepts and classroom practices. A focus on critical reflection of 
technology use encouraged the teachers to continue reflective engagement in the ever-changing and ever-
complicated digital learning, teaching, and living context. This observation resonates with Lawless and 
Pellegrino’s (2007) contention that “the most important impact a professional development activity can 
have on a teacher is that of pedagogical practice change ostensibly reflecting a deeper change in 
pedagogical content knowledge” (p. 595). It is clear that teachers are true agents (Johnson & Golombek, 
2002), and they are bound to build and reconstruct their CALL learning in their own ways based on what 
their teaching contexts provide. Teacher educators may find it useful to think of the result of CTE 
learning as serendipitous, not as something to be transferred, because the connection is likely to be made 
in multiple places and in complex forms based on what the teacher’s sociocultural ecology affords and 
what the teacher perceives to be possible. 
CONCLUSION 
This study began with a suspicion that transfer may be an inappropriate concept for CTE when examining 
the impact of CTE curriculum. Informed by Beach’s (2003) conception of consequential transitions, (i.e., 
critical changes that come about through deep and struggling reflection) the study sought to develop a 
cross-contextual understanding of language teachers’ learning and the connections that they made 
between their own teaching contexts and a CTE class. Consistent with previous studies (e.g., Egbert et al., 
2002), the four teachers interviewed in this study were seldom able to use the tools in the ways that had 
been introduced to them or that they had planned or expected to, but they were able to continuously 
Chin-chi Chao Rethinking Transfer 
 
Language Learning & Technology 115 
review and refine their understanding and practice based on the CTE experience, whether or not the 
technology was involved. The reflective engagement that these teachers demonstrated is indeed important 
for the ever-changing technological context that the teachers work in and should be considered an 
important objective of the CTE course, if not more so than tool use. It is also important that teacher 
educators review their own assumptions toward what counts as valuable CALL teacher learning so that 
they can help teachers develop the necessary skills and wisdom to continuously meet the teachers’ 
contextual needs and challenges.  
The study addresses a need for language teacher educators to rethink the goal of CALL teacher education. 
As digital technology continues to develop and become an indispensable part of everyday classroom life, 
teacher educators can no longer expect teachers to simply use what was learned from a CTE course in a 
way that could be anticipated. The results from the study strengthen the view that teachers are agents of 
their learning and their classroom practice (Johnson & Golombek, 2002) and that CTE courses need goals 
other than the simple transfer of tool use. Although it is still important to engage teachers in experiencing 
emerging tools and exploring how the tools may be used in language education, teachers also need to be 
inspired in a CTE course. The experiences reported here suggest that engaging teachers in critical 
examinations of their positions toward issues of digital media may lead to continuous reflection on CALL 
pedagogy long after the course. More research is needed to understand the link between CALL teacher 
reflection, changing pedagogy, and bringing out the best of the language learner of the 21st century. 
 
APPENDIX: Course Agenda. 
Date Topic Application 
 Part I: Social media and language learning: (r)evolution? 
7/9   Pronunciation MyET (2008) 
7/11   Listening/ speaking PhotoStory  
7/16  Multiliteracies Audacity  
7/18  Communicate LiveMocha 
7/23  FB  Facebook 
7/25  Online Game Online games, Second Life 
7/30  Tandem Learning Forms of Tandem Learning 
 Part II: Mobile Assisted Language Learning (MALL) 
8/1   MALL Introduction Project-based learning and Webquest 
8/6   Dictionary  MALL functions  
8/8  Reading Moviemaker 
8/13  Writing Creative Common, Flicker, Picpick and Toondoo 
8/15   Classroom Practice Zuvio and classroom response systems (CRSs) 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This project was supported by a grant provided by the Ministry of Science and Technology of the 
Republic of China (Taiwan) (Project number: 102-2410-H-004 -104). The author is grateful to the 
teachers for their contributions and participation in this study, to the graduate students for their assistance, 
and to the special issue editors and reviewers for their kind support and constructive suggestions.   
Chin-chi Chao Rethinking Transfer 
 
Language Learning & Technology 116 
 
REFERENCES 
Bai, H., & Ertmer, P. A. (2008). Teacher educators’ beliefs and technology uses as predictors of 
preservice teachers’ beliefs and technology attitudes. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 
16(1), 93–112. 
Bauer-Ramazani, C. (2006). Training CALL teachers online. In P. Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher 
education in CALL (pp. 183–202). Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.  
Beach, K. (2003). Consequential transitions: A developmental view of knowledge propagation through 
social organizations. In T. Tuomi-Gröhn & Y. Engeström (Eds.), Between school and work: New 
perspectives on transfer and boundary-crossing (pp. 39–62). Bingley, UK: Earli. 
Chao, C. (2006). How WebQuests send technology to the background: Scaffolding EFL teacher 
professional development in CALL. In P. Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 
221–234). Philadelphia, PA: John Benamins. 
Egbert J., Paulus, T. M., & Nakamichi, Y. (2002). The impact of CALL instruction on classroom 
computer use: a foundation for rethinking technology in teacher education. Language Learning & 
Technology, 6(3), 108–126. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num3/egbert/default.html 
Ertmer, P. A. (1999). Addressing first- and second-order barriers to change: Strategies for technology 
integration. Educational Technology Research and Development, 47(4), 47–61. 
Ertmer, P. A. (2005). Teacher pedagogical beliefs: The final frontier in our quest for technology 
integration? Educational Technology Research and Development, 53(4), 25–39.  
Gall, M. D., Gall, J. P. & Borg, W. R. (2007). Educational research (8th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson. 
Guichon, N., & Hauck, M. (2011). Special issue on CALL and CMC teacher education research. ReCALL, 
23(3). 
Hampel, R. (2009). Training teachers for the multimedia age: Developing teacher expertise to enhance 
online learner interaction and collaboration. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 3(1), 35–50.  
Hegelheimer, V., Reppert, K., Broberg, M., Daisy, B., Grgurovic, M., Middlebrooks, K., & Liu, S. (2004). 
Preparing the new generation of CALL researchers and practitioners: What nine months in an MA 
program can (or cannot) do. ReCALL, 16, 432–447.  
Hong, K. H. (2010). CALL teacher education as an impetus for L2 teachers in integrating technology. 
ReCALL, 22 (1): 53–69.  
Hubbard, P. & Levy, M. (2006). (Eds.). Teacher education in CALL. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins. 
Johnson, K. E. & Golombek, P. R. (2002). (Eds.). Teachers’ narrative inquiry as professional 
development. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.  
Kassen, M. A., Lavine, R. Z., Murphy-Judy, K., & Peters, M. (2007). (Eds.). Preparing and developing 
technology-proficient L2 teachers. CALICO Monograph Series, 6. San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Kessler, G. (2007). Formal and informal CALL preparation and teacher attitude toward technology. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 20(2), 173–188. 
Koehler, M. & Mishra, P. (2008). Introducing TPCK. In AACTE Committee on Innovation and 
Technology (Ed.), Handbook of technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPCK) for educators. 
New York, NY: Routledge.  
Chin-chi Chao Rethinking Transfer 
 
Language Learning & Technology 117 
Lawless, K. A., & Pellegrino, J. W. (2007). Professional development in integrating technology into 
teaching and learning: Knowns, unknowns, and ways to pursue better questions and answers. Review of 
Educational Research, 77(4), 575–614. 
Lieblich, A., Tuval-Mashiach, R., & Zilber, T. (1998). Narrative research: Reading analysis and 
interpretation. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.  
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook (2nd ed.). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Mishra, P., & Koehler, M. J. (2006). Technological pedagogical content knowledge: A new framework 
for teacher knowledge. Teachers College Record, 108(6), 1017–54.  
Oxford, R. & Jung, S. (2007). National guidelines for technology integration in TESOL programs: 
Factors affecting (non)implementation. In M. A. Kassen, R. Z. Lavine, K. Murphy-Judy, & M. Peters 
(Eds.), Preparing and developing technology-proficient L2 teachers. CALICO Monograph Series, 6. (pp. 
23–48). San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Papert, S. (1990). A critique of technocentrism in thinking about the school of the future. M.I.T. Media 
Lab Epistemology and Learning Memo, 2. Retrieved from 
http://www.papert.org/articles/ACritiqueofTechnocentrism.html 
Slaouti, D., & Motteram, G. (2006). Reconstructing practice: Language teacher education and ICT. In P. 
Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 81–97). Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins. 
Thang, S. M., & Gobel, P. (Eds.) (2012). Selected Glocall 2010 conference papers: Specific applications 
of technology in second/foreign language educational settings [Special issue]. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 25(3). 
Tuomi-Gröhn, T. & Engeström, Y. (2003). Conceptualizing transfer: From standard notions to 
developmental perspectives. In T. Tuomi-Gröhn & Y. Engeström (Eds.), Between school and work: New 
perspectives on transfer and boundary-crossing (pp. 19–38). Bingley, UK: Earli. 
Tuomi-Gröhn, T., Engeström, Y. & Young, M. (2003). From transfer to boundary-crossing between 
school and work as a tool for developing vocational education: An introduction. In T. Tuomi-Gröhn & Y. 
Engeström (Eds.), Between school and work: New perspectives on transfer and boundary-crossing. (pp. 
1–15). Bingley, UK: Earli. 
White, C. & Reinders, H. (Eds.) (2009). Special Issue: Teacher education and computer-assisted language 
learning [Special issue]. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 3(1). 
 
OTHER MEDIA (Retrieved during July-August 2012) 
Asia Inspirer (1998). Tom Snyder Production, Inc. (Version 4.0) [CD-ROM]. 
Audacity. Dominic Mazzoni (Version 2.0.1) [Sound recording and editing program]. Retrieved from 
http://audacity.sourceforge.net  
Facebook. Facebook Inc. [Social networking service]. Retrieved from http://www.facebook.com 
Flicker. Yahoo! Inc. [Image hosting and sharing website ]. Retrieved from https://www.flickr.com/ 
LiveMocha.  Rosetta Stone, Inc.  [Social networking service] Retrieved from http://livemocha.com/ 
Movie Maker. Microsoft Corporation. (Version16.4) [Video editing software]. Retrieved from  
http://windows.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-live/movie-maker  
Chin-chi Chao Rethinking Transfer 
 
Language Learning & Technology 118 
MyET (2008) L. Labs Inc. (Version 3.0) [Pronunciation software].  
PhotoStory. Microsoft Corporation. [Version 3]. [Image and video story software].Retrieved from 
http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=11132 
Picpick. NTeWORKS. (Version 3.1.6). [Graphics and images freeware] Retrieved from 
http://www.picpick.org/en/ 
Second Life. Linden Lab. [Virtual environment] Accessed from http://secondlife.com/ 
Toondoo. Jambav, Inc. [Comic-creating web application] Retrieved from http://www.toondoo.com/ 
Webquest. Bonny Dodge. [Inquiry-based web projects]. Retrieved from http://webquest.org/index.php 
Zuvio. Zuvio, Inc. [Mobile application and Instant Response System] Retrieved from 
http://www.zuvio.com.tw/ 
