Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/call.pdf 
February 2015, Volume 19, Number 1 
p. 198 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501                                                                                                                                                198 
CALL for Papers for Special Issue of LLT 
Theme: Methodological Innovation in CALL Research and 
 its Role in SLA 
Special issue editor: Bryan Smith 
 
This special issue of Language Learning & Technology will focus on methodological innovation in 
current CALL research. As the field of CALL matures, teacher-scholars are employing many new and 
exciting applications of digital technologies for second and foreign language learning (L2L), including 
mobile technologies, gaming, and social media to name just a few. Likewise, new applications for 
student-computer and student-student interaction continue to improve and expand.  Such developments, 
while exciting, present a host of methodological challenges for researchers. That is to say, as we attempt 
to harness many of these technologies for L2L and study their effectiveness we often find that familiar 
methodologies for collecting and analyzing data are inadequate.   
For this special issue we seek proposals that highlight how specific innovative methodological choices 
allow us to capture and/or analyze aspects of learner-computer or learner-learner interaction in a way that 
illuminate the relationship between some aspect of CALL and SLA. Innovative methodological choices 
may include applying an existing methodological tool or technique from CALL or a cognate field in a 
new way or using a specific technology in a methodologically innovative fashion. An example of an 
innovative methodological choice would be if one were to conduct a stimulated recall session while a 
participant viewed a screen capture of her own eye gaze during a previous task-based CMC activity. 
Whereas stimulated recall is a widely used methodological technique in applied linguistics research, it is 
not often employed in conjunction with eye gaze recordings of CALL tasks. Likewise, though eye 
tracking technology has been used in reading research for decades, it has only recently begun to gain 
momentum in CALL as a tool for exploring the nature of learner attention to form during interactive 
tasks.  
In order to be considered for this special issue, proposals must present in-depth empirical data and report 
on actual language learning processes or outcomes. Papers that present an original, innovative and 
compelling conceptual framework for CALL methodology as it relates to SLA will also be considered.  
Please consult the LLT Website for general guidelines on submission and research. 
Please also send a word document with your title and 250-word abstract by June 1, 2015 to llt@hawaii.edu 
Publication timeline:  
• June 1, 2015: Submission deadline for abstracts 
• June 15, 2015: Invitation to authors to submit a manuscript 
• November 1, 2015: Submission deadline for manuscripts 
• February 1, 2017: Publication of special issue 
 
