Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/news.pdf 
February 2016, Volume 20, Number 1 
pp. 34–37 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 34 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
University of Hawai‘i Center for Language and Technology (CLT) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC) 
 
 
 
 
 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
2016 ONLINE INSTITUTE: FUNDAMENTALS OF PROJECT-BASED LANGUAGE 
LEARNING 
Project-Based Learning has a rich and productive history extending for over 100 
years. Embark on a journey of discovery to better understand project-based language 
learning (PBLL) and explore its connections with 21st Century Skills, content-based 
instruction, performance assessment and your own instructional context. Experts in 
the field guide you through the creation of a project blueprint. Connect with 
colleagues who have a common interest in quality PBLL implementation.  
Successfully complete all assigned tasks and earn an NFLRC digital badge, which qualifies you to apply 
for the NFLRC PBLL Intensive Summer Institute offered each year. Registration for this online institute 
is $25. Space is limited, so sign up today. 
2016 INTENSIVE SUMMER INSTITUTE: PBLL & INTERCULTURALITY 
How can Project-Based Language Learning (PBLL) help learners develop 
interculturality, or the ability to inhabit and interpret different cultures and to see 
one’s own culture through the eyes of another? How do I design rigorous PBLL 
projects to incorporate intercultural telecollaborations? The NFLRC 2016 Intensive 
Summer Institute (ISI) will help you answer these questions with guidance from 
experts in the field through a dynamic, technology-rich professional development 
experience. You will work on a Project Blueprint for your own language classroom 
assisted by colleagues and guided by a group of language professionals with background in PBL, 
language pedagogy, instructional technology, and assessment. 
In-service K-16 world language educators are invited to apply for this on-site, in-person institute. The 
NFLRC 2016 Intensive Summer Institute is not a beginner's workshop. In order to join, applicants will 
need to first earn a digital badge from the 2016 Fundamentals of Project-Based Language Learning 
Online Institute as a prerequisite. (Applicants who have obtained a 2015 Fundamentals of PBLL badge 
need to submit an additional interculturality-focused Project Blueprint to earn the qualifying badge for 
application to the 2016 Intensive Summer Institute.) Seats are limited and applications will be competitive. 
  
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
2016 SOUTHWEST CONFERENCE ON LANGUAGE TEACHING (SWCOLT) 
MARCH 3–5, 2016 • Honolulu, HI 
We are pleased to be hosting the 2016 Southwest Conference on Language Teaching (SWCOLT), its first 
time in Hawai‘i, in conjunction with the Hawai‘i Association of Language Teachers (HALT), which will 
be celebrating its 30th anniversary. 
SWCOLT is a regional foreign language teachers’ organization that brings together K-16 language 
educators from 9 member states: Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawai‘i, Nevada, New Mexico, 
Oklahoma, Texas, and Utah.  
SWCOLT 2016 will be held at the Hilton Waikiki Beach Hotel, with pre-conference workshops on March 
3 and the main conference on March 4–5. The theme of the conference will be I ka ʻōlelo ke ola (“In 
language, there is life”). Please see the SWCOLT website for more details or to register for the 
conference. 
STAY IN TOUCH WITH SOCIAL MEDIA 
Did you know that the NFLRC has its own Facebook page with close to 3,000 fans? It’s one of the best 
ways to hear about the latest news, publications, conferences, workshops, and resources we offer. Just 
click on the “Like” button to become a fan. For those who prefer getting up-to-the-minute “tweets,” you 
can follow us on our Twitter page. Finally, NFLRC has its own YouTube channel with a growing 
collection of free language learning and teaching videos for your perusal. Subscribe today! 
NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
Student learning outcomes assessment in college foreign language programs 
John M. Norris & John McE. Davis (Eds.), 2015, 274 pp. 
Available in hardcopy and as ePub 
Changes in accreditation policies and institutional practices have led to the 
emergence of student learning outcomes assessment as an important, increasingly 
common expectation in U.S. college foreign language programs. This volume 
investigates contemporary outcomes assessment activity, with a primary focus on 
useful assessment, that is, assessment that is put to use proactively by foreign 
language educators. Authors approach the topic from distinct perspectives, 
ranging from a study of national trends in outcomes assessment practices, to 
reflections on assessment experiences by program leaders, to case studies 
highlighting language educators’ implementation and uses of outcomes 
assessment for diverse curricular and pedagogical purposes. 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 36 
Developing Courses in Languages for Specific Purposes 
Trace, Jonathan, Hudson, T., & Brown, J. D. (Eds.), 2015, 307 pp. 
Free download from ScholarSpace 
The goals of most foreign language (FL) instruction in higher education within the 
United States are built around three main components: (a) the acquisition of the 
knowledge of language skills for general communication use; (b) exposing 
learners to other cultures and ideas; and (c) fostering an appreciation of 
differences in cultures and ways of thinking. While each of these are certainly 
noble outcomes and likely meet the needs of the majority of university level FL 
learners, they remain quite broad in terms of what it is a learner will actually be 
able to do with the language once they have left the classroom. This is especially 
true for those of us faced with learners who have specific and sometimes 
immediate language needs that require more than generalized or dispositional 
knowledge alone. For these learners, Language for Specific Purposes courses provide an invaluable 
alternative or supplement to general language courses. 
ScholarSpace 
 
NFLRC maintains a large searchable archive of free language research and 
teaching materials which currently contains over 350 items. These items 
include foreign language teaching materials (in print, audio, and video), 
language acquisition research papers, and collections of conference 
materials. 
Save the trees! Check out our other two online, open-access journals: 
  
Language Documentation & Conservation is a 
refereed, open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC 
and published by University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to 
language documentation and conservation, as well 
as book reviews, hardware and software reviews, 
and notes from the field. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed 
international journal of issues in foreign language 
reading and literacy, published twice yearly on the 
World Wide Web and sponsored by NFLRC and 
the University of Hawai‘i College of Languages, 
Linguistics, and Literature. 
 
 
View all NFLRC Publications 
  
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR) 
 
 
 
 
 
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
CLEAR is pleased to announce its professional development offerings for July 2016. Online registration 
is open on our website. The topics are as follows: 
• Speaking activities for oral proficiency development, July 11–13 
• Differentiated instruction in the language classroom, July 14 (one day workshop) 
• Keeping student and teacher talk in the target language, July 15 (one day workshop) 
• Teaching language with technology: Basic tools and techniques, July 18–20 
• Writing in the foreign language classroom, July 21–23 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We enjoyed seeing many of you at ACTFL 
in San Diego, and look forward to seeing even more at the Central States Conference on the Teaching of 
Foreign Languages in Columbus in March. 
CLEAR is also hosting the 2016 conference of the Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium 
(CALICO). We hope to see you in East Lansing in May (main conference May 12-13 with pre- and post-
conference workshop options)! Learn more here. 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe here. 
