Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/review4.pdf 
February 2016, Volume 20, Number 1 
pp. 50–53 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 50 
REVIEW OF RESEARCHING LANGUAGE LEARNER INTERACTIONS 
ONLINE: FROM SOCIAL MEDIA TO MOOCS 
Researching Language Learner Interactions Online: From 
Social Media to MOOCs 
Edward Dixon and Michael Thomas (Eds.) 
 
2015 
ISBN: 978-0-9963165-0-7 
US $ 24.95 
385 pp. 
 
CALICO Monograph Series 
Texas State University, US. 
 
 
Review by Elena Martín-Monje, Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia 
Researching Language Learner Interactions Online: From Social Media to MOOCs, edited by Dixon and 
Thomas, offers a multi-faceted view of the latest developments in technology-enhanced language 
learning, paying special attention to learner exchanges. The editors claim to have a dual focus, addressing 
both new empirical research and new research approaches in the field, covering not only pedagogical 
aspects such as instructional design or learning strategies, but also issues at the institutional level such as 
teacher training, accreditation, and articulation. A holistic approach to language learning is emphasized 
throughout the volume, both explicitly (in the introduction and Chapters 1, 3, 8, and 19) and implicitly, 
which gives this monograph a comprehensive nature. 
There is a total of 19 chapters which fall into seven sections: (1) Reconceptualizing Learners, (2) Massive 
Open Online Courses, (3) Digital Video, (4) Social Networking, (5) Telecollaboration, (6) Communities, 
and (7) Learning Analytics. The 29 contributors come from different parts of the globe: Asia, Australia, 
Europe and North America. However, since half of them come from the latter, it gives the volume a 
special “North American flavor”, providing empirical evidence from university courses in Connecticut, 
Utah, Pennsylvania, Washington D.C., California, Florida, Wisconsin, and Iowa. Each section is 
comprised of two to three chapters which combine empirical evidence with theoretical frameworks and 
proposals. 
The introductory chapter provides an overview of the volume and advances one of the main ideas that 
permeate this collection of chapters: Digitally mediated environments enable some sophisticated 
linguistic exchanges, which are a worthwhile field of research and advancement, both in formal and 
informal education. This is followed by Part 1, Reconceptualizing Learners, which reflects on how the 
role of people learning a language has evolved, becoming more active and blurring the distinction 
between social and educational uses of technology. In Chapter 2, Milstein introduces the concepts of 
pancake people, throwaway culture, and “en media res practices” (p. 9) to describe the emerging trends 
in distance language courses. The author places instructors and educators at a crossroads in which they 
have to decide whether to embrace a new student-led value of the ephemeral or to try and re-direct these 
Elena Martín-Monje Review of Researching Language Learner Interactions Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
new practices into more structured, formal learning. Chapter 3, by Chik, is the only contribution that 
specifically attends to Mobile Assisted Language Learning, reporting on an interesting research project 
that makes use of Positioning Theory to warn against misguided pedagogy in choosing English language 
apps for young learners. In this chapter, an appendix with the full list of apps that were examined would 
have been helpful to the reader in order to gain a fuller picture. 
Part 2 focuses on Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs), which according to the book editors, “are set 
to have an unprecedented impact on educational practice and affect the ways students engage with 
language and culture over the next decade” (p. 1). This is confirmed not only by the three chapters that 
comprise this section, but by the repeated references to this new modality in most of the subsequent 
sections: Part 3 (Chapter 8), Part 4 (Chapter 11), Part 5 (Chapter 14) and Part 7 (Chapter 19). Chapter 4 
relies on Sociality Theory to analyze the interactions in one of the few truly connectivist language 
MOOCs devised to date. Lewis, Comas-Quinn and Hauck examine data drawn from their MOOC on open 
translation practices and conclude that the common features associated with human sociality (empathy, 
altruism, reciprocity, fairness, and collaboration) enhance the performance of participants in the course, 
both as volunteer translators and as successful learners. In Chapter 5, Rubio compares the course-delivery 
formats of three types of technology-enhanced courses: blended, online, and MOOC. Looking at 
interaction patterns and correlations between delivery format and student success, the author concludes 
that there is no specific format that stands out as overtly better. All three allow instructors and learners to 
potentially make the most of the language course in different ways. His most prominent contribution is 
perhaps the useful insight he provides for course designers and instructors. In Chapter 6, Dixon and Fuchs 
deal with similar issues summoning the need to reconsider digitally mediated courses—such as online 
courses and MOOCs—and face-to-face instruction in terms of content, objectives, assignments, and 
assessment. Whereas the proficiency goals may remain the same, it is mainly assessment issues which 
need to be reconsidered, given that they provide the most stimulating affordances, taking for instance the 
potential of massive communicative exchanges in MOOCs. 
Part 3 turns to the subfield of digital video. Chapter 7, by Marre Karasic and Vedantham, provides a 
taxonomy of current video creation tools used for language learning and suggests that video assignments 
enhance the understanding of other languages and cultures, while at the same time they enable students to 
be more aware of their own identity through this learning process. In Chapter 8, Thomas describes the 
European Union funded project CAMELOT, which explores the use of machinima in language learning 
contexts, putting the emphasis on task-based language teaching and project-based learning. In the last 
chapter of this section, Chapter 9, Akiyama reports the affordances of an eTandem learning project which 
made use of video-based Skype sessions. These exchanges resulted in increased first language awareness 
as well as a heightened responsiveness to sociolinguistic variations and discourse options in the foreign 
language. 
Part 4, Social Networking, investigates online social structures. In Chapter 10, Vandergriff focuses on 
learner agency in forum interactions, showing the different ways in which participants initiate and plan 
language learning, develop metalinguistic talk, self-regulate their learning, approach the learning content, 
and even take the role of the instructor in some cases. The authors of Chapter 11, Christensen and 
Christensen, discuss the efficacy of digitally mediated language learning in a social network site. Looking 
at the communicative exchanges between Japanese language learners and their native partners, they 
identify issues of scaffolding that may hinder or enhance these interactions. In Chapter 12, Blattner, 
Dalola, and Lomicka offer an inspiring study on the effective use of Twitter to make language learners 
aware of pragmatic issues (the use of abbreviations and borrowings from English in the learning of 
French as a foreign language) even at beginner levels such as the one described in their study. 
Part 5 is devoted to telecollaboration, another keyword that is repeated outside the two chapters included 
in this section, being explicitly mentioned in Part 2 (Chapter 6), Part 3 (Chapter 9) and Part 4 (Chapter 
10). Schenker describes, in Chapter 13, a fundamental issue in language interactions between native and 
Elena Martín-Monje Review of Researching Language Learner Interactions Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
non-native speakers, negotiation of meaning, and shows that it can successfully take place in virtual 
environments, even at beginning language levels. Chapter 14, by Messina Dahlberg and Bagga-Gupta 
provides a different angle on telecollaboration, offering an anthropologically framed study that explores 
how online language learners create communities through the use of a third space (the virtual classroom) 
and hybridity (different language varieties, identity positions, etc.) in an environment that is not defined 
by classroom walls. 
These communities are at the center of Part 6. Chapter 15, by Batardiere, explores how higher order 
thinking skills can be enhanced in asynchronous online discussions, identifying cognitive presence and 
engagement in online forums. White’s Chapter 16 explores the relationship between orientation of 
learners toward communities of practice and the digital tools that they choose to access those 
communities, claiming that it is the educator’s responsibility to expose students to activities and resources 
that will make accessing those social groups an easier task. Chapter 17 closes this section with a valuable 
theoretical contribution. Case delves into the creation of personal learning environments using an activity-
theory framework, and shows the vast opportunities that are already in place for language learners to 
generate and expand their personal learning environments through technology that ranges from 
vocabulary-training applications to machine translation or foreign language practice via social media. 
The closing section, Part 7, Learning Analytics (LA), is a novelty in the field of Computer-Assisted 
Language Learning (CALL). In Chapter 18, Youngs, Moss-Horwitz, and Snyder describe the application 
of Educational Data Mining to a French elementary course and make the case for the usefulness of such 
analysis in detecting possible pitfalls in course design. Although they admit that qualitative studies help 
clarify assumptions and cross-reference what the data appear to indicate, they demonstrate the main 
strength of LA these days: “Data analysis can offer a view into student learning and highlight where 
educators need to step in to guide students, where course designs need to be improved, and where 
researchers can focus future efforts to improve students’ online experiences and learning” (p. 366). In the 
concluding chapter, Chapter 19, Link and Li retrieve Chapelle’s (2001) renowned theoretical proposal for 
evaluating CALL materials and adapt it for the use of LA in language teaching and learning, putting 
forward a possible framework to be implemented in CALL research. This re-using and re-purposing 
corresponds well with the latest trends in education and also falls in line with open educational resources, 
MOOCs, and other open practices. However, it is yet to be seen whether the framework is adopted and 
generalized in a field that is still very incipient, since LA alone does not fully account for student 
behavior and learning needs. 
Case, one of the authors in the volume, states that the primary focus of CALICO monographs such as this 
“has been on technology in institutional contexts” (p. 325) and this is also true of Researching Language 
Learner Interactions Online: From Social Media to MOOCs. However, this book clearly goes beyond the 
boundaries of brick-and-mortar classrooms and emphasizes the increasing importance of informal 
learning settings, which is, in my opinion, one of its main strengths. The breadth and depth of topics is 
equally valuable, as well as how it accounts for empirical evidence while providing worthy theoretical 
underpinnings: Positioning Theory, Sociality Theory, Socio-cultural Theory, and Activity Theory. 
Readers of this volume will not be short of theoretical frameworks on which to base their future research. 
All topics are treated from theoretical and practical perspectives in a comprehensive manner, but it would 
have been desirable to see some cross-references between the individual chapters, or otherwise have a 
concluding chapter, which would draw the seven parts together and give an overview of what the book 
has achieved. In terms of format, another nice addition would be a title page for each of the sections, so 
that the different parts of the book are clearly separated. Nevertheless, paraphrasing a statement by one of 
the contributing authors (Milstein), here substance reigns over style and the amount of substance is 
praiseworthy: an overview of relevant conceptualizations in current foreign language research, coverage 
of a wide spectrum of languages and language levels, a focus on socio-cultural as well as linguistic 
aspects, reflections on the importance of metacognition and self-directed learning, and coverage of 
Elena Martín-Monje Review of Researching Language Learner Interactions Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
complex issues such as the development of LA for language research in a way that is accessible and not 
overly technical. The assets of this volume are manifold. It is well worth considering for language 
teachers and researchers, as well as for undergraduate and postgraduate students interested in current 
trends in CALL. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Elena Martín-Monje is a lecturer at Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia (UNED), Spain, and 
a member of the ATLAS Research Group. As a teacher, teacher trainer, and researcher, her current 
interests include mobile learning and MOOCs, having recently co-edited the first monographic volume on 
Language MOOCs. 
E-mail: emartin@flog.uned.es 
 
REFERENCES 
Chapelle, C. (2001). Computer applications in second language acquisition: Foundations for teaching, 
testing and research. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
