Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/review3.pdf 
February 2016, Volume 20, Number 1 
pp. 46–49 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 46 
REVIEW OF LANGUAGE LEARNING WITH DIGITAL VIDEO 
Language Learning with Digital Video 
Ben Goldstein 
Paul Driver 
2015 
ISBN: 978-1-107-63464-0 
US $38.20 
206 pp. 
Cambridge University Press 
Cambridge, United Kingdom 
 
 
Review by Zachary F. Miller and Jeffrey Maloney, Michigan State University 
The Internet, coupled with recent advancements in digital media applications and the affordability of 
video production equipment, has dramatically influenced foreign language education (Hafner, 2015; 
Kern, 2014). Central to whether these technological advancements are properly realized for second 
language (L2) learning is the educator. As technology becomes more ubiquitous, especially within the 
realm of higher education, instructors are finding the need to integrate new teaching approaches for 
engaging students (Tiernan, 2015). Not every foreign language teacher has had opportunities to develop a 
strong methodological groundwork for utilization of Internet-age tools and resources appropriate to their 
particular teaching contexts. One such technological niche ripe for further classroom implementation is 
that of digital content. The new volume by Ben Goldstein and Paul Driver fills this gap by providing 
effective guidelines for teaching languages with the help of digital videos. Language Learning with 
Digital Video details how to incorporate digital videos into lesson plans, as well as imparts practical 
advice on a wide variety of issues concerning digital video creation and resourcing for language 
pedagogy. Their work is primarily targeted for L2 educators who possess access to digital video 
production and consumption technologies. Even so, instructors with dated or limited video resources may 
still find the activities and strategies helpful for complementing foreign language coursework. 
In Language Learning with Digital Video, Goldstein and Driver expand upon the dynamic nature of 
digital media by infusing the pedagogical advantages of this popular medium into L2 curricula. While the 
intended audience of the book spans elementary to advanced English as a Second Language (ESL) 
teachers, all suggested activities involving digital video could be adapted to support a variety of foreign 
language courses. One of the biggest strengths of the book is the plethora of outside resources provided 
by the text. These include a reference list of useful links to online digital media, as well as two companion 
websites providing up-to-date video resources, additional activities, and tips for creating original video 
content. The book is comprised of nine chapters grouped into two main sections: Part 1, Video 
Exploitation (the first five chapters) and Part 2, Video Creation (the last four chapters). Both sections 
begin with brief introductions that highlight main concepts and relevant topics, such as utilizing digital 
media and producing videos. These overviews may be especially useful for teachers who lack the digital 
literacy to integrate digital media in a second language classroom environment. 
Part 1 focuses on how L2 instructors can develop language-related tasks from established digital media on 
the Internet. The authors convey a clear learning focus for each chapter and include helpful images and 
examples that reinforce activity structures. Even teachers with a cursory knowledge of online digital 
Zachary Miller and Jeffrey Maloney Review of Language Learning with Digital Video 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
media and video production should find the overall material straightforward. The section opens with 
helpful guidelines for properly integrating videos into the L2 classroom. Areas include how to (a) create 
activities with an emphasis on task sequencing (pre-viewing, while-viewing, and post-viewing), (b) 
exploit videos based on their different cinematic genres, (c) select the “right” video sequence to support 
course objectives, and (d) avoid copyright issues when using or editing online videos. A series of pre-
made activities in each chapter is subsequently presented based upon specific language themes. An 
estimated time of activity completion, recommended proficiency level, preparation tips, and activity 
variations are also included. Goldstein and Driver remind readers that several of their activities are 
conducive to a flipped classroom (see Spino & Trego, 2015), in which videos can be watched at home to 
maximize in-class discussion. 
Chapter 1 opens the first section and provides ten activities that emphasize creating original text for video 
sequences. The authors recommend that students be allowed to produce their own texts in digital videos 
to spur motivation and written language development. For example, in (1.4) Interior monologues, the 
authors suggest that students can develop their own thought bubbles to describe the characters’ intense 
emotional reactions or facial expressions in a film scene. Chapter 2 presents ten activities focused on 
narrative genre and taps into learners’ creativity by encouraging alternative versions of media clips. In 
(2.3) Mini Bollywood, for example, students are prompted to dub and subtitle videos from Bombay TV. 
Chapter 3 focuses on the power of persuasion in video advertisements and movie trailers. In (3.7) Trailers 
past and present, one of eight prescribed activities, learners compare differences in style, culture, and 
historical perspective between older and more recent movie trailers. The fourth chapter incorporates 
music with video, detailing eight tasks that facilitate dialogue often beyond the song lyrics. The final 
chapter of this section, Chapter 5, highlights seven topics-based activities found on the Cambridge 
University Press English Language Teaching YouTube channel. Video tasks are based around various 
teaching aims, as in predicting video content from topical clues with (5.2) Water or analyzing language 
used in a video script in (5.5) Memory. 
We believe that Part 1 provides instructors with multiple avenues for effectively utilizing pre-existing 
video clips in the L2 classroom. Many of the activities are short enough to supplement individual lesson 
objectives and are adaptable to any class size or proficiency level. Teachers looking for ways to develop 
L2 acquisition skills through original video content, however, may find the second half of the book to be 
a better fit. 
Part 2 centers on the technical aspects of digital media (both hardware and software) and includes many 
hands-on tasks that acquaint both teachers and students with digital video production. Goldstein and 
Driver provide a variety of tips in this arena, which include using green screens, selecting the proper 
editing software, and sharing material online. Creativity and student collaboration are stressed with the 
primary goal defined as “situating language through practical engagement” (p. 117). As the chapters 
progress in this section, the complexity and sophistication of digital video techniques also increase. While 
the authors still highlight language foci in their recommended activities, L2 development is blended with 
an emphasis on video production and editing skills. Goldstein and Driver portend that such project-based 
learning approaches to second language acquisition facilitate 21st-century skill development (e.g. guided 
reflection and critical thinking) in learners. 
Chapter 6 begins the second section and presents basic concepts of digital literacy for those seeking a 
broader familiarization in creating digital videos. Many activities stress video production methods to 
enhance shorter language-related assignments. Several of the chapter’s tasks, such as (6.1) Limelight and 
(6.4) Good game?, are simple enough to complete within one or two classroom sessions. In the final three 
chapters, the authors list activities that tap into progressively higher video creation skill sets. Chapter 7 
focuses on developing projects that allow learners to synthesize information and present coherent 
arguments in the target language. For instance, (7.1) Prove it! has students responding to controversial 
subjects that are subsequently recorded and uploaded onto a class website for further commenting. The 
eighth chapter places a stronger emphasis on audio-editing skills as learners are charged with embedding 
Zachary Miller and Jeffrey Maloney Review of Language Learning with Digital Video 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
their own narration into video clips. In one example, (8.2) News news, students add original audio tracks 
to news reports, blending L2 writing, speaking, and, listening skills into one activity. The final chapter of 
Part 2, Chapter 9, presents activities that often span multiple class periods or demand work outside of the 
classroom. Goldstein and Driver recommend that these latter activities, such as recording video diaries in 
(9.1) I, Object, or re-creating scenes of famous Hollywood films from (9.7) Half-baked remake, be 
reserved for longer-term assignments. 
Similar to Part 1, the variety of tasks in chapters 6 through 9 (often with multiple variations) are sure to 
keep L2 learning fresh and engaging for students. L2 instructors should also find the tiered approach to 
project intricacy, from medium-level (Chapter 7), to challenging (Chapter 8), to elaborate (Chapter 9), 
nicely layered to accommodate a variety of medium and long-term projects. 
In summary, Language Learning with Digital Video delivers positive contributions to the growing 
technological space of foreign language pedagogy. Goldstein and Driver seamlessly synthesize 
fundamental L2 core competencies (e.g. speaking, listening, and writing) with multi-modal, video 
exploitation and production activities. Digital videos are now widely accessible from the Internet and are 
often easy to manipulate for educational purposes. As such, this volume provides targeted advice and 
strategies for instructors who want to effectively incorporate the digital video medium into online or 
classroom L2 instruction. We hope that the authors continue to update the recommended web links 
sprinkled throughout the text in future editions, as well as maintain their YouTube channel geared for 
English language teaching. Overall, we highly recommend Goldstein and Driver’s new book for 
instructors interested in utilizing digital video, in its many forms, for language teaching. This reader-
friendly guide provides practical and approachable information, along with a clear direction, for working 
with one of the most popular and dynamic mediums in the digital arena today. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Zachary F. Miller is a Ph.D. student in the Second Language Studies Program at Michigan State 
University. His research interests include second language acquisition in a military context and the effects 
of emotion on L2 learning. 
E-mail: mill2602@msu.edu 
Jeffrey Maloney is a Ph.D. student in the Second Language Studies Program at Michigan State 
University. His research interests include extramural technology use and its effects on instructed language 
learning and technology use within the SLA classroom. 
E-mail: malone88@msu.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Hafner, C. A. (2015). Remix culture and English language teaching: The expression of learner voice in 
digital multimodal compositions. TESOL Quarterly, 49(3), 486–509. 
Kern, R. (2014). Technology as pharmakon: The promise and perils of the internet for foreign language 
education. Modern Language Journal, 98(1), 340–357. 
Spino, L. A., & Trego, D. (2015). Strategies for flipping communicative language classes. CLEAR News, 
19, 1–4. 
 
Zachary Miller and Jeffrey Maloney Review of Language Learning with Digital Video 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
Tiernan, P. (2015). An inquiry into the current and future uses of digital video in university teaching. 
Education and Information Technologies, 20(1), 75–90. 
