Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/parkwarschauer.pdf 
October 2016, Volume 20, Number 3 
pp. 180–199 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 180 
SYNTACTIC ENHANCEMENT AND SECOND LANGUAGE LITERACY: 
AN EXPERIMENTAL STUDY 
Youngmin Park, University of California, Irvine 
Mark Warschauer, University of California, Irvine  
This experimental study examined how the reading and writing development of sixth-
grade L2 students was affected by syntactic enhancement. Visual-syntactic text formatting 
(VSTF) technology, which visualizes syntactic structures, was used to convert a textbook 
to the one with syntactic enhancement. The sample (n = 282), which was drawn from a 
larger study conducted in Southern California, was a mixed population of English 
proficiency levels: low-proficiency L2 students (n = 113) and high-proficiency L2 
students (n =169). Over a school year, VSTF students read their English language arts 
(ELA) textbooks in VSTF on their laptops and control students read their regular block-
formatted textbooks either on their laptops or in print. Observations and interviews 
revealed that VSTF reading facilitated student engagement in ELA instruction by drawing 
students’ attention to syntactic structures. The results of the California Standard Tests 
(CST) before and after the intervention were examined to evaluate participants’ learning 
outcomes. Although high-proficiency students did not show a significant improvement on 
the post-test, low-proficiency made significant gains on two subtests of the CST: written 
conventions and writing strategies. These findings suggest that VSTF reading may 
facilitate improving syntactic awareness, which is essential for L2 students to develop 
their English reading and writing skills in academic contexts. 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English 
Keywords: Computer-assisted Language Learning, Grammar, Reading, Writing 
APA Citation: Park, Y., & Warschauer, M. (2016). Syntactic enhancement and second 
language literacy: An experimental study. Language Learning & Technology, 20(3), 180–
199. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/parkwarschauer.pdf 
Received: March 3, 2015; Accepted: May 12, 2016; Published: October 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Youngmin Park & Mark Warschauer 
INTRODUCTION 
Developing English proficiency for academic success presents great challenges for second language (L2) 
students, whether in English speaking countries or not. Among a wide range of registers, from oral to 
written and from informal to formal, in which L2 students need to engage, the formal features of written 
discourse—reading and writing—become more demanding, but crucial to learn, than other features as 
they advance through grade levels. For instance, L2 students in the U.S. tend to acquire basic 
conversational skills in the first few years, but it takes much longer for them to develop language 
proficiency for their academic success in schools (Scarcella, 2003). Thus, the academic performance of 
L2 students especially with low English proficiency is significantly behind their native peers, which leads 
to higher dropout rates for L2 students (Hill, Weston, & Hayes, 2014). Likewise, in non-English-speaking 
countries, improving written English proficiency is indispensable for academic or career success; 
however, even ten years of formal instruction may be insufficient for that (Sheu, 2003; Tanaka & 
Stapleton, 2007). Among various features of academic English, which is defined as “the language used in 
school to help students acquire and use knowledge” (Anstrom et al., 2010, p. iv), this study focuses on 
syntactic awareness, that is, the ability to reflect on sentence structures and relations between words. 
According to Scarcella’s well-cited work (2003), the syntactic component of academic English for 
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  181 
reading and writing necessitates the accurate and effective use of words and phrases and their 
sophisticated grammatical features including complex syntactic structures. Although such syntactic 
knowledge continues to develop through high school (Nagy, Diakidoy, & Anderson, 1993), it has been 
given insufficient attention as a part of academic English in elementary and secondary schools (Fillmore 
& Snow, 2000). To address challenges in developing academic language proficiency, research has 
suggested that instructional support is necessary for students to meet such language expectations, which 
differ from those of the everyday registers of English (e.g., Schleppegrell, 2012). Commonly used 
instructional approaches to raise L2 syntactic awareness include the following: discrete-item exercises to 
increase metalinguistic knowledge, simplifying texts to reduce syntactic complexity, and input 
enhancement to make language input salient. This study aims to explore the use of reformatted text as 
input enhancement. An English language arts (ELA) textbook is reformatted in a way to emphasize 
syntactic structures and to facilitate developing academic English proficiency among L2 students while 
they read real-world texts. As such, we employ visual-syntactic text formatting (VSTF) technology to 
visualize syntactic structures without abridging content to offer L2 students the chance to acquire a solid 
foundation in syntax from reading real-world texts. We hypothesize that our reformatted textbook will 
serve as effective input enhancement for L2 students in the English classroom so that they can improve 
syntactic awareness. The increased syntactic awareness can in turn affect their reading and writing 
proficiency. 
SYNTACTIC AWARENESS IN L2 WRITTEN DISCOURSE 
The extraction of syntactic information of words or word groups is essential for the construction of 
meaning from text (Grabe, 2009). The Structure Building Model proposed by Gernsbacher (1997), among 
widely recognized reading comprehension models, gives us insights into how syntactic awareness and 
processing support comprehension. Cognitive processes in this model involve laying a foundation, 
mapping information onto the foundation, and shifting to build new substructures. The first sentence that 
is read lays a foundation for comprehension. Readers then either map incoming information from a new 
clause or sentence, which relates to previously processed information, onto the existing foundation or 
shift to create a new substructure. There are two mechanisms that control these processes: suppression 
and enhancement. Readers can either suppress information that is irrelevant for structure building or 
enhance the activation of information that coheres with the previous information for further structure 
building. In these structure-building processes and mechanisms readers need to skillfully use linguistic 
cues, such as lexical and syntactic information, which signal coherence relations in text and guide the 
mapping process. What follows discusses how syntactic awareness affects L2 reading and writing 
development. 
Syntactic Awareness in L2 Reading Development 
A clue to understanding the role of syntactic awareness in reading may lie in its association with reading 
fluency and vocabulary development. Successful reading necessitates accurate and rapid reading 
(Kame’enui & Simmons, 2001). Automatic syntactic processing (Grabe, 2009) and recognition of 
phrasing (Kuhn & Stahl, 2003) are among skill components needed for reading fluency. Fast and accurate 
syntactic processing can indicate that cognitive resources are little used in making connections among 
sentences but rather available for other comprehension-related activities, such as making inferences or 
retrieving background knowledge (Jenkins, Fuchs, van den Broek, Espin, & Deno, 2003). With regard to 
vocabulary development, syntactic awareness not only closely relates to the form-meaning mapping, but 
also assists identifying grammatical functions of a word in text (Nagy & Scott, 2000). For example, an 
ability to analyze the structure of a sentence assists building multiple meanings (e.g., animal or to carry) 
that connect to a single form (e.g., bear). Identifying the grammatical function of a word largely depends 
on morphological awareness (i.e., an ability to recognize morphological structure and employ word 
formation rules). Derivational suffixes, such as -s in works, which give crucial help in grasping meanings 
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  182 
of new words, reflect on a syntactic role of the suffixed word in a sentence. 
Syntactic Awareness in L2 Writing Development 
Improved syntactic awareness through L2 reading can be beneficial for students to enhance their writing 
skills in the L2. Syntactic complexity is one of the most predictive indices of writing quality (McNamara, 
Crossley, & McCarthy, 2009); however, writing in the L2 with high syntactic complexity seems 
demanding. L2 writers tend to produce simpler text structures, such as shorter T-units, fewer clauses, less 
passivization, more run-on sentences, and fewer compound sentences, as compared to L1 writers (Hinkel, 
2002; Montano-Harmon, 1991; Silva, 1993). Competent writing skills that involve using syntactic 
awareness are reciprocally related to reading skills, as literacy development models suggest (e.g., 
Fitzgerald & Shanahan, 2000). In other words, proficient writers tend to have more linguistic knowledge, 
including complex syntactic knowledge, derived from reading exposure than do less-proficient writers 
(McNamara et al., 2009). We expect that, if L2 students are able to enhance L2 syntactic awareness while 
learning to read, this knowledge can also serve as a valuable linguistic resource along the way as they 
develop L2 writing skills. 
Individual Differences in L2 and Syntactic Awareness 
From Gernsbacher’s (1997) model in addition to the relationship between syntactic knowledge and 
meaning construction, we can learn how individual differences in comprehension skills are generated. 
According to her model, those who have difficulty utilizing linguistic cues may have inefficient 
suppression and enhancement mechanisms. As a result, less skilled readers tend to shift and create too 
many substructures that are hard to assemble, leading to their slow processing and inaccurate 
comprehension. In the same vein as Gernsbacher’s (1997) model, Givón (1995) focuses on syntactic cues 
as basic and continuous resources for the construction of structures and meaning. L2 research has also 
discussed how an ability to exploit syntactic signals relates to individual differences among L2 students. 
Low-proficiency L2 readers are inefficient in using syntactic information (Skehan, 2003) and tend to 
compensate for their weak syntactic processing skills by relying on semantic and other sources 
(Bernhardt, 1986; Lee & VanPatten, 1995). High-proficiency L2 readers, in contrast, capitalize on 
syntactic information of words and efficiently integrate words into syntactic structures in a native-like 
manner (Frenck-Mestre & Pynte, 1997). 
It seems reasonable to suggest that L2 students should develop syntactic processing skills to become 
proficient. However, it is challenging for L2 students to develop strong knowledge of the syntax to the 
extent that they can perform syntactic parsing nearly as effortlessly as L1 readers do. Challenges that L2 
readers face may emerge from at least two sources: limited previous linguistic knowledge in L2 and 
restricted exposure to L2 print. L1 children already have oral knowledge of thousands of words 
(Cunningham, 2005) and of basic syntactic structures (Grabe, 2009) before they learn to read. Constantly 
building on such knowledge, children are usually exposed to extensive L1 print and can thereby further 
develop automaticity in L1 comprehension processes including word recognition and syntactic parsing 
(Grabe, 2009). L2 students, who are short of L2 linguistic knowledge and insufficiently exposed to L2 
print, have demanding tasks to simultaneously develop linguistic knowledge and comprehension skills. In 
fact, syntactic awareness appears more difficult than other linguistic skills for L2 students to develop 
while they are learning to read. From synthesizing L2 reading research conducted over several decades, 
Bernhardt (2000) found that linguistic errors of L2 students decreased over time in many cases, such as 
sound-letter association and word recognition; however, this was not the case for syntactic errors. Rather, 
L2 students produced increasingly high syntactic error rates until they became highly proficient. We 
therefore speculate that external manipulation marking syntactic structure in the form of input 
enhancement can facilitate L2 learners to acquire linguistic knowledge while learning to read. 
 
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  183 
INPUT ENHANCEMENT AND L2 SYNTACTIC AWARENESS 
Manipulating texts in a manner to make syntactic chunks salient can be a way to positively affect the 
learning process of L2 students and thereby increase their syntactic awareness. This attempt is what Smith 
(1991) called input enhancement, a technique to draw L2 students’ attention to formal language properties 
by deliberately making them salient. According to Smith, teachers can make input salient. However, such 
input enhancement is not always salient to students' internal learning mechanism. In other words, it will 
be desirable, but not always possible, for students to act on enhanced input and increase their linguistic 
knowledge. Smith argues that the growth in linguistic knowledge can be assessed best by students’ output 
(e.g., to produce a correct form) and at least by an alternatives identification test (e.g., to identify a correct 
alternative to the error). An error detection test (e.g., to notice something sounds wrong) may provide 
insufficient evidence on student’ growth. The following discusses previous research on input 
enhancement in L2 development and potentials of syntactic formatting as input enhancement. 
Typographical Enhancement 
A common method of enhancing input is manipulating typographical conventions. Lee and Huang (2008) 
conducted a meta-analysis of relevant research based on 16 studies published over 26 years, offering 
insight into aspects and effects of input enhancement in written texts. Each experimental study included in 
this analysis focused on one (n = 8) or two (n = 8) target forms. Examples of target grammatical forms 
include determiners, relative clauses, and passive voice. Each study employed a single type of 
typographical conventions to highlight a target form for the experimental condition: boldfaced (n = 14), 
underlined (n = 11) or italicized (n = 1). Additionally, texts in 15 out of 16 studies included input 
flooding, a technique to saturate readers with artificially increased occurrences of the target form. It 
should be noted that this technique was applied to both experimental and control conditions. 
With regard to the effects on learning outcome, all these studies measured the extent of students’ 
grammar learning and nine of them further assessed reading comprehension. To examine the overall 
effect across the studies, Lee and Huang (2008) calculated aggregating effect size d in their meta-analysis. 
They found mixed results: visual input enhancement had small sized overall effects on the learning of 
target forms (d = .22) and negative effects on comprehension (d = -.26). As the authors pointed out, 
however, it is necessary, when interpreting the effect size, to take into consideration two aspects: the 
experimental conditions and the amount of exposure to the target form. Input flooding, which was 
available in both experimental and control conditions, might positively influence control students’ 
incidental learning of the target form by strengthening the probability of noticing. Experimental students 
might be given an insufficient amount of exposure because the studies had a limited number of treatment 
sessions over a short period of time. The treatment duration ranged from one day to four weeks. Six 
studies administered one treatment session, five studies had two to three and the remaining four studies 
included more than six. In particular, studies with one treatment session lasted less than 30 minutes, 
reporting no significant treatment effects on participants’ learning. 
Lee (2007) conducted another typographical enhancement study to examine the effect of input 
enhancement on grammar learning (passive verb forms) and comprehension skills. This quasi-
experimental study with Korean 11th graders (N = 259) had two by two conditions: input enhancement 
(boldfaced verb forms vs. unenhanced verb forms) and topic familiarity (Korean culture vs. Egyptian 
culture). Participating students had three 50-minute sessions and took pre- and post-tests on grammar (a 
form correction task) and comprehension (a free recall task). Lee found that input enhancement assisted 
the learning of the passive form but not comprehension. On the contrary, topic familiarity aided 
comprehension but did not help students learn the passive form. 
In sum, typographical enhancement at least supports the learning of a target grammatical form, though it 
either did not affect or else negatively affected comprehension skills (Lee, 2007; Lee & Huang, 2008). 
The drawbacks of this method are the limited number of target forms (usually one or two) and a short 
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  184 
period of exposure to enhanced input. 
Syntactic Enhancement through Technology 
A way to resolve the abovementioned drawback of input enhancement is the use of technology, making it 
possible to increase the quantity and quality of targeted input (Gascoigne, 2006). There has been an 
attempt to draw readers’ attention not to a single formal feature but to overall syntactic structure, which 
we refer to syntactic enhancement in this paper. Little research has been performed on syntactic 
enhancement in both L1 and L2 contexts. Studies by Jandreau and Bever (1992) and LeVasseur, 
Macaruso, and Shankweiler (2008) are among only few relevant L1 studies that investigated the effect of 
syntactic enhancement on reading skills. The former study used phrase-grouping algorithm to determine 
the size of space between phrases. In this study, high (n = 69) and average (n = 65) language proficiency 
college students read either phrase-sensitively formatted texts (extra spacing added to the end of each 
phrase and sentence) or evenly spaced texts. It was found that phrase-sensitive formatting was effective 
on comprehension, but only for average proficiency students. The study by LeVasseur, Macaruso, and 
Shankweiler (2008), which employed computer-based reading training, examined the relationship 
between text reformatting and young L1 students’ reading skills. In this study, English L1 students (ages 
7 to 9 years) were given texts in two formats: phrase-preserving (line breaks corresponding to syntactic 
boundaries) versus phrase-disrupting conditions (line breaks interrupting syntactic units). LeVasseur and 
her colleagues found that the phrase-preserving format supported reading fluency but not comprehension. 
A set of studies has explored a recently developed syntactic enhancement through VSTF technology in 
both L1 and L2 contexts, though few studies were published in refereed journals. This phrase-based 
formatting depicts how phrases and clauses are hierarchically related, rather than simply grouping words 
into a series of phrases, which distinguishes VSTF from former syntactic enhancement methods. Figure 1 
shows an example of a linear text (at the top) and how some of its clauses are nested within larger ones 
(in the middle). In order to present such complex structures in VSTF (on the bottom), computer 
calculations are performed for each sentence in the text (Walker, Schloss, Fletcher, Vogel, & Walker, 
2005). Phrases that are nested within the original line are separated out and indented with an attempt to 
bring the meaning and underlying structures of a given sentence to a more prominent position. 
 
Figure 1. Visual-syntactic text formatting 
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  185 
Two studies on VSTF included L2 students as participants (Vogel, 2011; Walker & Vogel, 2005). Walker 
and Vogel (2005) had an intervention study to examine how VSTF affected high school students’ reading 
retention. 10th grade students read their history texts in VSTF for a school year and took a number of 
tests (ten unit tests and a final test). VSTF students (n = 40) showed greater improvement on all of the 
tests as compared to their control peers (n = 44), who read block-formatted texts. Overall, the intervention 
effect became larger with a longer intervention: the effect size was larger in tests administered in the 
second half of the year (.55) than in those in the first half (.38). This study did not focus on, but included, 
L2 students. The authors reported that the L2 students (n = 12) benefited from the use of VSTF, though it 
took more reading sessions for them to outperform their control peers (n = 17) on unit tests. By the end of 
the year, L2 students in the experimental group had closed one-half to almost the full gap between 
themselves and L1 students in the control group. 
Vogel (2011), a high school teacher in Colorado, reported his successful use of VSTF in a standardized 
test preparation program, in which two-thirds of students were L2 students. These students read sample 
test passages in VSTF in 20-minute sessions on a daily basis for four weeks. All of the students who 
started with an unsatisfactory or partially proficient level were able to increase their reading proficiency. 
In particular, 81% of the participants met the state standard for acceptable growth and 62% met the school 
goal of reading at a proficient level by the end of the school year. However, the results from these two 
successful VSTF intervention studies should be carefully interpreted given that they were not refereed 
publications. A systematic evaluation of intervention with VSTF needs to be performed to confirm its 
effects on L2 development. 
THE CURRENT STUDY 
In responding to the challenges of increasing L2 syntactic awareness in academic English development, 
this study examined syntactic enhancement, VSTF, as a way to scaffold L2 syntactic awareness in written 
discourse. Addressing limitations of typographical enhancement studies, our intervention not only 
covered the whole syntactic structure in a given text, rather than a single feature, but also lasted a school 
year. Based on previous findings and implications concerning learning outcomes (Lee, 2007; Lee & 
Huang, 2008; LeVasseur et al., 2008) and participants’ proficiency levels (Jandreau & Bever, 1992; 
Vogel, 2011), we developed hypotheses. First, syntactic enhancement would at least promote 
achievement gains in measures of syntactic knowledge. This expected result would, in turn, foster the 
development of reading and writing. Second, low-proficiency students would receive more benefit from 
syntactic enhancement than would high-proficiency students. Specific research questions are as follows: 
1. Does VSTF as syntactic enhancement through text-formatting technology draw L2 students’ 
attention to syntactic structure in their ELA textbook? 
2. Does syntactic enhancement affect the development of L2 reading and writing? 
(1) Which ELA measures are most influenced by syntactic enhancement of VSTF? 
(2) How does this result relate to the development of L2 reading and writing? 
3. How does the intervention effect, if any, vary depending on participants’ proficiency levels?  
Study Context 
This study was conducted in two suburban school districts in Southern California. The ELA curriculum 
for 6th grade students (aged 10 to 11 years old) in the participating schools was in line with district and 
state-adopted reading–language arts programs, and was tied to the State Content Standards for ELA 
(California State Board of Education, 1998). Students received instruction for approximately 2 hours 
daily, which emphasized systematic, explicit skills instruction in reading and writing, and were asked to 
read and comprehend a wide variety of grade-level-appropriate literature. All of L2 students in this 
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  186 
subsample received regular instruction with L1 peers in mainstream classrooms, except for 13 students. 
These 13 students received an intensive reading intervention at their school, which was provided to both 
L1 and L2 students who struggled with English. 
Participants 
Teachers 
We invited teacher participants by making primary contact with school districts where each student had a 
laptop for use in school. Teachers read the study information sheet and 22 teachers agreed to participate in 
this study. This study was deemed IRB exempt protocol given that it was conducted within the already 
established 6th grade language arts curriculum. Therefore, no written consent form was obtained from 
teachers as well as students. The participating teachers had an average of 16 years of teaching experience 
(ranging from 7 to 34 years) and 4 years of using laptops for instruction (ranging from 1 to 7 years). One 
teacher taught ELA to three different classes in three different classrooms, while the rest of the teachers 
taught all subjects (including ELA) to their one respective class. Participating classrooms were randomly 
allocated by draw to one of two groups (VSTF vs. control). Two control teachers dropped out of the study 
following randomization, leaving 14 classrooms in the VSTF group and 10 in the control group. 
Students 
This study constitutes a secondary analysis of a subsample drawn from a larger study. For the primary 
study, a total of 652 students, aged from 10 to 11 years, from 24 6th grade classrooms of 10 schools 
participated in this study during the 2011–2012 academic year. In the current study with the focus on L2 
students, those whose home languages were other than English (n = 282) were pooled from the primary 
study. These students fell into one of three groups depending on their proficiency: English Learners (EL, 
n = 113), Initially Fluent English Proficient (IFEP, n = 59), and Reclassified Fluent English Proficient 
(RFEP, n = 110) Learners. ELs are students who require support to function in school due to their 
relatively low English proficiency. IFEPs are those who had gained full English proficiency by the time 
they entered school. RFEPs are those who once had low English proficiency but have attained English 
proficiency and no longer need language support. Because IFEPs and RFEPs were comparable to each 
other and to L1 peers in their English proficiency level, they were combined to make a high-proficiency 
group in a comparison to the low-proficiency group of ELs. As a result of the classroom assignment, 160 
L2 students received VSTF intervention as compared to 122 L2 control students. 
VSTF Intervention 
Apparatus 
All students in the intervention condition read the VSTF version of their ELA textbooks on their laptop, 
of which a sample page is shown in Figure 2. A table of contents, which appears in the left panel, has 
links that students click on to take them directly to each chapter or section, which is shown in the right 
panel. Extra space between sentences marks the beginning of new sentences. Alternate colors of 
background are used to distinguish between paragraphs. By using Options from the menu, users can 
change themes that include different background and font colors, along with font types and sizes, to 
customize their textbook. Bookmarking is also available for easier future access. There are two features 
that are unavailable in the VSTF version: page numbers and images. 
Instruction 
For an academic school year (approximately 25 weeks), students received the typical standards-based 
instruction, during which experimental students used their VSTF-formatted textbook and control students 
read their textbook in regular block format, either on their laptops or in print. To obtain data on the 
fidelity of implementation, all participating teachers were asked to report the amount of time that their 
students spent on reading per day for three designated weeks during the experiment. The VSTF reading 
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  187 
time in class ranged between 30 to 120 minutes per the teacher’s instruction (M = 74.56, SD = 33.23), 
whereas the textbook reading time of control students ranged between 65 and 130 minutes a week (M = 
88.62, SD = 20.31). A t-test analysis indicated that the VSTF reading time of the VSTF group was 
significantly shorter than the textbook reading time of the control group (p < .01). However, the total 
reading time of VSTF students might match to that of control students, because VSTF students were 
sometimes allowed to use their paper version textbook to complete reading or writing tasks in class. 
 
Figure 2. A screenshot of the VSTF version of the ELA textbook 
Design 
This mixed-method study included a combination of standardized tests before and after the intervention, 
observations, and a semi-structured interview after the intervention. In order to learn whether syntactic 
enhancement helped L2 students pay attention to syntactic structure while reading, we made observations 
and conducted an interview with VSTF teachers. The ELA portion of the California Standards Test (CST) 
was used as pre- and post-tests. Students were assessed on CST at the end of the previous school year and 
at the end of the school year when the intervention was near completion. A comparison of achievement 
between the VSTF and control groups helped us detect any achievement gains after the intervention. 
Measures 
Observation 
Two researchers observed all of the VSTF classes, intending to make three rounds in each class (for 40–
50 mins each time) during the year. However, they were not able to complete three rounds in some of the 
classes, which will be discussed in the Results section. Filling out an observation form developed by the 
research team (See Appendix), the researchers attempted to capture how many students actually used 
their VSTF textbook, how comfortably they used it, what types of instructional strategies teachers used, 
and how VSTF facilitated teachers’ instruction. Observations were not video recorded. 
Interview 
A 90-minute semi-structured group interview was conducted with VSTF teachers at the end of the school 
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  188 
year. This interview was audio-recorded and then transcribed. Interview questions included what 
instructional approaches were facilitated by VSTF, how students were engaged in reading the VSTF 
version of the textbook, and whether the VSTF textbook supported low-proficiency students. Teachers 
were additionally asked to share vignettes to illustrate such moments. 
ELA Performance in the CSTs 
At the end of each school year, California students in 2nd through 11th grade take the CSTs, which 
measure students’ performance against content standards set by the State. The CSTs include ELA and 
mathematics throughout all grade levels and either or both of science and history–social science in upper 
grades (5th and above). Only at 4th and 7th grades does the ELA test include a writing component. Scaled 
scores and five performance levels are reported by the State. 
In order to examine the intervention effect in this study, we used the results of ELA portion from the CST 
2010–2011 and 2011–2012 as pre- and post-tests, respectively. The ELA test consisted of 75 multiple-
choice questions with all test passages formatted in a conventional block pattern on paper. This test had 
reading and writing portions, which are further divided into three and two subtests, respectively, which 
are explained in the following. 
The three reading portion are word analysis, reading comprehension, and literary response and analysis. 
In the word analysis subtest (13–14 items), students were asked to use their knowledge of word origins 
and word relations, as well as word, sentence, and paragraph clues to determine meaning. Reading grade-
level appropriate narrative and expository texts for the reading comprehension subtest (16–17 items), 
students described, connected, and criticized the essential ideas, arguments, and perspectives of the text 
by using their knowledge of text structure, organization, purpose, and related topics. In the literary 
response and analysis subtest (12 items), students read and responded to historically or culturally 
significant works of literature. For example, they were asked to define how tone, meaning or themes were 
conveyed in a given literary text, and to explain the effects of common literary devices, such as 
symbolism, imagery, or metaphor. 
The writing portion of the ELA test1 consists of written conventions and writing strategies. These tests did 
not assess how well the students write; however, they asked students to identify correct forms of writing. 
Students’ performance in these tests can be a good indicator of how well they will write essays in the 
future, because standards for these two tests are also used as the scoring rubric for the writing test of 
CSTs (California Department of Education, 2006). A sound grasp of written conventions and effective 
use of writing strategies are significant indicators of successful writing development. The questions in the 
written conventions subtest (16–17 items) assessed students’ command of Standard English conventions 
appropriate to the grade level, such as sentence structure, grammar, punctuation, capitalization, and 
spelling. The writing strategies subtest (16–17 items) had questions that assessed students’ ability to 
revise a flawed text into a clear, coherent, and focused essay. The answers for this subtest exhibited 
students’ awareness of appropriate forms of writing, precise use of vocabulary to develop a topic, 
knowledge of effective organizational patterns, including comparison and contrast or arrangement by a 
specific order, and ability to revise writing for improvement of organization. 
Data Analysis 
Research Question 1 
Evidence from observations and interviews helped us to answer Research Question 1. Students’ comfort 
and engagement levels were averaged for each round of observation. For students’ comfort level, 
observation notes were coded from 1 (very uncomfortable in dealing with the VSTF software) to 5 (very 
comfortable in navigating the VSTF-converted textbook and adjusting a reading mode to meet personal 
needs). The students’ engagement scale assessed students’ attention and participation in a reading 
activity, ranging from 1 (little engaged) to 5 (highly engaged). 
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  189 
Strategies and comments both from teachers and students were logged during every observation. This 
data was coded using open coding (Strauss & Corbin, 1990). Examples of codes include sources of 
reading (paper-based vs. VSTF), methods of reading (e.g., individual vs. paired vs. group, silent vs. 
aloud), signs of improvement in student performance, and the prevalence of improvement among students 
with different proficiency levels. These codes were counted. The data collected during the group 
interview were used to triangulate findings from the analysis of observations. For interrater reliability, 
simple percentage agreement—the ratio of all coding agreements over the total number of coding 
decisions—was used. Two researchers coded part of observation notes and the interview transcript 
together until the coding process yielded 90 % of interrater reliability. After discussing how to deal with 
data about which disagreement arose, the researchers coded the rest of the data and counted codes. 
Research Question 2 
An analysis of variances (ANOVA) procedure was conducted to compare learning outcomes between 
groups. To begin, a multivariate ANOVA, instead of separate ANOVAs, was run to test if the random 
assignment procedure achieved the desired effect of initial group equivalence. Based on reasonable 
correlations among five subtests that assessed different literacy skills (Pearson’s correlations ranging 
from .69 to .81), our analysis model took as dependent variables the pre-test of the five ELA CSTs 
subtests, as advised by Brace, Kemp, and Snelgar (2006). The main advantage of multivariate analysis, as 
opposed to separate ANOVAs on each dependent variable, is to control for any unmeasured confounding 
that variables might carry. 
To compare the achievement of the VSTF group with the control group, a one-way multivariate ANOVA 
with covariates was performed on post-tests of the five ELA subtests. Participant’s demographic 
information and the pre-test scores of ELA subtests were used as covariates to adjust for possible 
confounding and to reduce error variance in the intervention outcome. Five demographic variables 
include gender, ethnicity, disability, English proficiency, and social economic status. 
Research Question 3 
A two-way multivariate ANOVA on the five ELA subtests was conducted to examine whether the 
association between the treatment and students’ proficiency levels could be found. The English 
proficiency variable (low vs. high) was included as an independent variable in addition to groups (VSTF 
vs. control). An interaction between these two independent variables was also tested. All covariates 
except for English proficiency included in the model for RQ 2 were retained in this analysis model. 
RESULTS 
Research Question 1 
Two researchers attempted to visit each of 14 experimental classrooms for three times. They made three 
rounds of observation in nine classrooms but only two rounds in the other five due to scheduling 
conflicts. As a result, we had 37 observations in total. It should be noted that this section does not 
exclusively refer to L2 students, because observations took place in classrooms in which L2 students 
received instruction together with L1 students. Attempting to focus on L2 students, we included verbatim 
quotes from observations and interviews (in quotation marks) that particularly referred to L2 students. 
Throughout observations, VSTF students used the reformatted textbook with little trouble and were 
actively engaged in ELA class. The average scores of students’ comfort (out of 5) slightly increased from 
the first (4.25) to the second (4.83) and to the third observation (4.91); the students’ engagement level 
remained steady, ranging from 4.4 to 4.6. 
Data from observations helped us identify instructional strategies, areas of language learning to be 
facilitated, characteristics of students who benefited from the intervention, and any disadvantages of 
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  190 
VSTF that interfered with learning. Occurrences of codes were counted out of 37 times when VSTF was 
actually used. Table 1 summarizes this result. 
Table 1. The Result of VSTF Classroom Observations 
    Counts 
Percent of  
Occurrence (%) 
Source of reading VSTF only 22 59.5 
  
VSTF primarily, paper 
secondarily 13 35.1 
  VSTF and paper equally 2 5.4 
Methods of reading Individual 10 27.0 
 Paired 30 81.1 
 Whole class 14 37.8 
Modes of reading Silent 29 78.4 
  Aloud 8 21.6 
  With audiobook 5 13.5 
Notice of improvement in student performance  11 29.7 
Positive changes due to VSTF Fluency  7 18.9 
  Confidence 6 16.2 
  Comprehension 2 5.4 
  Amount of reading time . . 
  Syntactic awareness 2 5.4 
  Concentration 4 10.8 
  Writing 1 2.7 
  Retention 2 5.4 
Types of students supported by VSTF Struggling readers 7 18.9 
 Advanced readers   
 Those with disability 2 5.4 
 Readers in general 6 16.2 
Notice of decrease in student performance 8 21.6 
Negative changes due to VSTF Fluency  4 10.8 
 Confidence . . 
 Comprehension . . 
 Amount of reading time 1 2.7 
 Syntactic awareness   
 Concentration 6 16.2 
 Writing . . 
  Retention . . 
A general description of the VSTF classroom, which was revealed from observations, is as follows. The 
VSTF textbook was a primary means of instruction, though the paper version was sometimes used either 
before or after reading VSTF textbook to have students look through pictures unavailable in VSTF. There 
were also a few students in some classes who chose to read their paper-based book if they felt paper 
version more efficient for their reading, while their classmates read the VSTF version. Attempting to 
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  191 
engage all students in ELA activities, whole class reading was used at the beginning of class, in which a 
teacher or a student read aloud while the whole class followed along using their own VSTF textbook. 
Follow-up activities, such as completing a worksheet or creating a brochure, were mostly accompanied by 
paired or individual reading, during which a teacher monitored students reading and helped them if asked. 
Several teachers agreed that VSTF textbook was appropriate for paired reading because low-proficiency 
students in particular were lost less often and read faster than they would in the paper version. Teachers 
attributed this effectiveness to sentence structure of VSTF and alternate paragraph colors in VSTF. These 
features made paired reading using the VSTF version “funner and easier” compared to the paper version, 
as a number of students spoke up. 
Teachers acknowledged positive changes in literacy skills. Almost half of the teachers stated in 
observation that they noticed students’ reading fluency was increased for the same reason that VSTF 
facilitated paired reading. During interview, teachers specified that this was usually the case with low-
proficiency students. A teacher added that some L2 students in her class started to “read in phrases” as 
opposed to reading phonetically. This feature, making it less likely for low-proficiency readers to get 
“mixed up,” led to keep their attention during reading, as some teachers acknowledged. It is noteworthy 
that a couple of teachers mentioned their students started to recognize sentence structures. This positive 
change in syntactic awareness was not limited to reading activities. One day a low-proficiency L2 student 
used VSTF format in her writing, saying that she tried to parse out her sentences. 
A decrease in students’ performance was also noticed, which happened in the first two rounds of 
observation. Two teachers said that their students were reluctant to use the VSTF version in general. One 
of them worried that VSTF format slowed down his advanced students’ reading. A high-proficiency girl, 
though, suggested a positive view in the second round of observation: the VSTF version gave her a better 
grasp of content than the paper version. She added that while reading the former she did not miss out 
information, which commonly happened when she read (usually skimmed) the latter. Though she was a 
L1 student, her comment provided an insight into potential effects of syntactic enhancement. Another 
issue germane to a negative intervention effect was the lack of images and page numbers in VSTF rather 
than its format. The aforementioned teacher pointed out visual aids as an essential part for low-
proficiency readers to better understand important scenes and characters. The lack of page numbers as 
well as images in VSTF made all passages look the same to some students, hindering effective searching 
of words or parts in passages to answer comprehension questions. Some other students, however, 
commented that they would still prefer to read in VSTF, despite missing out on pictures and certain 
details. They said the picture-free textbook not only kept them from being distracted by pictures, but also 
enabled them to imagine what was happening in a story. 
Research Question 2  
We examined the effect of VSTF reading on 6th grade L2 students’ ELA achievement. Table 2 shows 
descriptive statistics of participants’ achievement on the pre- and post-tests (scaled scores) by group. A 
one-way multivariate ANOVA on the pre-tests revealed that there was no significant effect for groups (λ 
= .986, F(4, 281) = 0.979, p > .05), suggesting that the two groups were comparable at pre-tests. 
  
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  192 
Table 2. Descriptive Statistics of Dependent Variables by Condition (Scaled Scores) 
  
Total Low proficiency High Proficiency 
  
Control VSTF Control VSTF Control VSTF 
  
(n = 122) 
M 
SD 
(n = 160) 
M 
SD 
(n = 41) 
M 
SD 
(n = 72) 
M 
SD 
(n = 81) 
M 
SD 
(n = 88) 
M 
SD 
Pre-test Word Analysis 69.73 67.93 49.44 56.46 80.00 77.32 
  
21.86 21.44 21.69 20.07 13.03 17.71 
 
Reading Comprehension 68.77 67.33 45.98 54.69 80.31 77.67 
  
24.23 23.29 24.41 22.04 13.76 18.84 
 
Literary Response 66.69 68.39 44.56 54.86 77.89 79.45 
  
24.95 23.39 23.09 20.49 17.23 19.53 
 
Written Conventions 71.77 69.91 54.02 60.08 80.75 77.95 
  
20.68 21.09 21.38 19.59 13.24 18.82 
 
Writing Strategies 67.43 65.86 46.93 55.08 77.80 74.68 
  
24.00 21.59 22.83 18.67 16.92 19.81 
Post-test Word Analysis 68.10 69.00 45.00 54.97 79.79 80.48 
  
24.84 20.69 24.77 18.56 14.65 14.33 
 
Reading Comprehension 60.92 60.20 39.29 47.46 71.86 70.63 
  
23.50 20.68 19.71 18.67 16.73 15.89 
 
Literary Response 67.00 64.68 48.15 53.32 76.54 73.98 
  
23.04 20.02 24.58 18.65 15.04 15.94 
 
Written Conventions 72.60 73.87 51.46 63.50 83.30 82.35 
  
23.13 17.76 24.35 17.93 12.94 12.33 
 
Writing Strategies 64.06 66.79 38.44 53.79 77.02 77.43 
  
25.18 21.01 19.34 19.29 16.29 15.77 
A one-way multivariate ANOVA analysis compared the VSTF and control groups’ ELA achievement 
after intervention. The result showed that there was no group difference on the post-tests. However, a 
follow-up analysis with covariate, adding pre-test scores and demographic variables as covariates, 
revealed a significant group difference on the post-test (λ = .949, F(5, 263) = 2.819, p < .05, η2p = .051). 
The analyses of the univariate outcomes for each subtest showed a beneficial effect of the intervention in 
the writing portion: written conventions (F(1, 267) = 5.518, p < .05, η2p = .020) and writing strategies 
(F(1, 267) = 9.870, p < .05, η2p = .036). Marginal significance was also found in one of three subtests in 
the reading portion: word analysis (F(1, 267) = 3.523, p = .06, η2p = .013). Figure 3 shows estimated 
marginal means of the five subtests after controlling for pre-tests and the demographic covariates. 
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  193 
 
Figure 3. Estimated marginal means of each post-test. WA = Word Analysis; RC = Reading 
Comprehension; LR = Literary Response; WC = Written Conventions; WS = Writing Strategies. 
† indicates p < .1, * indicates p < .05 ** indicates p < .001 
Research Question 3  
A two-way multivariate ANOVA (Group × Proficiency) with covariate was conducted to test whether the 
intervention effect differed depending on students’ proficiency levels. A trend was found suggesting an 
association between Group and English Proficiency (λ = .965, F(5, 265) = 1.942, p = .08, 
η2p = .035). The univariate comparisons showed that the interaction approached significance only in the 
writing portion: written convention (F(1, 269) = 4.789, p < .05, η2p = .017) and writing strategies 
(F(1, 269) = 5.627, p < .05, η2p = .020). To partition this interaction, a follow-up simple main effects 
analysis using a Bonferroni correction (α = 0.05) was performed. Findings suggested that the low-
proficiency students in the VSTF group outperformed those in the control group in the post-tests of 
written conventions (p = .003) and writing strategies (p = .000), while there was no group difference 
among those with high-proficiency. These results verify that VSTF reading can influence at least low-
proficiency L2 students’ achievement on writing measures. Estimated marginal means of the post-tests 
across groups and English proficiency are presented in Figure 4. 
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  194 
 
Figure 4. Estimated marginal means of the post-tests across groups and English proficiency. Significant 
differences were only found between low-proficiency students. Control_High = control group students 
with high English proficiency; VSTF_High = VSTF group students with high English proficiency; 
Control_Low = control group students with low English proficiency; VSTF_Low = VSTF group students 
with low English proficiency. WA = Word Analysis; RC = Reading Comprehension; LR = Literary 
Response; WC = Written Conventions; WS = Writing Strategies. 
** indicates p < .001, *** indicates p < .0001 
DISCUSSION 
This study addresses three questions concerning the effect of visualizing syntactic structures on reading 
and writing development among L2 English students. Our hypotheses that VSTF will raise awareness to 
L2 syntactic structure and improve L2 literacy development are partly evidenced by our qualitative and 
quantitative results. First, the qualitative findings from observations and interviews suggest that syntactic 
structure caught students' attention. Meaning-based phrasing and spaces in between lines in VSTF can 
help students, especially those with low proficiency, to increase fluency. This finding is in line with the 
research by LeVasseur et al. (2008) on the effect of syntactic enhancement on reading fluency. Drawing 
on Gernsbacher’s (1997) model, we postulate that already parsed sentences particularly help low-
proficiency students with structure building processes at a faster rate than would otherwise be possible. A 
degree of caution is required though because a VSTF version of a textbook may negatively affect some 
students by slowing down their reading speed. This is mainly attributed to features of the VSTF textbook 
as compared to paper textbook: the lack of images and page numbers in VSTF and, in part, its broken-up 
phrasing. Such drawbacks, however, do not relate to syntactic enhancement. Some students can be 
negatively influenced by VSTF phrasing, which may be due to its unfamiliarity rather than syntactic 
enhancement. This negative effect can be overcome once students become used to its format, as shown in 
this study. To increase the effectiveness of VSTF, teachers would be well advised to attend to two 
important considerations: providing visual aids to compensate for the missing images and allocating 
adequate time and training for students to benefit from syntactic enhancement. 
Research Question 2 concerns the effects of VSTF reading on L2 students’ learning outcomes: whether 
syntactic enhancement of VSTF can support the development of L2 literacy. The quantitative findings 
from standardized tests suggest that syntactic enhancement can support L2 students in improving the 
knowledge necessary for writing development. The achievement gain of VSTF students in written 
conventions and writing strategies is of significance for two reasons. First, the result implies that syntactic 
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  195 
enhancement can affect the improvement in syntactic awareness, which is the part of the knowledge that 
the two measures assess. These measures assess how well students identify correct alternatives to ill-
formed words or structures. This type of tests is not the best but a fairly effective method for detecting 
students’ growth in syntactic knowledge, according to Smith (1991). Second, this result implies that 
increased syntactic enhancement through reading may contribute to the development of skilled writing, 
affirming the view that reading and writing share a reciprocal relationship (Fitzgerald & Shanahan, 2000). 
A limitation of this finding is that it does not offer direct evidence of skilled writing because the measures 
used in this study did not require students’ writing output. However, the knowledge tested in the two 
measures represents important tools to communicate efficiently through writing. 
Our results with regards to reading are not as strong as in the case of writing. The quantitative findings 
cannot fully confirm findings from previous studies on VSTF (Vogel, 2011; Walker & Vogel, 2005), in 
which VSTF helped students improve their reading performance. However, this result, taken together 
with our qualitative findings, helps us identify reading skills to be further evaluated in syntactic 
enhancement studies: vocabulary and reading fluency. The positive trend in word analysis found in this 
study may support for the important role of syntactic awareness in vocabulary development, which was 
suggested in the literature (e.g., Nagy & Scott, 2000). Our qualitative finding of VSTF students’ increased 
fluency is consistent with previous literature on the relationship between syntactic awareness and reading 
fluency (Jenkins et al., 2003). Further studies with an emphasis on vocabulary learning and reading 
fluency are needed to ascertain these points. 
The last question focuses on who may benefit most from syntactic enhancement. It appears that syntactic 
enhancement is particularly effective among low-proficiency L2 students. This result is similar to the 
findings from the study by Jandreau and Bever (1992), in which phrase-sensitive formatting supported 
average-proficiency students only. Such mixed results suggest that varying syntactic processing skills 
among L2 students presumably affected how effectively input enhancement worked. Low-proficiency L2 
students have weaker syntactic processing skills (Bernhardt, 1986; Lee & VanPatten, 1995), which may 
be otherwise troubled with structure building and fluent and accurate comprehension. Their pattern is in 
contrast to high-proficiency L2 students who employ syntactic processing in a similar way to L1 students 
as found in previous research (e.g., Frenck-Mestre & Pynte, 1997). Therefore, low-proficiency students 
are likely more responsive to already parsed sentences than are those with high proficiency. 
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
The limitations of this study suggest directions for future research. First, despite the considerable 
improvement in VSTF students’ achievement, our qualitative data does not provide a sufficiently detailed 
insight into specific effects of syntactic scaffolding for L2 students. Because this study is based on the 
subsample of our study that includes both L1 and L2 students, the valuable information about low-
proficiency students we learned from our data includes, but is not confined to, L2 students. Qualitative 
research methods, such as observations and interviews, focusing exclusively on L2 students will help us 
better understand how syntactic scaffolding affects English development of L2 students. 
The generalizability of this study is limited to low-proficiency L2 students in the US. Of particular 
interest is whether the findings can be applied to other contexts or with other age groups of L2 students. 
In non-English-speaking contexts, there is a huge number of L2 students who have limited syntactic 
knowledge but have to understand grade-appropriate materials. Their English competency in written 
academic discourse is frequently a requisite for college and professions even in non-English-speaking 
contexts. Syntactic enhancement can be a viable approach to facilitate written English competency in 
such contexts. Regardless of curricular and learning environments, instructors can easily employ syntactic 
enhancement by using VSTF technology, because it only changes syntactic structures without making any 
amendment to the original content. Future studies need to evaluate if the effect of syntactic enhancement 
persists across various contexts. 
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  196 
CONCLUSION 
Our study shows that syntactic enhancement can facilitate the development of L2 reading and writing by 
assisting with syntactic awareness. Further, our finding suggests that though the specific gains from 
syntactic enhancement were limited to low-proficiency students, VSTF as syntactic enhancement can be a 
useful instructional tool to support L2 literacy development. We conclude that it will be beneficial to 
provide such an aid to young L2 students who need to pay attention to syntactic structures that become 
increasingly complicated early on, even before the secondary school grades. In addition, we encourage 
research on syntactic enhancement in non-English speaking contexts where L2 students face challenges in 
transitioning into being proficient. 
 
APPENDIX. VSTF Observation Note 
VSTF Observation Note 
 
Observer:   District: 
School:    Teacher: 
Student comfort (5 = high, circle one):  5   4   3   2   1 
Student engagement (5 = high, circle one):  5   4   3   2   1 
Date  Time Used   
Unit  Section  
# Students  # Using VSTF  
 
 
Continue any section on back as necessary 
Problems  
Teacher Strategies  
 
 
Student Strategies or Practices 
 
 
Teacher Comments 
 
Student Comments  
Observer Suggestions for 
Improvement 
 
Other Observer  
Comments 
 
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  197 
 
NOTES 
1. Sample tests, including written conventions and writing strategies, can be found through the 
California Department of Education website. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The study was funded by a grant from the John Randolph Haynes and Dora Haynes Foundation. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Youngmin Park recently received a Ph.D. degree from the University of California, Irvine, specializing in 
Language, Literacy, and Technology. Previously a high school teacher and teacher trainer in Korea, she 
has published and presented on topics related to teaching and learning English as a second or foreign 
language. 
E-mail: youngmp@uci.edu 
Mark Warschauer is Professor at the University of California, Irvine and director of the Digital Learning 
Lab and the Teaching and Learning Research Center at UCI, and Editor in Chief of AERA Open. His 
recent books include Learning in the Cloud: How (and Why) to Transform Schools with Digital Media 
(Teachers College Press). 
E-mail: markw@uci.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Anstrom, K., DiCerbo, P., Butler, F. A., Katz, A., Millet, J., & Rivera, C. (2010). A review of the 
literature on academic English: Implications for K–12 English language learners. Arlington, VA: George 
Washington University Center for Equity and Excellence in Education. 
Bernhardt, E. B. (1986). Cognitive processes in L2: An examination of reading behaviors. In J. Lantolf & 
A. Labarca (Eds.), Research in second language learning: Focus on the classroom. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Bernhardt, E. B. (2000). Second language reading as a case study of reading scholarship in the 20th 
century. In M. Kamil, P. Mosenthal, P. D. Pearson, & R. Barr (Eds.), Handbook of reading research (Vol. 
3; pp. 791–811). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Brace, N., Kemp, R., & Snelgar, R. S. (2006). SPSS for psychologists: A guide to data analysis using 
SPSS for Windows (Versions 12 and 13). Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
California Department of Education (2006). California Standards Test technical report. Retrieved from 
http://www.cde.ca.gov/ta/tg/sr/documents/startechrpt05.pdf 
California State Board of Education. (1998). English-language arts content standards for California 
public schools. Sacramento, CA: The California Department of Education. Retrieved from 
http://www.cde.ca.gov/be/st/ss/documents/elacontentstnds.pdf 
 
 
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  198 
Cunningham, A. (2005). Vocabulary growth through independent reading and reading aloud to children. 
In E. Hiebert & M. Kamil (Eds.), Teaching and learning vocabulary (pp. 45–68). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum. 
Fillmore, L. W., & Snow, C. E. (2000). What teachers need to know about language. Washington, DC: 
Center for Applied Linguistics & Office of Educational Research and Improvement. 
Fitzgerald, J., & Shanahan, T. (2000). Reading and writing relations and their development. Educational 
Psychologist, 31(1), 37–41. 
Frenck-Mestre, C., & Pynte, J. (1997). Reading in second and native languages. The Quarterly Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 50A(1), 119–148. 
Gascoigne, C. (2006). Toward an understanding of incidental input enhancement in computerized L2 
environments. CALICO Journal, 24(1), 147–162. 
Givón, T. (1995). Coherence in text vs. coherence in mind. In M. A. Grensbacher & T. Givón (Eds.), 
Coherence in spontaneous text (pp. 59–115). Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins. 
Gernsbacher, M. A. (1997). Two decades of structure building. Discourse Processes, 23(3), 265–304. 
Grabe, W. (2009). Reading in a second language: Moving from theory to practice. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Hill, L. E., Weston, M., & Hayes, J. M. (2014). Reclassification of English learner students in California. 
San Francisco, CA: Public Policy Institute of California. Retrieved from 
www.ppic.org/content/pubs/report/R_114LHR.pdf 
Hinkel, E. (2002). Second language writers' text: Linguistic and rhetorical features. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Jandreau, S. M., & Bever, T. G. (1992). Phrase-spaced formats improve comprehension in average 
readers. Journal of Applied Psychology, 77(2), 143–146. 
Jenkins, J. R., Fuchs, L. S., van den Broek, P., Espin, C., & Deno, S. L. (2003). Sources of individual 
differences in reading comprehension and reading fluency. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(4), 
719–729. 
Kame’enui, E., & Simmons, D. (2001). Introduction to this special issue: The DNA of reading fluency. 
Scientific Studies of Reading, 5(3), 203–210. 
Kuhn, M., & Stahl, S. (2003). Fluency: A review of developmental and remedial practices. Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 95(1), 3–21. 
Lee, J., & VanPatten, B. (1995). Making communicative language teaching happen. New York, NY: 
McGraw-Hill. 
Lee, S. (2007). Effects of textual enhancement and topic familiarity on Korean EFL students’ reading 
comprehension and learning of passive form. Language Learning, 57(1), 87–118. 
Lee, S., & Huang, H. (2008). Visual input enhancement and grammar learning. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 30(3), 307–331. doi:10.1017/S0272263108080479 
LeVasseur, V. M., Macaruso, P., & Shankweiler, D. (2008). Promoting gains in reading fluency: A 
comparison of three approaches. Reading and Writing, 21(3), 205–230. 
McNamara, D. S., Crossley, S. A., & McCarthy, P. M. (2009). Linguistic features of writing quality. 
Written Communication, 27(1), 57–86. doi:10.1177/0741088309351547 
 
Youngmin Park and Mark Warschauer Syntactic Enhancement and L2 Literacy 
 
Language Learning & Technology  199 
Montano-Harmon, M. R. (1991). Discourse features of written Mexican Spanish: Current research in 
contrastive rhetoric and its implications. Hispania, 74(2), 417–425. 
Nagy, W., & Scott, J. (2000). Vocabulary processes. In M. Kamil, P. Mosenthal, P. Pearson, & R. Barr 
(Eds.), Handbook of reading research (Vol. 3; pp. 269–284). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Nagy, W., Diakidoy, I., & Anderson, R. C. (1993). The acquisition of morphology: Learning the 
contribution of suffixes to the meanings of derivatives. Journal of Reading Behavior, 25(2), 155–170. 
Scarcella, R. (2003). Accelerating academic English: A focus on English language learners. Oakland, 
CA: Regents of the University of California. 
Schleppegrell, M. J. (2012). Academic language in teaching and learning. The Elementary School 
Journal, 112(3), 409–418. 
Sheu, S. P.-H. (2003). Extensive reading with EFL learners at beginning level. TESL Reporter, 36(2), 8–
26. 
Skehan, P. (2003). Focus on form, tasks, and technology. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 16(5), 
391–411. Retrieved from http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1076/call.16.5.391.29489 
Silva, T. (1993). Towards an understanding of the distinct nature of L2 writing. TESOL Quarterly, 27(4), 
657–673. 
Smith, S. M. (1991). Speaking to many minds: On the relevance of different types of language 
information for the L2 learner. Second Language Research, 7(2), 118–132. 
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and 
techniques. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications. 
Tanaka, H., & Stapleton, P. (2007). Increasing reading input in Japanese high school EFL classrooms: An 
empirical study exploring the efficacy of extensive reading. The Reading Matrix, 7(1), 115–131. 
Vogel, C. (2011). CSAP and ACT bootcamp: Using the Liveink reading format. Paper presented at the 
Colorado Council International Reading Council Annual Conference, Denver, CO. 
Walker, R., & Vogel, C. (2005). Live Ink: Brain-based text formatting raises standardized test scores. 
Paper presented at the National Educational Computing Conference, Philadelphia, PA. 
Walker, S., Schloss, P., Fletcher, C. R., Vogel, C. A., & Walker, R. (2005). Visual-syntactic text 
formatting: A new method to enhance online reading. Reading Online, 8(6). Retrieved from 
http://www.readingonline.org/articles/art_index.asp?HREF=/articles/r_walker/ 
