Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/granena.pdf 
October 2016, Volume 20, Number 3 
pp. 40–59 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 40 
INDIVIDUAL VERSUS INTERACTIVE TASK-BASED PERFORMANCE 
THROUGH VOICE-BASED COMPUTER-MEDIATED COMMUNICATION 
Gisela Granena, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya 
Interaction is a necessary condition for second language (L2) learning (Long, 1980, 1996). 
Research in computer-mediated communication has shown that interaction opportunities 
make learners pay attention to form in a variety of ways that promote L2 learning. This 
research has mostly investigated text-based rather than voice-based interaction. The 
present study applied “form-focusing information gap tasks” (Pica, Kang, & Sauro, 2006) 
to a voice-based computer-mediated environment and investigated whether individual or 
interactive task performance conditions affect language development differently. This is a 
relevant research question for distance language learning programs, which are primarily 
asynchronous and largely rely on individual performance and text-based communication. 
The results of the study showed significant pre-to-post learning gains under both 
performance conditions (individual and interactive). Between-groups comparisons further 
showed that participants in the interactive condition outperformed participants in the 
individual condition on two of the three target structures investigated. 
Language(s) Learned in this study: English 
Key words: Computer-mediated Communication, Distance Learning and Teaching, 
Speaking, Task-based Learning and Teaching 
APA Citation: Granena, G. (2016). Individual versus interactive task-based 
performance through voice-based computer-mediated communication. Language 
Learning & Technology, 20(3), 40–59. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/granena.pdf 
Received: October 12, 2014; Accepted: April 27, 2015; Published: October 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Gisela Granena 
INTRODUCTION 
In order to learn a language, learners need exposure to input and opportunities to produce output, 
especially through participation in conversation. This exchange of information and communication of 
ideas (i.e., interaction), particularly the modification of interaction, has been hypothesized as a necessary 
and sufficient condition for second language (L2) acquisition by interactionist theories of second 
language acquisition (SLA; see Hatch, 1978; Long, 1980, 1996). The opportunities to negotiate for 
meaning and to notice language features that interaction creates (through processes such as repetition, 
clarification, elaboration, and simplification) have been shown to arise both in native speaker–L2 learner 
interaction, as well as in learner–learner interaction (Pica, Lincoln-Porter, Paninos, & Linnell, 1996). 
Research has also shown that these interactional modifications take place both in face-to-face (F2F; Gass 
& Varonis, 1994; Mackey, 1999) and synchronous computer-mediated communication (SCMC; see 
Blake, 2000, 2009; Blake & Zyzik, 2003; de la Fuente, 2003; Lee, 2002; Pellettieri, 2000; Smith, 2003). 
Both communication modes provide opportunities to focus on form—understood as a process that “overly 
draws students’ attention to linguistic elements as they arise incidentally in lessons whose overriding 
focus is on meaning or communication” (Long, 1991, p .46). 
In order to maximize focus-on-form opportunities, researchers have investigated task types and task 
features that increase the occurrence of interactional modifications and that direct learners’ attention to 
form, both in F2F (Doughty & Pica, 1986; Duff, 1986; Gass, Mackey, & Ross-Feldman, 2005; Pica, 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
Kanagy, & Falodun, 1993) and SCMC contexts (Blake, 2000; Smith, 2003). Research suggests that 
information gap tasks (see Long, 1980) requiring a two-way exchange of information are among the most 
effective in promoting interactional modifications (Doughty & Pica, 1986; Pica, et al., 1993; Varonis & 
Gass, 1985). Taking advantage of the versatility that characterizes information gap tasks, Pica, Kang, and 
Sauro (2006) developed “form-focusing information gap tasks” (p. 308). These are information gap tasks 
whose completion requires attention to low-salience grammatical forms. Building on the work by Pica et 
al. (2006), the present study applied a form-focusing information gap task to a computer-mediated 
language learning environment and investigated whether individual or interactive task performance 
conditions affect language development differently. This is a relevant question to consider when 
designing online language courses, which typically rely on asynchronous (and mostly written) individual 
language practice, especially now that recently developed open-source interactive speaking tools are 
available (e.g., SpeakApps project). These tools can optimize task-based computer-mediated oral 
interaction among language learners by giving them access to different sources of input (e.g., sets of 
information) that need to be shared in order to complete a task successfully. These tools have opened a 
whole new range of possibilities to promote synchronous interactive language practice online. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Focus on Form through Interaction in SCMC 
Focus on form helps learners perceive, comprehend, and ultimately internalize L2 words, forms, and 
structures (Long, 1991). A substantial body of research (for a review, see Sauro, 2011) has shown that 
SCMC does facilitate processes such as noticing, uptake, and learner-initiated talk about language forms 
(Swain & Lapkin, 1998), and that it can result in improved L2 knowledge or production. Regarding the 
occurrence of focus on form in online contexts, Lee (2002, 2008) showed that, despite the overall 
predominant focus on meaning and fluency, L2 learners used a variety of strategies for negotiation such 
as requests for help, clarification requests, and self-correction in SCMC. Similarly, Geng and Takatsuka 
(2009) and Yilmaz and Granena (2010) found that L2 learners assist one another in attending to language 
forms through collaborative dialogue in SCMC. These results suggest that focus on form does occur in 
online contexts, although it seems to occur less frequently than in F2F contexts (Loewen & Reissner, 
2009). 
Regarding the learning outcomes of focus on form in SCMC, de la Fuente (2003) and Smith (2004) 
showed steady gains in receptive and productive vocabulary knowledge in SCMC tasks where learners 
were required to negotiate the meaning of unknown lexical items. Payne and Whitney (2002) also found 
greater accuracy of vocabulary and grammar in oral language use after participating in chatroom sessions, 
a finding that suggests that L2 oral proficiency can be indirectly developed through chatroom interaction 
(see also Payne & Whitney, 2002). Improved L2 outcomes have also been reported by studies that have 
investigated instructional interventions such as corrective feedback through SCMC. For example, Sauro 
(2009) and Yilmaz (2012) both found that implicit and explicit corrective feedback types are helpful in 
SCMC. Specifically, metalinguistic information in Sauro (2009) and recasts and explicit correction in 
Yilmaz (2012) resulted in significant learning gains over control conditions. Only Loewen and Erlam 
(2006) found no significant advantage for feedback conditions over control conditions in SCMC. Their 
study, however, unlike others that found a clear advantage for feedback, looked at small group interaction 
instead of pair interaction. In addition, according to the authors, the participants might have not been 
developmentally ready to benefit from corrective feedback, as suggested by their low pre-test scores on 
the target form, the English regular past tense. 
The findings reported above indicate that computer-mediated communication (CMC) has positive impacts 
on L2 learning. However, all the findings reported belong to text-based SCMC studies. Indeed, most 
CMC studies have looked at text-based interactions via a variety of text chat tools. Some studies have 
investigated bimodal interactions combining text and voice chat (Blake, 2005; Collentine, 2009), but 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 42 
research on voice chat alone, either audio-conferencing or video-conferencing, especially in its 
synchronous modality, is scarce, despite the pedagogic potential of this type of CMC in online distance 
education courses which typically lack interactive speaking practice. The few studies that have looked at 
voice-based SCMC have compared text versus voice chat interactions or synchronous versus 
asynchronous voiced-based CMC. Satar and Ozdener (2008) found that secondary school L2 learners 
improved their speaking skills both after text-based and voice-based (audio only) chat sessions. There 
were no significant differences in learning gains between the two chat groups, but the participants in the 
text chat group reported significantly lower anxiety levels. The authors concluded that both text and voice 
chat are equally effective and can result in speaking gains as long as learners are guided by appropriate 
language learning tasks. 
Volle (2005) compared asynchronous and synchronous voice-based (audio only) activities and found 
significant oral proficiency gains in both. Jepson (2005) looked at repair moves in text- and voice-chat 
interactions. Repairs included clarification requests, confirmation checks, comprehension checks, self-
repetitions, and incorporations. The results showed a significantly higher number of repairs in voice chats 
(audio-conferencing). Finally, Yamada and Akahori (2009) compared different conferencing systems, 
video-conferencing displaying both interlocutors’ images, video-conferencing displaying only one of the 
two interlocutors’ image, and audio-conferencing. They found that the presence of one’s own image 
promoted self-correction, while the presence of the partner’s image helped understand the partner’s 
degree of comprehension and their intended meaning. 
The findings of these comparison studies suggest not only that voice chat is as effective as text chat from 
the point of view of learning gains, but also that it may promote more modified interaction as learners 
make sure that their information is accurate and understood. The fact that this interaction takes place 
orally, unlike text chat, can have additional learning benefits that can also be found in F2F 
communication. One of these is the opportunity to practice pronunciation skills and to self-repair and 
engage in meaning negotiation resulting from breakdowns related to pronunciation. Other learning 
benefits are in the areas of turn adjacency conventions and discourse coherent structures (Jepson, 2005), 
which voice exchanges share with F2F communication. Finally, when voice chat takes place through 
video-conferencing, learners can take advantage of and learn from the use of non-verbal cues. 
The potential advantages of the voice SCMC medium as a means for improving oral L2 proficiency, 
however, will ultimately and largely depend on the creation of optimal psycholinguistic environments for 
language learners (Doughty & Long, 2003). There is a need for technological options to go hand-in-hand 
with pedagogical and psycholinguistic considerations. One of the ways in which technology can be 
guided by such considerations is through the use of tasks—and among these, tasks that SLA research has 
shown to be effective in promoting L2 learning. The use of appropriate tasks can also minimize the 
concerns raised against voice chat in comparison to text chat, such as the fact that voice chat may increase 
anxiety among learners (Satar & Ozdener, 2008) and that some learners may take control of the 
interaction (Hampel & Hauck, 2004). 
Form-focusing Tasks 
SLA interaction research has shown that task design variables are the most important factors influencing 
learners’ participation, interactional processes, and learning outcomes (e.g., Doughty & Pica, 1986; Pica 
& Doughty, 1985). Specifically, information gap tasks (Long, 1980) have been shown to set up favorable 
conditions for L2 learning to occur by promoting meaning negotiation and ensuring more equal 
participation from learners (Pica et al., 1993). In these tasks, learners hold complementary information 
they need to exchange verbally in order to reach a specific goal. These features help decrease learners’ 
anxiety by guiding them through the task with a specific goal in mind and all the information they need 
for successful task completion. They also ensure more balanced opportunities for learners to participate in 
the interaction. However, as pointed out by Pica et al. (2006), information gap tasks fail to draw attention 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
to forms that lack salience because these are rarely the focus of negotiation in such a meaning-focused 
context. 
In an attempt to draw learners’ attention to low-salience forms that are difficult to learn, Pica et al. (2006) 
proposed “form-focusing information gap tasks” (p. 308), information gap tasks that involve text 
comparison and whose completion requires the use of low-salience grammatical forms. Their study, 
which included six pairs of intermediate-level learners of English, indicated that form-focusing 
information gap tasks have attention-promoting features, which resulted in the participants’ noticing and 
awareness of the low-salience language forms investigated (articles and determiners, pronouns and 
connectors, and verb and modal morphology). These findings suggest that form-focusing tasks can be 
successfully implemented in a F2F environment. 
The Current Study 
Following Chapelle’s (1997) claims that computer-mediated language learning materials and practices 
should be informed by theoretical paradigms and methodologies from the field of SLA, the present study 
applied form-focusing information gap tasks as proposed by Pica et al. (2006) to a computer-mediated 
language learning environment and investigated whether individual or interactive performance conditions 
affect language development differently. The type of computer-mediated communication investigated was 
voice chat, given the scarcity of research carried out in this modality and its potential to improve speaking 
abilities in authentic spontaneous unplanned conditions. Because language learning online takes place 
mostly via asynchronous individual practice, this study set out to compare learning gains from form-
focusing information gap tasks carried out individually and interactively (i.e., synchronously) in pairs. 
Previous research has looked at the effects of participating in interaction and has shown that being 
actively involved in interaction, as opposed to observing interaction take place, leads to greater learning 
gains (Mackey, 1999). Research has also shown that interaction in small groups or pairs is more effective 
than interaction in larger groups (Long & Porter, 1985) and that pairs generate more language and 
language-related episodes than small groups (Lasito & Storch, 2013). Another comparison worth 
investigating, especially relevant to inform the design of online language courses, is whether individual or 
interactive online task performance conditions are more beneficial for language learners. To the best of 
my knowledge, the only study that investigated this issue in a computer-mediated learning environment 
was conducted by Tare et al. (2014). The study, which focused on text chat, compared interactive chat 
versus independent writing conditions in a sample of 25 intermediate-level learners of Russian. Both 
conditions were matched in terms of language input, time, and required production. The findings of the 
study revealed that pre-to-post learning gains were greater in the interactive condition in vocabulary 
knowledge and oral production. No differences were found between the two groups in writing accuracy or 
complexity. The authors concluded that their findings supported the benefits of interaction in online 
language learning environments via the Internet, online tools, or mobile applications and that text chat 
could be easily implemented to enhance foreign language learning in any context. 
Given the growing interest in distance language learning and the availability of recently developed tools 
for content management in synchronous oral communication (e.g., SpeakApps), there is a need to 
investigate whether interaction through a voice-based modality facilitates L2 learning compared to 
individual work, which is the default in online language courses. 
Research Questions 
The three research questions which guided this study were the following: 
1. Do L2 learners who carry out a form-focusing information gap task in a computer-mediated 
environment show any language gains in modals, past tense verbs, or connectors? 
2. Do L2 gains differ for learners who carry out a form-focusing information gap task individually 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
and interactively (via voice chat)? 
3. Do L2 gains differ depending on type of L2 form? 
METHOD 
Participants 
A total of 126 EFL learners (32% male and 68% female; between age 19 and 38; mean age: 28.5 years; 
SD: 5.21) participated in the study. Ninety of them were assigned to the individual condition (33% male 
and 67% female; mean age: 28.6 years; SD: 5.41) and 36 to the interactive condition (28% male and 72% 
female; mean age: 28.4 years; SD: 4.76).1 Participants were native speakers of Spanish taking an 
intermediate-level English course online (the equivalent to a B1.1 level according to the Common 
European Framework of Reference) at a Spanish university. They were taking the course as a degree 
requirement, for personal development, or for professional development and volunteered to participate in 
the study in exchange for extra credit. 
Target Structures 
Three target structures that were essential for task completion (Loschky & Bley-Vroman, 1993) were 
chosen for the study: past tense, modal verbs, and connectors. The rationale behind this choice was the 
fact that these forms are low-salience forms and, therefore, difficult to acquire for L2 learners (DeKeyser, 
2005). Low-salience forms are characterized by one or more of the following: low perceptibility, limited 
transparency between them and the meanings or functions they encode, or wide ranging functionality 
(Pica, 2012). The past tense (e.g., arrived, achieved), and bound inflections for tense and aspect in 
general, are difficult to notice. Modals and connectors, on the other hand, lack transparency of function 
and meaning and are wide ranging in functionality. Modal verbs such as may and should can be used to 
give advice, predict, and argue, and connectors such as however or so can stand for different meanings, 
which makes these forms have low reliability of form-meaning mapping (DeKeyser, 2005). 
According to Long (1996), this type of redundant grammar features cannot be learned through a pure 
focus on meaning. For example, Pica et al. (2006) reported that forms such as “articles and pronouns, 
modal verbs, and bound inflections for tense and aspect were seldom the focus of classroom negotiation” 
(p. 307). They explained that errors related to these forms or the absence of these forms altogether was 
rarely addressed. Instead, meaning negotiation typically focused on lexical items and the clarification of 
information. This makes forms such as the past tense, modals and connectors good candidates for the 
form-focusing task used in the current study, which aimed at drawing learners’ attention to these forms, 
their function and meaning. 
Although these three structures were chosen for their limited perceptual salience or functional 
transparency, they may not be equally difficult for Spanish learners to acquire. Problems with the 
acquisition of the regular past tense by Spanish speakers (e.g., Brutten, Mouw, & Perkins, 1986) have 
been attributed to the perception and production of the -ed morpheme, since Spanish is not a language 
with consonant clusters in word-final position. Modal verbs and connectors (or conjunctions) are not 
inflectional, but free functional morphemes. This makes them more perceptually salient, even if they are 
redundant features that convey structural or grammatical information. However, the meaning of the past 
tense is transparent when compared to the complexity of modal verbs in terms of function and meaning. 
Also, connectors—even if not so wide-ranging in meaning and function as modals—can stand for 
different meanings and, in addition, there is no one-to-one correspondence with the equivalent Spanish 
forms. The low salience of each of the structures is, therefore, due to different factors (i.e., low 
perceptibility, limited transparency between form and meaning or function, or wide ranging 
functionality). 
 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
Pre- and Post-test Measures 
Participants were administered a cloze test as a pre-test and post-test measure using Quia Web, a website 
to create online educational activities (see Appendix A). Following Pica et al. (2006), the cloze passage 
given as the main treatment task was the same as the one given as pre- and post-test. The cloze had 24 
gaps, eight for each of the three target structures in the study. For each participant, there were eight 
critical (target) items and 16 distracters. For example, for a learner in the Connectors group, connectors 
were critical and the past tense and modal verbs worked as distracters, whereas for a learner in the Modals 
group, modal verbs were critical and the past tense and connectors worked as distracters. 
Treatment Tasks 
Three jigsaw versions of a text giving various tips for a job interview were created for the study, one for 
each target structure (past tense, modals, and connectors). A jigsaw task involves a set of unordered 
sentences that learners have to reorder. Like Pica et al. (2006), each jigsaw had an A and a B version. This 
means that the jigsaw included a spot-the-difference component. The A and B versions differed in that 
sentences in each of the versions could be either the same as in the original text or different. If different, 
the sentence contained a form inconsistent with the meaning of the original text. Following Pica et al. 
(2006), no truly ungrammatical forms were included (e.g., wented) in order to encourage participants to 
attend to form, function, and meaning relationships as they decide which version of the text is the right 
one. For example, in order to choose between wented and went, participants would not have to focus on 
form, function, and meaning relationships. Simply by being familiar with the past form of the verb to go 
they would be able to make a choice. However, in order to choose between go and went, participants 
would have to pay attention to how these forms encode function and meaning in the sentence or text in 
question. Each text consisted of eight short paragraphs (350 words in total). Each paragraph (either in 
version A or B) contained a form inconsistent with the meaning of the text or with the original text. 
The treatment had two steps. In step one, participants were asked to read the original text and to think of a 
suitable title. The purpose of this first step was to familiarize participants with the text while engaging 
them in a meaning-focused activity. This step was the same for participants in the individual and the 
interactive condition. In step two, participants were provided with either the version for the past tense, 
modal verbs, or connectors. Each version of the text consisted of an unordered set of paragraphs. In the 
interactive condition, each participant was provided with a different set (A or B), whereas in the 
individual condition, each participant was provided with the two sets (A and B). There were eight 
differences in the two sets, one per paragraph, targeting the past tense, modal verbs, or connectors. Some 
participants had a paragraph that was identical to that in the original text, while others had a paragraph 
that had been modified. Participants were instructed to first choose the order of the paragraphs as they 
appeared in the original text.2 Then, they were asked to choose the version of each paragraph that was the 
most accurate and precise one (A or B) and to give reasons for their choice. The two components of 
choosing (choosing the order of the paragraphs, which involves text reconstruction, and choosing between 
different paragraphs, which involves comparison) were aimed at giving learners opportunities to notice 
the forms in different ways. According to Pica et al. (2006), “when choosing sentence order, the learner’s 
noticing of forms, form differences, and gaps is incidental to the choice; in choosing between different 
sentences, such noticing is implicit but nonetheless more directly related to the choice” (p. 316).  
In the interactive condition, participants were asked to complete steps 1 and 2 orally in pairs. In the 
individual condition, participants were asked to complete these two steps individually. Instead of giving a 
reason for their choices, they were asked to think of a reason for their choices that they could explain to 
their teacher. 
Procedure 
Students were given the pre-test as a warm-up activity preceding unit four in their syllabus. Three weeks 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
later, they were offered the opportunity to earn extra credit for doing additional practice as part of a 
language study. The first 126 students who signed up were randomly assigned into one of three groups 
under individual task performance conditions up to a maximum of 30 participants per group, or to one of 
three groups under interactive task performance conditions up to a maximum of 12 participants per group. 
Participants in each of the groups in the individual condition, one per target structure, were given a link 
where they could complete the form-focusing information-gap task (the jigsaw) individually. Qualtrics, a 
web-based survey tool developed at the University of Maryland, was used to create the individual version 
of the task. This tool allowed presenting step one and step two in the treatment separately, without 
allowing participants to go back to previous screens (see Appendix B). Time on task for participants in 
the individual condition was 13.90 min on average (SD = 5.96). 
For the interactive version of the task (see Appendix C), the Tandem tool was used, a content 
management system for synchronous oral tasks available through SpeakApps (see Figure 1).3 Tandem 
connects a pair of students, assigns each student a role, and allows providing different sets of information 
to each student (i.e., Student A, Student B). Students recorded their conversations and sent the audio files 
to their teacher. Time on task for participants in the interactive condition was 14.42 min on average 
(SD=4.49). 
Both the individual and the interactive versions of the task finished with a link to the immediate post-test, 
which all participants had to complete individually. The pre-test and post-test were scored for accuracy. 
One point was allocated for every blank in the cloze filled in correctly, regardless of spelling mistakes.4 
 
 
Figure 1. Welcome screen of the Tandem tool. 
RESULTS 
Table 1 and Table 2 show the pre-test, post-test, and gain scores for each of the three target structures  in 
the individual condition and the three target structures in the interactive condition (one for each target 
structure), calculated as proportions (0–1.0). Scores in each group conformed to normality, according to 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) tests (p > .05). 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics for Pre- and Post-test Scores in the Individual Condition 
Target structure Pre-test Post-test Pre-to-Post Gains 
 Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD 
Modals .42 .21 .61 .28 .19 .26 
Past Tense .27 .22 .60 .28 .32 .29 
Connectors .43 .20 .78 .26 .35 .24 
Table 2. Descriptive Statistics for Pre- and Post-test Scores in the Interactive Condition 
Target structure Pre-test Post-test Pre-to-Post Gains 
 Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD 
Modals .45 .10 .76 .18 .31 .23 
Past Tense .27 .21 .88 .13 .60 .28 
Connectors .28 .16 .79 .19 .51 .17 
In order to test whether pre-to-post gains were statistically significant, a mixed factorial analysis of 
variance (ANOVA) was conducted with two within-subjects factors5, Time (pre-test and post-test) and 
Target Structure (modals, past, and connectors), and one between-subjects factor, Condition (individual 
and interactive). This analysis further determined whether there were differences depending on the type of 
performance, individual versus interactive (as shown by an interaction between Time and Condition), or 
type of target structure (as shown by an interaction between Time and Target). 
The results revealed that Time was a significant factor (F(1, 120) = 224.133, p < .001, ηp2 = .65)6, which 
indicated that participants in both individual and interactive conditions had improved significantly 
between pre- and post-test. In addition, the interactions between Time and Condition, on the one hand, 
and Time and Target structure, on the other, were also significant (F(1, 120) = 12.411, p = .001, ηp2 = .09, 
and F(2, 120) = 6.469, p = .002, ηp2 = .10 , respectively). These results further showed that the individual 
and interactive  conditions had not improved equally (.47 as the average overall gain score in the 
interactive condition versus .29 in the individual condition) and that the gains in the three target structures 
were not comparable between pre-test and post-test (.26 for modals versus .47 for the past tense versus 
.43 for connectors). 
Follow-up tests to the significant two-way interactions were conducted. First, Bonferroni adjusted 
independent t-tests were run comparing individual and interactive conditions on each of the target 
structures. The two conditions did not differ when modal verbs were the target (t(40) = 1.302, p = .201). 
Differences were significant, however, for the past tense (t(40) = 2.742, p = .009) and marginally 
significant for connectors (t(40) = 1.986, p = .054). In both cases, participants in the interactive condition 
outperformed participants in the individual condition (.60 vs. .32 as average gain scores in the case of the 
past tense, and .51 vs. .35 in the case of connectors). 
Two separate ANOVAs were then computed as follow-up tests to the significant interaction between 
Time and Target. The first ANOVA compared pre-to-post learning gains in the interactive condition 
according to target structure. The results showed that target structure was a significant factor 
(F(2, 33) = 4.858, p = .014). Pairwise comparisons with Bonferroni correction further showed that gain 
scores for modal verbs (.31) were significantly lower than gain scores for the past tense (.60, p = .012) 
and connectors (.51, p = .032), whereas the difference between gain scores for the past tense and 
connectors was not significant (p = .319). In the individual condition, the results for target structure did 
not reach statistical significance (F(2, 87) = 2.891, p = .061), meaning that gain scores were roughly 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
comparable in the three structures. However, the pattern was similar to that observed in the interactive 
condition. The lowest pre-to-post learning gains corresponded to modal verbs (.19), followed by the past 
tense (.32), and connectors (.35). 
A last analysis was performed to compare gain scores on the target structure participants had received 
treatment on versus gain scores on the target structures that were included as distracters in the pre- and 
post-test measures (i.e., non-target structures). As a reminder, participants in the interactive and individual 
conditions that were assigned modal verbs as the target structure were also tested on the past tense and 
connectors as distracters. Participants that were assigned the past tense as the target structure were also 
tested on modal verbs and connectors as distracters. Participants that were assigned connectors as the 
target structure were also tested on modal verbs and the past tense as distracters. Table 3 and Table 4 
display the gain scores on target and non-target structures in the individual and interactive conditions, 
respectively. 
Table 3. Descriptive Statistics for Gain Scores in the Individual Condition 
Groups Target Structure Non-Target Structures 
 Mean SD Mean SD 
Modals .19 .26 .23 .19 
Past Tense .32 .29 .24 .25 
Connectors .35 .24 .26 .22 
Table 4. Descriptive Statistics for Gain Scores in the Interactive Condition 
Groups Target Structure Non-Target Structures 
 Mean SD Mean SD 
Modals .31 .23 .34 .12 
Past Tense .60 .28 .40 .18 
Connectors .51 .17 .33 .21 
Paired-samples t-tests revealed that participants in the interactive condition that had the past tense or 
connectors as target structures scored significantly higher on these structures than on non-target structures 
(t(11) = 2.563, p = .026, and t(11) = 2.923, p = .014, respectively), whereas participants that had modal verbs 
as the target structure did not score higher on this structure than on non-target structures (t(11) = -0.540, p 
= .600). The same results were found for the individual condition. The participants with the past tense and 
connectors as their respective target structures had significantly greater learning gains on these two 
structures than on non-target structures (t(29) = 2.578, p = .015, and t(29) = 2.221, p = .034, respectively). 
On the other hand, those participants with modal verbs as the target structure did not show greater gains 
for this structure than for non-target structures (t(29) = -0.732, p = .470). 
To summarize, participants’ scores on the target structures improved significantly from pre-test to post-
test, regardless of whether they performed form-focusing tasks in an interactive or individual condition. 
Participants in the interactive condition outperformed those in the individual condition. Specifically, they 
scored significantly higher on two of the target structures: the past tense and connectors. These were also 
the structures with the highest scores in each of the conditions. When the target structure was modal 
verbs, pre-to-post learning gains were not significantly higher than for non-target structures, neither in the 
interactive nor individual condition. Carrying out the task interactively also did not result in any greater 
gains than doing it individually when the target was modal verbs. 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
DISCUSSION 
Building on Pica et al. (2006), who proposed “form-focusing information gap tasks” (p. 308) as a way to 
draw learners’ attention to low-salience forms that are difficult to master, this study applied a form-
focusing information gap task to a computer-mediated environment and investigated whether individual 
or interactive task performance conditions affect language development differently. Three target 
structures were examined: modal verbs, the past tense, and connectors. Six groups of participants were 
randomly assigned to one of the three target structures under either an interactive or individual condition. 
The first research question asked whether carrying out a form-focusing information gap task in a 
computer-mediated environment would result in any learning gains. The results showed statistically 
significant pre-to-post learning gains in all three target structures, regardless of whether participants were 
in an individual or interactive condition and regardless of target structure. These results support the well-
established effectiveness of information gap tasks in SLA (Long, 1980), whether working alone or with 
another learner, and particularly the effectiveness of form-focusing information gap tasks as an instrument 
to help learners acquire low-salience L2 forms by drawing their attention to these forms while engaged in 
meaning-focused L2 use. 
As Pica et al. (2006) argued, the versatility of these tasks allows adjusting them to particular learning 
problems, to language forms that are difficult to acquire and that rarely become the focus of meaning 
negotiation in interaction. The key task feature that can explain the contribution of these tasks to the 
development of low-salience L2 forms is task-essentialness (Loschky & Bley-Vroman, 1993). These are 
tasks that require comprehension and production of particular linguistic features that learners must attend 
to in order to complete the task successfully. According to Loschky and Bley-Vroman (1993), when a 
grammar aspect is essential to meaning, learners will have to process that grammar aspect and its 
function. This may lead them to notice gaps in their knowledge, which may lead in turn to a restructuring 
of that knowledge through the formation of new hypotheses about that particular linguistic form and its 
function. It is important to point out, as Loschky and Bley-Vroman argue, that these are not grammatical 
exercises where grammatical accuracy is part of the task instructions, but information gap tasks where a 
grammar aspect is essential to meaning and to the communication task. 
Although learning gains from pre-test to post-test were significant in all the performance conditions, the 
results revealed an interaction between type of performance condition and gains. Those participants under 
interactive task performance conditions outperformed participants under individual conditions. This 
provided a positive answer to the second research question, which asked whether carrying out a form-
focusing information gap task individually or interactively would lead to differences in learning 
outcomes. According to these results, interaction is a further facilitative condition for SLA, in addition to 
the use of form-focusing information gap tasks. The benefits of interaction were already formalized in the 
Interaction Hypothesis by Long (1981, 1996) and several interactionist studies have shown that 
completing tasks interactively has L2 advantages over completing them individually (e.g., Gass & 
Varonis, 1994; Mackey, 1999). This has been related to the interactional processes that spontaneously 
arise in communicative exchanges between learners or learners and native speakers and that promote 
noticing of language features (Pica et al., 1993). In a similar line, Loschky and Bley-Vroman (1993) 
argued that information gap tasks that require the exchange of information create the potential for 
“communicatively oriented feedback on structural accuracy” (p. 132)—the second criterion, in addition to 
task-essentialness, that according to them contributes to facilitate grammatical development. As learners 
decide which language form they need, they may provide each other with valuable feedback on the 
correctness of their hypotheses. Therefore, the benefits of interaction would add on to the benefits of L2 
learning tasks where a successful outcome depends on comprehension or production of information 
expressed with a particular language form. The fact that the learners in the individual condition also 
improved significantly from pre-test to post-test suggests that the task was successful in promoting 
noticing of the target structure. The greater learning gains in the interactive condition indicate that 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
noticing in the context of interaction provides greater benefits through the verbalization and discussion of 
language options. The joint activity might have also allowed learners to pool their resources. Extracts 1 to 
3 show examples of learners’ negotiations, one for each target structure. As can be seen, the task was 
successful in encouraging participants to attend to form, function, and meaning relationships. In order to 
choose between the two forms, participants had to pay attention to how these forms encoded function and 
meaning in the sentence in question. 
Extract 1 (connectors). 
Student 1: (reads his paragraph) 
Student 2: (reads her paragraph) the different word is when or while. I think that while is better 
because is in the same time, the actions are the same time. 
Student 1: Yes, yes the actions are matching in the time yes. 
Student 2: Yes. 
Student 1: I think the same, while is a better option here. 
Extract 2 (past tense). 
Student 1: I didn’t understand did you try or tried? 
Student 2: Tried in past. 
Student 1: In past. 
Student 2: Past action. 
Student 1: So I have try in present. 
Student 2: I think it’s a past action you tried the your shoes before. 
Student 1: Because it’s an action in the past time, you are at home now, in present and before you 
were in the shoe store no? 
Student 2: Yes. 
Student 1: So I have the wrong sentence and you have the right sentence. 
Extract 3 (modals). 
Student 1: In the last sentence… 
Student 2: In my step it say shouldn’t. 
Student 1: In your step shouldn’t and in my can’t. 
Student 2: Ok. 
Student 1: It’s better shouldn’t no? 
Student 2: I think is better can’t because if you cannot turn off your cell phone before remember to 
mute it now, shouldn’t is a recommend no? 
Student 1: Yes, I think is better can’t because is a option. 
Student 2: Should is a obligation and can is a recommend. 
Student 1: If you cannot turn off your cell phone, is not a strong obligation, is a recommend, is 
better can’t. 
Student 2: I think is better. 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
A recent study that also investigated differences in learning gains between individual and interactive task 
performance conditions, Tare et al. (2014), reported the same research findings as the present study. In 
their study, which focused on text chat, intermediate-level learners of Russian either completed a task 
interactively via text chat or completed the task alone via independent writing activities. The participants 
that were given the opportunity to interact in pairs showed greater learning gains in vocabulary 
knowledge, as measured by a Vocabulary Knowledge Scale, and in amount of oral production. 
Specifically, the interactive group produced more runs and spoke for a longer duration of time. These 
results suggest that the benefits of carrying out a task interactively can happen in different modalities (text 
chat and oral chat) and that L2 learning gains can take place in various language domains simultaneously. 
However, the benefits of carrying out a form-focusing information gap task interactively did not equally 
apply to the three target structures investigated. The study found a significant interaction between 
learning gains and target structure, providing a positive answer to the third research question, which asked 
whether differences in L2 gains would differ depending on target structure. The three structures 
investigated were modal verbs, the past tense, and connectors. These structures were selected for their low 
salience, either because they are difficult to perceive or lack transparency of function or meaning. They 
belong to the category of functors, involving inflections, auxiliary verbs, articles, prepositions, and 
conjunctions, and defined by Brown (1973) as “forms that mark grammatical structures and carry subtle 
modulatory meanings” (p. 75). The results showed that gains were greater for the past tense and 
connectors than for modal verbs. Also, the participants in the interactive condition scored significantly 
higher on the past tense and marginally higher on connectors, but there were no significant differences 
between participants in the interactive and individual conditions for modal verbs. These results suggest 
that form-focusing information gap tasks were not successful in promoting the development of modal 
verbs, not even under the interactive condition. An anonymous reviewer suggested that the reordering of 
paragraphs involved in the first step of the task could have increased the salience of past tense forms and 
connectors, maybe because these forms were more task essential than modals to complete this part of the 
task. 
An alternative explanation for these findings could be the degree of difficulty of modal verbs compared to 
the difficulty of the past tense and connectors. According to DeKeyser (2005), there are three factors 
involved in determining grammatical difficulty: complexity of form, complexity of meaning, and 
complexity of form-meaning relationship. In the case of modal verbs (e.g., must, can, should, may, and 
might), both complexity of meaning and complexity of form-meaning relationship are higher than in the 
case of the past tense and connectors. Modal verbs are in fact considered among the most problematic 
grammatical items for L2 learners (Palmer, 1974, 1990) and “one of the most difficult structures that you 
as an ESL/EFL teacher will have to deal with” (Celce-Murcia & Larsen-Freeman, 1983, p. 80). Regarding 
complexity of meaning, modals are characterized by the abstractness and vagueness of their semantic 
functions (Thompson, 2002). Most of them express both deontic meanings such as obligation, intention, 
or permission (e.g., You must finish your homework) and epistemic meanings associated with truth 
conditions and assessment of degrees of certainty (e.g., You must be John’s sister). This, in turn, means 
that there is no one-to-one relation between form and meaning and, therefore, lack of transparency 
regarding form-meaning mapping. The past tense and connectors, on the other hand, are semantically 
more transparent. The past tense inflection is difficult to perceive, but semantically unambiguous. 
Connectors such as but, although, or so may be difficult from the point of view of the syntactic structure 
they require, but they indicate logical relations that are semantically quite transparent, even if abstract. In 
the context of the form-focusing information gap task used (a jigsaw based on a text), the greater semantic 
transparency of the past tense and of connectors may have made them easier to spot and correct than 
modal verbs. In order to promote the development of modal verbs, L2 learners would probably need a 
combination of instructional interventions including rich elaborated input and negative feedback, in 
addition to task-based interaction. These are factors claimed to contribute to a psycholinguistically 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
optimal L2 learning environment (Doughty & Long, 2003).  
Finally, a word is in order regarding the use of voice chat and its particular affordances for educational 
use. It has been argued (e.g., Brandt & Jenks, 2013) that the voice SCMC medium, even though it may be 
more similar to F2F than text chat, creates some interactional problems that do not take place in F2F 
communication or text chat. According to Brandt and Jenks (2013), in online spoken communication, 
problems can arise such as overlapping talk, possibly followed by silence, failure to identify the speaker, 
or difficulty gaining the right to talk. These problems, however, are mostly found in particular voice 
SCMC contexts, such as multi-party chat rooms, where several participants gather at the same time and 
which allow for new chat room members in once talk has started. While this setting may also be 
beneficial for language learners, the tool investigated in the current study opens a new range of 
possibilities as a voice SCMC medium and avoids several of the constraints pointed out by Brandt and 
Jenks (2013).  
CONCLUSION 
In order to learn a L2, learners need opportunities to participate in conversation (Long, 1980, 1996). 
Research in CMC has shown that interaction makes learners pay attention to form in a variety of ways 
that promote L2 learning (for a review, see Sauro, 2011). However, studies have looked at text-based 
rather than voice-based interaction. Given the growing interest in distance language learning (primarily 
asynchronous) and the availability of recently developed tools for synchronous oral communication, the 
present study investigated whether interaction through this modality (and tool) facilitates L2 learning. The 
type of task used a form-focusing information gap task as a research treatment, which was suggested by 
Pica et al. (2006) as a way to draw learners’ attention to low-salience forms that are difficult to master. 
The results showed that learners’ performance on a cloze test improved from pre-test to post-test 
regardless of target structure and condition (individual or interactive). However, learners in the interactive 
condition outperformed learners in the individual condition when the target structure was the past tense or 
connectors. No differences were observed in the case of modal verbs. 
These results support the beneficial effects of learner-learner interaction via voice-based CMC, but 
suggest a differential effect depending on the transparency of function and meaning of the grammatical 
structure. Since the outcome measure employed was a cloze test, further research should investigate 
whether learning gains can also be observed in oral production and other types of measures. Similarly, 
research should determine to what extent gains are retained by means of delayed post-tests. Finally, future 
research comparing interactive and individual performance conditions should carefully design the 
experimental conditions to be comparable on all aspects except for the variable under investigation. In the 
current study, although participants in both conditions were required to think of a reason for their choices 
in the spot-the-difference component of the task, no evidence that control participants actually did so 
could be gathered, which poses a limitation to the findings of the study. 
Overall, the findings of this study can inform distance language learning program design decisions by 
showing that there are technological options available (e.g., SpeakApps) that make task-based L2 oral 
interaction possible. These tools can compensate for the asynchronicity of communication characteristic 
of distance language learning, as well as provide an invaluable opportunity for conversation practice 
outside of the F2F classroom. In addition to the technological options that make oral interaction possible, 
the form-focusing information gap tasks investigated in the current study proved to be effective in 
promoting the development of L2 learning abilities. These tasks differ from others typically used in the 
interactionist paradigm in that they not only elicit output, but also provide input in the form of text. This 
feature makes them suitable to practice both written and oral receptive skills as well as productive skills, 
unlike other tasks which lack textual input, such as picture-based spot-the-difference tasks. The range of 
possibilities these tasks offer not only for F2F communication, but also for online instruction, is one of 
the most relevant implications of this study. 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
 
APPENDIX A. Cloze Test Used as Pre-test and Post-test 
STEP 1  
If you apply for a job, you ______be called for an interview so be proactive and prepare yourself ______ 
strategically and mentally for the event. First, talk to people who ______ their dream and now have a job. 
They can give you good advice!  
STEP 2  
You ______ also buy new clothes and shoes. Choose a pair of shoes that go well with your clothes. 
______, make sure they are comfortable. Even if you ______ them on at the shoe store when you bought 
them, wear them at home to get used to them.  
STEP 3  
Now, it’s the night before you rock ‘n’ roll! It is important that you get a good night’s sleep. ______ go to 
bed early and be sure to set your alarm clock before falling asleep. You ______ miss a job opportunity if 
you ______ the alarm!  
STEP 4  
You’re ready to go! Leave home early. You think you ______ get to the interview location on time, 
______ you might not. Can you imagine the stress you would feel if you ______ at the interview 
destination and it was the wrong place?  
STEP 5  
Greet the receptionist politely and enthusiastically (say hello). ______ remember to thank all the people 
that ______ you feel welcome while you are waiting. If you ______ turn off your cell phone, remember to 
mute it!  
STEP 6  
When you arrive at the interview room, shake your interviewers’ hands firmly ______ you smile. If the 
interviewers ______ your answers when they ask you questions, they will smile too. Make a positive 
impression and your chances (opportunities) of getting the job ______ increase dramatically!  
STEP 7  
As the interview draws to a close (finishes), interviewers ______ ask you if you have any questions for 
them. ______ create the right impression by asking at least one question that you ______ before the 
interview.  
STEP 8  
Finally, you do not ______ to follow-up a job interview (no further or additional action is required), 
______ it helps if you send a thank you note to the employers that just ______ you. Express your 
appreciation for the interview, reiterate your qualifications, and show your interest in working for their 
company. 
 
APPENDIX B. Instructions Given to Participants in the Individual Condition (Past Tense Group) 
SCREEN 1  
Welcome! This is a module with several activities. Please, move from one activity to another by clicking 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
on the small arrow that you will see at the end of every page (on the right). Important: You will not be 
allowed to go back.  
SCREEN 2  
The purpose of this activity is to help you become more accurate and precise in your speaking and 
writing, and to organize information more carefully.  
For this first task, please read the following 8 STEPS and think of a suitable (appropriate) title.  
SCREEN 3  
Please complete the following two tasks:  
Task 1: 
Compare each of the sentences on the left with each of the sentences on the right and choose the sentence 
that is more accurate and precise. There is always ONE DIFFERENCE between the two sentences. Think 
of a reason why you think the sentence on the left or the right is more accurate and precise.  
Task 2:  
Decide on the right order of the sentences, from 1 to 8.  
A. STEP _______  
You’re ready to go! Leave home early. You think 
you will get to the interview location on time, but 
you might not. Can you imagine the stress you 
would feel if you arrived at the interview 
destination and it was the wrong place?  
A. STEP _______  
You’re ready to go! Leave home early. You think 
you will get to the interview location on time, but 
you might not. Can you imagine the stress you 
would feel if you arrive at the interview 
destination and it was the wrong place?  
B. STEP _______  
You should also buy new clothes and shoes. 
Choose a pair of shoes that go well with your 
clothes. In addition, make sure they are 
comfortable. Even if you try them on at the shoe 
store where you bought them, wear them at home 
to get used to them. 
B. STEP _______  
You should also buy new clothes and shoes. 
Choose a pair of shoes that go well with your 
clothes. In addition, make sure they are 
comfortable. Even if you tried them on at the 
shoe store where you bought them, wear them at 
home to get used to them. 
C. STEP _______  
If you apply for a job, you may be called for an 
interview so be proactive and prepare yourself 
both strategically or mentally for the event. First, 
talk to people who achieved their dream and now 
have a job. They can give you good advice!  
C. STEP _______  
If you apply for a job, you may be called for an 
interview so be proactive and prepare yourself 
both strategically or mentally for the event. First, 
talk to people who achieve their dream and now 
have a job. They can give you good advice!  
D. STEP _______  
Now, it’s the night before you rock ‘n’ roll! It is 
important that you get a good night’s sleep. So, 
go to bed early and be sure to set your alarm 
clock before falling asleep. You may miss a job 
opportunity if you forget the alarm!  
D. STEP _______  
Now, it’s the night before you rock ‘n’ roll! It is 
important that you get a good night’s sleep. So, 
go to bed early and be sure to set your alarm 
clock before falling asleep. You may miss a job 
opportunity if you forgot the alarm!  
E. STEP _______  
Finally, you don't have to follow up a job 
interview (no further or additional action is 
required), but it helps if you send a thank you 
E. STEP _______  
Finally, you don't have to follow up a job 
interview (no further or additional action is 
required), but it helps if you send a thank you 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
note to the employers that just interviewed you. 
Express your appreciation for the interview, 
reiterate your qualifications, and show your 
interest in working for their company.  
note to the employers that just interview you. 
Express your appreciation for the interview, 
reiterate your qualifications, and show your 
interest in working for their company.  
F. STEP _______  
When you arrive at the interview room, shake 
your interviewers’ hands firmly while you smile. 
If the interviewers liked your answers when they 
ask you questions, they will smile too. Make a 
positive impression and your chances 
(opportunities) of getting the job will increase 
dramatically!  
F. STEP _______  
When you arrive at the interview room, shake 
your interviewers’ hands firmly while you smile. 
If the interviewers like your answers when they 
ask you questions, they will smile too. Make a 
positive impression and your chances 
(opportunities) of getting the job will increase 
dramatically!  
G. STEP _______  
As the interview draws to a close (finishes), 
interviewers could ask you if you have any 
questions for them. Therefore, create the right 
impression by asking at least one of the questions 
that you prepare before the interview.  
G. STEP _______  
As the interview draws to a close (finishes), 
interviewers could ask you if you have any 
questions for them. Therefore, create the right 
impression by asking at least one of the questions 
that you prepared before the interview.  
H. STEP _______  
Greet the receptionist politely and 
enthusiastically (say hello). Also, remember to 
thank all the people that made you feel welcome 
while you are waiting. If you can't turn off your 
cell phone, remember to mute it!  
H. STEP _______  
Greet the receptionist politely and 
enthusiastically (say hello). Also, remember to 
thank all the people that make you feel welcome 
while you are waiting. If you can't turn off your 
cell phone, remember to mute it!  
SCREEN 4  
Please click on the link and complete the fill-in-the-blanks exercise individually. Fill in (complete) each 
of the blanks with 1 word. 
 
APPENDIX C. Instructions Given to Participants in the Interactive Condition. 
SCREEN 1 
The purpose of this activity is to help you become more accurate and precise in your speaking and 
writing, and to organize information more carefully.  
SCREEN 2 
For this first task, please read the following text and, with the help of your partner, think of a suitable 
(appropriate) title. A general title is OK.  
SCREEN 3 
Now complete the following two tasks :  
Task 1:  
Compare each of your paragraphs (steps) with your partner’s. There is always one word that is different. 
Find the word and choose which word (either Student A or Student B’s) is more accurate and precise for 
the paragraph in question. Agree with your partner on one choice and explain why. 
 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
Task 2:  
Decide on the right order of the sentences (steps), from 1 to 8.  
SCREEN 4  
Please click on the link and complete the fill-in-the-blanks exercise individually. Fill in (complete) each 
of the blanks with 1 word. 
 
NOTES 
1. The higher number of participants in the control condition responded to convenience reasons, given 
that administering the task individually was easier than pairing students up at a day and time of 
their convenience for each of the target structures investigated. 
2. Please note that reordering the paragraphs did not necessarily involve recalling the original text, 
since it was possible to reorder them based on their meaning and world knowledge about the steps 
involved in a job interview. 
3. SpeakApps is a European research project coordinated by the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya and 
headed by Dr. Christine Appel. The platform was funded by the European program Lifelong 
Learning and aims to provide language teachers with tools to help improve L2 learners’ oral skills 
online. 
4. An anonymous reviewer pointed out that the scoring method should have taken into account form, 
function, and meaning, given that these were all subjects of investigation. The scoring method 
employed focused on the form, which had to be correct for the context in question. It was assumed 
that a correct form for a given context already took into account both correct function and meaning. 
5. As a reminder, both the pre-test and post-test measures included the three target structures, and this 
is why Target was a within-subjects (or repeated measures) variable. However, each participant 
only received treatment on one of the three structures, depending on group assignment. In other 
words, two of three structures worked as distracters in the tests. 
6. For partial eta squared (ηp2), a small effect size is .01 ≤ ηp2< .06, medium is .06 ≤ ηp2 < .14, and 
large is ηp2 ≥ .14. 
 
REFERENCES 
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language 
Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120–136. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/blake/default.html 
Blake, R. (2005). Bimodal CMC: The glue of learning at a distance. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 497–511. 
Blake, R. (2009). The use of technology for second language distance learning. Modern Language 
Journal, 93(S1), 822–835. 
Blake, R., & Zyzik, E. (2003). Who’s helping whom? Learner/heritage-speakers’ networked discussions 
in Spanish. Applied Linguistics, 24(4), 519–544. 
Brandt, A., & Jenks, C. J. (2013). Computer-mediated spoken interaction: Aspects of trouble in multi-
party chat rooms. Language@Internet, 10, article 5. Retrieved from 
http://www.languageatinternet.org/articles/2013/Brandt 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
Brown, R. (1973). A first language: The early stages. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Brutten, S. R., Mouw, J. T., & Perkins, K. (1986). The effects of language group, proficiency level, and 
instruction on ESL subjects’ control of the d and z morphemes. TESOL Quarterly, 20(3), 553–559. 
Celce-Murcia, M., & Larsen-Freeman, D. (1983). The grammar book: An ESL/EFL teacher’s course. 
Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Chapelle, C. (1997). CALL in the year 2000: Still in search of research paradigms? Language Learning & 
Technology, 1(1), 19–43. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/chapelle/default.html 
Collentine, K. (2009). Learner use of holistic language units in multimodal, task-based synchronous 
computer-mediated communication. Language Learning & Technology, 13(2), 68–87. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num2/collentine.pdf 
De la Fuente, M. (2003). Is SLA interactionist theory relevant to CALL? A study on the effects of 
computer-mediated interaction in L2 vocabulary acquisition. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 
16(1), 47–81. 
DeKeyser, R. M. (2005). What makes learning second-language grammar difficult? A review of issues. 
Language Learning, 55(S1), 1–25. 
Doughty, C., & Long, M. H. (2003). Optimal psycholinguistic environments for distance foreign 
language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 50–80. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/doughty/ 
Doughty, C., & Pica, T. (1986). “Information gap” tasks: Do they facilitate second language acquisition? 
TESOL Quarterly, 20(2), 305–325. 
Duff, P. (1986). Investigating tasks in language learning. Language Learning, 23(3), 45–56. 
Gass, S., & Varonis, E. (1994). Input, interaction, and second language production. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 16(3), 283–302. 
Gass, S., Mackey, A., & Ross-Feldman, L. (2005). Task-based interactions in classroom and laboratory 
settings. Language Learning, 55(4), 575–661. 
Geng, Z., & Takatsuka, S. (2009). Task-based peer-peer collaborative dialog in a computer-mediated 
learning environment in the EFL context. System, 37(3), 434–446. 
Hampel, R., & Hauck, M. (2004). Towards an effective use of audio conferencing in distance language 
courses. Language, Learning & Technology, 8(1), 66–82. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num1/hampel/default.html 
Hatch, E. (1978). Second language acquisition: A book of readings. Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Jepson, K. (2005). Conversations—and negotiated interaction—in text and voice chat rooms. Language 
Learning & Technology, 9(3), 79–98. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/jepson/default.html 
Lasito, & Storch, N. (2013). Comparing pair and small group interactions on oral tasks. RELC Journal, 
44(3), 361–375. 
Lee, L. (2002). Synchronous online exchanges: A study of modification devices on nonnative discourse 
interaction. System, 30(3), 275–288. 
Lee, L. (2008). Focus-on-form through collaborative scaffolding in expert-to-novice online interaction, 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(3), 53–72. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/lee.pdf 
Loewen, S., & Erlam, R. (2006). Corrective feedback in the chatroom: An experimental study. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 19(1), 1–14. 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
Loewen, S., & Reissner, S. (2009). A comparison of incidental focus-on-form in the second language 
classroom and chatroom. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 22(2), 101–114. 
Long, M. H. (1980). Input, interaction, and second language acquisition. (Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation). University of California, Los Angeles, CA. 
Long, M. H. (1981). Input, interaction, second-language acquisition. In H. Winitz (Ed.), Native language 
and foreign language acquisition (pp. 259–278). New York, NY: New York Academy of Sciences. 
Long, M. H. (1991). Focus on form: A design feature in language teaching methodology. In K. de Bot, D. 
Coste, C. Kramsch, & R. Ginsberg (Eds.), Foreign language research in crosscultural perspective (pp. 
39–52). Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins. 
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. Ritchie 
& T. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413–468). San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press. 
Long, M. H., & Porter, P. A. (1985). Group work, interlanguage talk, and second language acquisition. 
TESOL Quarterly, 19(2), 207–227. 
Loschky, L., & Bley-Vroman, R. (1993). Grammar and task-based methodology. In G. Crookes & S. 
Gass (Eds.), Tasks and language learning: Integrating theory and practice (pp. 122–167). Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters. 
Mackey, A. (1999). Input, interaction, and second language development: An empirical study of input, 
interaction, and second language development. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 21(4), 557–588. 
Palmer, F. R. (1974). The English verb. London, UK: Longman. 
Palmer, F. R. (1990), Modality and the English modals 2nd Edition, London, UK: Longman. 
Payne, J. S., & Whitney, P. J. (2002). Developing L2 oral proficiency through synchronous CMC: 
Output, working memory, and interlanguage development. CALICO Journal, 20(1), 7–32. 
Pellettieri, J., (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical 
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern. (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and 
practices (pp. 59–86). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Pica, T. (2012). Naturalistic and instructed language learning. In P. Robinson (Ed.), The Routledge 
encyclopedia of second language acquisition (pp. 455–458). London, UK: Routledge. 
Pica, T., & Doughty, C. (1985). Input and interaction in the communicative language classroom: A 
comparison of teacher-fronted and group activities. In S. Gass & C. Madden (Eds.), Input in second 
language acquisition (pp. 115–132). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Pica, T., Kanagy, R., & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second language 
research and instruction. In G. Crookes & S. Gass (Eds.), Tasks and second language learning (pp. 9–34). 
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Pica, T., Kang, H., & Sauro, S. (2006). Information gap tasks: Their multiple roles and contributions to 
interaction research methodology. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 28(2), 301–338. 
Pica, T., Lincoln-Parker, F., Paninos, D., & Linnet, J. (1996). Language learners’ interaction: How does it 
address the input, output, and feedback needs of L2 learner? TESOL Quarterly, 30(1), 59–84. 
Smith, B. (2003). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction: An expanded model. Modern Language 
Journal, 87(1), 38–57. 
 
Gisela Granena Individual versus Interactive Task-Based Performance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
Smith, B. (2004). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction and lexical acquisition. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 26(3), 365–398. 
Satar, H. M., & Ozdener, N. (2008). The effects of synchronous CMC on speaking proficiency and 
anxiety: Text versus voice chat. Modern Language Journal, 92(4), 595–613. 
Sauro, S. (2009). Computer-mediated corrective feedback and the development of second language 
grammar. Language Learning & Technology, 13(1), 96–120. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/sauro.pdf 
Sauro, S. (2011). SCMC for SLA: A research synthesis. CALICO Journal, 28(2), 369–391. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1998). Interaction and second language learning: Two adolescent French 
immersion students working together. Modern Language Journal, 82(3), 320–337. 
Tare, M., Golonka, E., Vatz, K., Bonilla, C., Crooks, C., & Strong, R. (2014). Effects of interactive chat 
vs. independent writing on L2 learning. Language Learning & Technology, 18(3), 208–227. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/tareetal.pdf 
Thompson, M. (2002). Modals in English language teaching. Retrieved from 
http://www.telusplanet.net/linguisticsissues/modalsinteaching.html 
Varonis, E. M. & Gass, S. (1985). Non-native/Non-native conversations: A model for negotiation of 
meaning. Applied Linguistics, 6(1), 71–90. 
Volle, L. M. (2005) Analyzing oral skills in voice e-mail and online interviews. Language Learning & 
Technology, 9(3), 146–163. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/pdf/volle.pdf 
Yamada, M., & Akahori, K. (2009). Awareness and performance through self- and partner’s image in 
videoconferencing. CALICO Journal, 27, 1–5. Retrieved from 
https://www.calico.org/memberBrowse.php?action=article&id=776 
Yilmaz, Y. (2012). The relative effects of explicit correction and recasts on two target structures via two 
communication modes. Language Learning, 62(4), 1134–1169. 
Yilmaz, Y., & Granena, G. (2010). The effects of task type in synchronous computer-mediated 
communication. ReCALL, 22(1), 20–38. 
