Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/review4.pdf 
October 2016, Volume 20, Number 3 
pp. 37–39 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 37 
REVIEW OF TEACHING LANGUAGES ONLINE 
Teaching Languages Online (2nd ed.) 
Carla Meskill & Natasha Anthony 
2015 
ISBN: 978-1-78309-376-2 
US $39.95 
248 pp. 
Multilingual Matters 
Buffalo, NY 
 
 
Review by Jeffrey Maloney and Jie Liu, Michigan State University 
As online technologies become more prevalent and ubiquitous, an increasing amount of programs are 
finding ways to take advantage of the online platform for delivering education to students. This trend is 
extending more and more to language instruction. Teaching Languages Online, by Meskill and Anthony, 
provides language educators with a comprehensive introduction to methods that encourage effective 
language teaching and learning in a variety of environments. The authors preface their second edition as 
being focused on increasing the abilities of both novice and experienced teachers to deliver dynamic and 
successful language instruction in blended or online formats. Readers will notice that sprinkled 
throughout the book are definitions and explanations of principles of language learning and teaching 
supported by research, which makes the volume more accessible to teachers who may have limited 
training in language pedagogy. Of specific focus are four different modes of online communication: oral 
synchronous, oral asynchronous, written synchronous, and written asynchronous. The authors outline 
multiple strategies for deploying online resources into systematic teaching processes to benefit language 
educators in various contexts. Also listed are relevant online resources for language educators at the end 
of each chapter. 
Compared to the first edition published in 2010, the new edition integrates the latest online tools and 
materials to date, which makes it suitable for instructors who are looking for the latest resources. The 
authors note that with the unprecedented growth of technology, students are increasingly using their 
mobile devices to practice or learn languages. As a result, instructors are competing for students’ attention 
since the environments in which the students are learning are not as focused as the classroom. Meskill and 
Anthony have attempted to address this problem by providing suggestions for ways to compensate. For 
instance, they illustrate how teachers can use chat areas to assure students' attentiveness in oral online 
environments; the creative employment of images can be used to attract students’ attention and elicit 
discussion in written environments. Another addition is the use of multiple instructional uses of three-
dimensional virtual worlds (e.g., Second Life) to build online target language environments that resemble 
authentic situations and carry out meaningful task-based language teaching and learning methods. This 
new edition also includes more illustrations on new tools and their applications in a wider range of 
languages, including English, Spanish, Russian, Chinese, and Japanese. 
Jeffrey Maloney and Jie Liu Review of Teaching Languages Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology  38 
The authors provide readers with practical strategies and examples on how to make use of various online 
tools and resources in each instruction module. Each chapter is presented in relatively the same format but 
adjusted to focus on the different environments. Strategies included are calling attention to forms, guiding 
learners to use target structures, and providing feedback. Each chapter also ends with summaries and 
sample activities. 
The first chapter offers an overview of what the authors term the essentials for online language teaching 
(p. 2). Included are brief discussions of time commitment, task structure, and assessment. After a general 
introduction of essentials for effective online language teaching in Chapter 1, the authors focus Chapters 2 
and 3 on language learning and teaching in oral synchronous and asynchronous online environments. For 
instance, instructors can refer to the task toolkit—which includes essential language elements for a given 
task—when they want to emphasize a certain structure. In oral asynchronous teaching environments, 
instructors and students interact by posting audio and written messages. Meskill and Anthony further 
highlight websites such as Voxopop and VoiceThread that offer free tools for asynchronous voice 
communication. Chapter 4 offers a review of the previous two chapters and discusses how to enhance oral 
instruction with text and visuals. 
Chapters 5 and 6 focus on various teaching methods for written instruction in synchronous and 
asynchronous online environments. In written synchronous environments, real-time written exchanges 
occur in the form of chat or texting. The authors provide a number of examples to illustrate how online 
instructors can incorporate a variety of virtual resources, such as chatting tools, videos, dictionaries, and 
three-dimensional games to guide students’ attention and facilitate practice. They also introduce strategies 
on how to integrate multimodal resources for effective teaching. Written asynchronous online 
environments have been proven extremely successful and are also considered by some educators as the 
most widely used and simplest to manipulate. The authors discuss how to incorporate multimodal tools 
and resources with ample time allowed in the environments to guide students’ attention and develop 
appropriate tasks. In Chapter 7, they also review how to use sound and visuals to effectively increase 
salience and familiarity with the materials along with promoting attentiveness to each lesson or module.  
In the last chapter, Chapter 8, the authors summarize the advantages and versatility of language teaching 
and learning in online formats. They briefly review the five skills of reading, listening, composition, 
speaking, and pronunciation and intonation. They include a review of different kinds of curricula that 
instructors can use as a base for their classes. With the abundance of multimodal online news 
programming and literature, instructors can easily access these resources to develop a current-events-
based or literature-based curriculum. The authors also discuss how virtual environments can offer 
information about the target culture, which can add depth to a culture-based online curriculum. Other 
types of curricula including theme-based, grammar-based, specific purposes-based, and functions-based 
are discussed as well. The authors also list what constitutes good instructional design, and they view 
flexible responsiveness as the primary principle (p. 223). 
In summary, Teaching Language Online provides a positive contribution to language pedagogy in online 
contexts. It covers a wide swath of strategies and practices for instruction in different environments and 
ways to produce tasks and lessons that can maintain attention and provide focused instruction and 
feedback. It may be more suited to contexts in which instruction is mostly focused on online experiences 
where interactions are mostly with the instructor or other students (e.g., discussion boards or blogs). 
While Meskill and Anthony provide ideas for free online tools, the strategies and discussions on how to 
incorporate major social media platforms may also be helpful. Overall, Teaching Languages Online is 
appropriate as a reference for online instruction in a variety of blended learning or online-only contexts. 
Instructors looking for a broader understanding of practices and techniques for online language 
instruction may be well served by this text. Instructors new to online language teaching are able to obtain 
systematic information on each instructional move, and the inclusion of introductions to different terms 
and teaching methods make it very approachable. Experienced instructors can also refer to this book for a 
Jeffrey Maloney and Jie Liu Review of Teaching Languages Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology  39 
list of updated tools and resources. In addition, the authors manage to take into consideration both a focus 
on forms and a focus on meaning aspect of language in teaching, further adding to its appeal. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Jeffrey Maloney is a Ph.D. student in the Second Language Studies Program at Michigan State 
University. His research interests include extramural technology use and its effects on instructed language 
learning and technology use within the SLA classroom. 
E-mail: malone88@msu.edu 
Jie Liu is a Ph.D. student in the Second Language Studies Program at Michigan State University. Her 
research interests include L2 acquisition of morphosyntax and L2 sentence processing. 
E-mail: liujie3@msu.edu 
