Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/doolysadler.pdf 
February 2016, Volume 20, Number 1 
pp. 54–78 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 54
BECOMING LITTLE SCIENTISTS: TECHNOLOGICALLY-ENHANCED 
PROJECT-BASED LANGUAGE LEARNING 
Melinda Dooly, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona 
Randall Sadler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
This article outlines research into innovative language teaching practices that make 
optimal use of technology and Computer-Mediated Communication (CMC) for an 
integrated approach to Project-Based Learning. It is based on data compiled during a 10-
week language project that employed videoconferencing and machinima (short video clips 
featuring virtual world avatars) to introduce young language learners (7 to 8 years old) to 
concepts of good and bad habits related to personal hygiene, physical activities, and 
eating. Within the Project-Based Language Learning approach (PBLL), the students 
gained new information about the topic under study, and this information was then used to 
communicate face-to-face (with classmates) and online (with telecollaborative partners) in 
the target language of English in order to resolve problems related to the topic. The 
authors provide a detailed overview of the project workflow as part of a qualitative study 
into the efficacy of the proposed pedagogical framework. 
Keywords: Collaborative Learning, Computer-Mediated Communication, Language 
Teaching Methodology, Second Language Acquisition, Task-Based Instruction
APA Citation: Dooly, M., & Sadler, R. (2016). Becoming little scientists: technology-
enhanced project-based language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 20(1), 54–
78. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/doolysadler.pdf
Received: March 5, 2014; Accepted: December 31, 2014; Published: February 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Melinda Dooly & Randall Sadler 
INTRODUCTION 
Language teaching is becoming increasingly more sophisticated as teachers take up the call to integrate 
innovative materials, resources (including technology), and strategies into their own practice. For 
instance, the rise of freely available social media for communicating with others, combined with time-
tested teaching approaches such as project-based learning, is attracting growing interest from language 
educators (what Gumock, Debski, and Wigglesworth (2005, p. 121) call “Project-oriented computer-
assisted language learning or PrOCALL”). This bespeaks the need for a variety of research into the 
optimization of this pedagogical proposal—what we call Technology-Enhanced Project-Based Language 
Learning (herein TEPBLL). Accordingly, studies into TEPBLL should not only focus on validating the 
approach via individual results of products stemming from its application but extensive investigation of 
processes should be carried out, in order to facilitate better understanding of how the integration of 
project content, materials, resources, technology, teaching strategies, and human interaction all contribute 
to the successful implementation of TEPBLL. 
As a follow-up to a prior study that looked at learners’ language output (Sadler & Dooly, 2013), this 
article provides an in-depth exploration of a TEPBLL project carried out with young, beginner language 
learners. The previous study found that the young language learners increased their production of simple 
sentences in the target language following a semester of TEPBLL instruction. Following on that pilot 
study report, the aim of this study is to account for “the social and cultural complexities entailed when 
diverse individuals come together for joint purposes” (Meskill, 2013, p. 1)—in this case, the completion 
of the task sequences encompassed within a second, 10-week TEPBLL venture. To do so, the researchers 
adopted an “inductive, data-driven, bottom-up approach” in order to see the “relevant social and linguistic 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
phenomena” (Levon, 2013, p. 197) that emerges through participant observation (data collection that 
allowed the researchers “to become both an active member of the goings-on of the community and to 
observe those activities as they unfold” (Levon, 2013, p. 204). As will be demonstrated further on in the 
article, the data indicate that the TEPBLL design was highly motivational and provided ample 
opportunities for the young learners to mediate both language learning and complex concepts related to 
the content of the project while at the same time providing them with purposeful moments to practice 
social language. 
Following the “principles of operation” for educational ethnography to ensure transparency in the 
analytical process (Heath, 1982, quoted in Green, Skukauskaite, & Baker, 2012, p. 312), the authors offer 
a rich description of both the project design and its implementation before moving on to an emic approach 
to the language teaching and learning process in order to explore the complexity of this type of 
pedagogical framework (e.g. interaction of teacher-initiated scaffolding, peer collaboration, material-
supported- and technologically-enhanced knowledge production, etc.). 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND AND BRIEF LITERATURE REVIEW 
The past decade and a half has seen critiques of “classic” language assessment, which principally focuses 
on the testing of final output that is either correct or incorrect. Researchers and theorists have begun to 
call for a more context-sensitive model of dynamic assessment which takes into account process as well 
as product (see Poehner & Lantolf, 2005; Rea-Dickins & Gardner, 2000). At the same time, there has 
been a growing interest in research and practice of telecollaborative practices in language teaching and 
learning (cf. Guth & Helm, 2012; Helm, Guth, & O'Dowd, 2012; Kessler, 2013; Schenker, 2012), 
especially as teachers and learners become more familiar with what Thorne (2012) calls “conventional 
Internet-mediated tools” (p. 19); however, there have been few studies on the use of online collaborative 
learning with young (beginning) language learners (although see Gruson, 2010; Gruson & Barnes, 2012; 
Kennedy & Miceli, 2013; Ko, 2012; Ramírez Verdugo & Alonso Belmonte, 2007; Tolosa, East, & 
Villers, 2013). There may be several possible reasons as to why the use of CMC (apart from some 
practices such as school blogs) occurs principally in secondary education or university levels (Milton & 
Garbi, 2000). The main challenges stem from specificities of teaching the young language learner: 
limitations of interests and comprehensive topics, minimal technological skills, and the fact that little or 
no written input can be used (depending on the age and level). Further complications lie in the need for 
somewhat sophisticated oral language use if the pedagogical design aims for telecollaboration with other 
speakers. 
Another issue may be the teacher’s understandings of the (ir)relevance of CMC for primary education. 
Computer-Assisted Language Learning (CALL) games—many of which, especially virtual worlds, 
resemble CMC platforms—have been used in primary education for years; however, these games, 
although perhaps more cartoonish in order to appeal to young learners, usually involve individual-
computer interaction without much need for social interaction with others in the virtual environment. The 
interaction tends to be linear, controlled tasks that build on “correct” input so that learners advance from 
more simple to more complex learning situations. They also focus more on acquiring lexicon, syntax, and 
morphological knowledge and less on real communication. 
Despite the oft-cited constraints of implementing technology-enhanced online collaborative learning with 
very young language learners, this project embraced the premise that telecollaboration—even with 
beginning learners—can provide fundamental opportunities for communicative exchanges which are key 
to long-term language learning. 
Project-Based Language Learning 
The pedagogical framework for Healthy Habits,1 the series of lessons used in this study, is Project-Based 
Language Learning (PBLL) as promoted by Beckett and Slater (2005), Fried-Booth (2002), and Stoller 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
(2006), who, in turn, based their work on socioconstructivist principles that underlie what the Buck 
Institute of Education (BIE) refers to as Project-Based Learning (BIE, 2003). The BIE defines Project-
Based Learning (PBL) as a “systematic teaching method that engages students in learning knowledge and 
skills through an extended inquiry process structured around complex, authentic questions and carefully 
designed products and tasks” (BIE, 2003:4). As discussed by Dooly (2013), PBLL fits easily within an 
approach consistent with Communicative Language Teaching (CLT; see J. Richards, 2005). As part of a 
larger, ethnographic study, this articles focuses on learning development rather than on specific 
quantifiable, isolated language production because the aim of this study is to have a better understanding 
of the socially constructed learning process (cf. Johnson, 2009; Lantolf & Thorne, 2006; Meskill, 2013) 
and whether the TEPBLL design is validated. 
METHODS 
To establish a baseline for measuring the success of the pedagogical intervention, a collective overview of 
the prescribed set of learning objectives (pre- and post-project) for the students is given. This is followed 
by a presentation of naturally occurring talk-in-interaction (Antaki, 2004; Heritage, 1999, 2004, 2010; 
Sacks, 1972; Schegloff, 1988, 1989) in order to tease out the way in which the participants produce an 
orderly social world, thereby allowing an emic perspective of the integration of teacher and material 
“scaffolding” (Vygotsky, 1978) in the complexity of the in situ learning process taking place within the 
pedagogical framework. 
The analysis of the interaction follows from Goodwin and Goodwin’s (2004) understanding of talk as 
embedded in social activities (see also Goodwin, 2000; Olsher, 2004). According to Goodwin and 
Goodwin, the act of speaking always emerges within complex and changing contextual configurations. 
These configurations include participants drawing on the semiotic resources provided by the context 
(gestures, artifacts, etc.) to orient themselves and others toward the actions in progress (in that moment) 
as well as broader activities (e.g. entire lesson, project, etc.). This understanding of the interaction 
provides a framework for investigating how individuals mutually build action (in this case, co-production 
of knowledge), while at the same time attending to, and helping to construct, other relevant actions and 
context. Moving from this premise, this study examines the complex ways in which the different 
resources provided by the pedagogical design become integrated into the co-constructed meaning-making 
process between the teacher, student, materials and technology during the TEPBLL implementation. 
Student Participants 
The student participants in this project came from three classes, two from Spain (classes A and B) and 
one from Austria (class C). In class A, there were 26 students (14 boys, 12 girls), while in class B there 
were 25 students (13 girls, 12 boys), all between the ages of 7 and 8 years old. They were in their 2nd 
year of early childhood education and were beginners in English as a Foreign Language. Class C, which 
was made up of mixed development levels and ages (from 6 to 8 years old), consisted of 24 students. As 
with their counterparts, they were beginners in English as a Foreign Language. 
Given the parameters of PBLL and the constraints found in teaching a foreign language in an environment 
where the target language is not a daily factor in the learners’ lives, the use of telecollaboration became an 
integral component of the project. It is not only the straightforward means of communication between 
distanced learners that justifies the integration of telecollaborative practices into the learning process: 
adherents of this approach also underline the role computer-mediated communication can have in 
promoting increased shared knowledge construction based on collaborative student interaction (Hampel 
& Pleines, 2013; Lamy & Hampel, 2007; Müller-Hartmann & Schocker-v. Ditfurth, 2011), which 
provides the foundation for successful PBLL planning and implementation. 
 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
Project Design: Pedagogical Framework  
Healthy Habits was designed from the perspective that language practice and content knowledge 
acquisition are part of the same process. The project endeavored to create learning opportunities that 
allowed the students to become immersed in the use of the target language while learning to work in 
groups (face-to-face and via online collaboration). The students also came to relate topics across subjects 
(although the collaboration between subject teachers was not to such an extent that this project can be 
considered Content and Language Integrated Learning (CLIL; see Coyle (2008) for a more in-depth 
discussion of CLIL parameters). The interrelationship between topic and language stemmed from learner 
reflection and discussion on the relevance of the learnt concepts: apart from direct subject knowledge 
(good habits, bad habits, specific lexicon), students were required to reflect on cause and effect of the 
daily actions that were the focus of the project. In short, the TEPBLL design allowed for a highly 
complex, yet wholly integrated learning environment, where meaning-making occurred through 
interaction and mediation between the teachers, students, materials, and technology. 
Stoller (2002) proposes a sequencing of steps for designing and implementing a language learning project 
that involves the students in the beginning phases of the project design and development. However, given 
the age of the students, decisions concerning initial stages of the project (theme, final outcomes, project 
structure, materials development for preparing the students for the language demands of each phase) were 
taken by the teachers and researchers involved and did not involve negotiation with the students. A 
complete outline of the focal activities, related tasks for language preparation, and anticipated gains in 
specific competencies for the 10-week period is shown in Table 1. 
Table 1. Activity Outline: 10-Week Period 
Specific student tasks Specific linguistic aptitudes 
and/or target lexicon 
Cross-disciplinary activities & 
competences 
Week 1: Creation of VoiceThread™ presentations 
 Individual written presentations 
(name, age, something unique…) 
Introducing one’s self ICT: use of audio recorder (diction 
with a microphone, etc.) 
 Orally record prepared text Personal information: age, 
likes and dislikes, family 
relationships, physical 
descriptions… 
Interpersonal: introductions 
Week 2: Listening to partner schools' video presentations (information gathering) 
 Watch partners’ video presentations 
 
Listen for gist Geography: locate partner school 
on map; learn expansive domains 
(city, state, country, continent) 
 Compare information (similarities & 
differences) between groups 
Comprehension of 
descriptions 
Intercultural competences: interest 
in others 
  Use of comparatives   
Week 3: Use of flashcards (specific target language); creation of posters about partner schools 
 Listening/comprehension & giving 
physical descriptions (using avatars 
and games) 
Use of specific lexicon 
(physical descriptions) 
Physical education: physical 
activities needed for healthy body 
 Create posters about partner school 
based on information from video 
presentation 
Use of greetings Intercultural competences: interest 
in others 
  Formulate simple questions 
 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
Week 4: Short videoconference; machinima (healthy/unhealthy habits); poster of good/bad habits 
 Videoconference (small groups) Oral comprehension; 
recognition of different 
intonations/accents 
Social Studies: visit local market 
to buy healthy snacks 
 Machinima clip: respond to avatars’ 
statements (e.g. smoking is a healthy 
habit) with true/false 
Oral comprehension aided 
by visual and textual 
imagery 
Intercultural competence: relating 
known facts with new knowledge 
about other cultures 
 Poster of information: good/bad 
habits 
Use of greetings ICT: use of social media; video 
cameras & microphones 
  Simple questions  
  Polite responses  
Week 5: Vocabulary flashcards; poster (connections between good/bad habits and consequences) 
 Flashcard games: habits and 
consequences 
New specific lexicon Catalan: individual dossiers of trip 
to market 
 Create poster of consequences Comprehension of causal 
conjunctions (e.g. 
‘because’) 
Maths: market budget (to spend & 
amount left over) 
Week 6: Machinima (How do scientists observe human behavior?); simple report; case studies 
 Revise what scientists do Comprehension skills (gist 
using context and visual 
cues) 
ICT: use laptop computers (stop, 
rewind, repetition, etc. 
 Learn to observe and fill in simple 
report 
Make connections btw oral 
input and written text 
Reasoning: relate oral statements 
to listed facts 
 Observe case study and fill in report 
(small groups) 
Recognition of target 
lexicon (oral & written) 
 
 Compare/correct answers with others   
Week 7: Case studies; Videoconference 2 
 View case studies (whole class) Greetings Intercultural competences; interest 
in others, learn about other 
cultures 
 Act as “experts” to facilitate 
comprehension of behaviour for rest 
of class 
Give simple information ICT: use of social media; video 
cameras and microphones 
 Videoconference 2: information gaps  Ask for clarification  
  Give polite responses  
Week 8: Final report; cause and effect; suggestions 
 Compare information gathered Making suggestions (use of 
modal auxiliary should) 
Interpersonal competences: 
empathy for others 
 Fill in final report regarding avatar's 
habits and subsequent health 
problems 
Revision of target lexicon Social Science: understand causal 
relationships (e.g. bad posture 
causes backaches). 
 Draw conclusions; make suggestions 
to improve avatars’ health 
Experiment with new 
language possibilities 
(language creativity & 
risk—taking) 
 
 
 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
Week 9: Machinima viewing 
 
 Listen to scientist avatars explain 
actions taken (based on suggestions) 
and results of actions 
Oral comprehension of 
cause-effect explanations 
Social Science: understand causal 
relationships (e.g. bad posture 
causes backaches). 
  Connect oral 
comprehension to written 
texts (handout) 
 
Week 10: “Talk show” interview; final written evaluation 
 Answer avatars’ interview questions 
about what they have learnt  
Oral comprehension of 
direct questions 
 Cross-disciplinary 
 Demonstrate comprehension of 
written text, with use of images 
Formulate simple answers  
 Categorize information (problem, 
good habit, bad habit, etc.) 
Read target lexicon  
 Show understanding of causal 
relationships 
Explain causal relationships  
  Use of conjunction 
(because) 
 
  Make suggestions  
Project Design: Materials and Technological Resources 
The project was carried out during 10 weeks in the 2011-2012 academic year. The teachers and 
researchers involved in Healthy Habits were two EFL primary education teachers: Maria Mont (CEIP St. 
Jordi, Catalonia, Spain) and Manuela Ebner (Praxis Volkschule, Vienna, Austria); teacher educators and 
researchers Melinda Dooly, (Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain) and Randall Sadler (University 
of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA). The materials were developed by Dooly and Sadler in close 
consultation with the EFL teachers and with some collaboration from student-teachers enrolled in their 
university classes at the time. 
The teachers began with specific linguistic objectives that they had to meet in order to complete their 
school curriculum: describe physical appearance and character, know when and how to give and receive 
basic greetings, talk about daily routines, use adequately selected adverbs of frequency, use appropriately 
selected “functional” language (e.g. “Can you repeat, please?”). Added to this were the linguistic and 
cognitive demands required for completing the sequenced tasks during the period of the project (e.g. 
recognition and production of specialized lexicon, comprehension and production of complex sentence 
structures that indicate cause and effect, receptive and productive skills required for presenting and 
receiving information, asking for clarification, and giving suggestions). 
Social media resources were widely used during the project, as both a means of materials production and 
for in-class activities focused on communication. Principal among the resources were scientist avatars, 
which, along with other specially created personalities, were used to create machinima—short video clips 
filmed in a virtual world—in this case, Second Life (the article provides hotlinks to materials and videos 
(machinima clips) which can be accessed by going to the list of URLs in the Appendix A). 
Through weekly online meetings between the EFL teachers and researchers, activities were conceived, 
discussed, and designed (note that the initial planning of the overall project began several months before 
first implementation; the meetings during implementation were generally for “fine-tuning”). In-class 
teaching strategies included role-playing and dialogic use of common resources such as flashcards (see 
Figure 1), posters, and worksheets, most of which were produced during the online meetings and often 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
with free, online platforms. These materials were “handmade” using the online cartoon strip creation tool 
Bitstrips because of the very specific nature of the required lexicon (lice, bad teeth and spots are not 
usually high on publishing houses’ list of “need-to-know” words that are included in course books). 
 
Figure 1. Examples of flashcards. 
Voice Over Internet Protocol (VOIP) was another technology that was integrated into the learning process 
and which was especially important for promoting oral production by the students. In this case, free 
Skype™ software was employed for videoconferencing (see Figure 2), allowing the teachers to create 
periodic events that obliged students to engage with their online partners in authentic communication, 
whether introducing themselves or co-constructing knowledge through shared information about the 
target content between the two classes. The design of the project ensured that there was a real purpose for 
the students to use the target language (communicating real ideas) and also reinforced the use of English 
as a means of authentic communication with others who do not share the same language. The students 
soon came to realize that they had to use English as it was the only way to converse with their online 
peers. How all of these resources were integrated into the project is discussed in more detail in the next 
section. 
 
Figure 2. Images of the first videoconference. 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
Project implementation 
At the beginning of the project, students were introduced to the general concepts of what they would be 
doing during the 10 weeks through an initial “meeting” with two avatar scientists. In this first clip, the 
two scientist avatars (Dr. Stella and Dr. Albert) purposefully greeted the participating teachers by name, 
in order to engage the students on a personal level and to personalize the learning context (see Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. Healthy Habits introduction in machinima. 
Next, the two avatars explained: who they were (their names), what they were (scientists who study 
healthy and unhealthy habits) and what they did in order to study these habits (observation of boys’ and 
girls’ different habits, both healthy and unhealthy). The scientist avatars then told the students that they 
needed assistance and asked the students in the two schools if they would be willing to help (videotapes 
of the students’ reactions show a resoundingly enthusiastic affirmation). The scientist avatars went on to 
outline the type of help they would need: the students were to help in “collecting data” through case study 
observation by becoming little scientists. As indicated in Figure 4, the students in Spain and Austria 
viewed identical versions of this first machinima—the reasons for different versions of later machinima 
will be explained below. 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
 
Figure 4. Spain-Austria machinima project collaboration stages. 
In a nutshell, students were asked to become “little scientists” in order to help out Dr. Albert and Dr. 
Stella (the avatar scientists) in their observations of three case studies (other “teen” avatars created for the 
project). In order to do so, the crucial information that they would need to understand was introduced 
gradually through the aforementioned flashcard images, along with worksheets to provide a framework 
for required language structures. In subsequent machinima clips, the scientists and other avatars were 
used for interactive listening activities that focused the students’ attention on recognizing types of habits 
(healthy and unhealthy), categorizing those habits (e.g. smoking is an unhealthy habit), the symptoms or 
problems related to certain unhealthy habits, and the benefits related to certain healthy ones (see Figure 
5). 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
  
Figure 5. Scientist avatars discuss good and bad habits. 
The Healthy Habits introduction machinima (produced with the help from future ESL/EFL teachers who 
were taking teacher education courses being taught by the researchers) helped the students to recognize, 
name, and classify different habits (e.g. smoking, eating lots of vegetables, etc.). It is important to note 
that this video (and the project in general) was introducing vocabulary, content materials, and ideas that 
their teachers might normally have considered as being beyond the L2 abilities of these students. As seen 
in the introductory machinima, the use of the virtual world allowed the teachers and researchers to 
introduce the vocabulary and complicated concepts in a contextualized manner that would be almost 
impossible to accomplish in a regular classroom setting. This was simultaneously complemented and 
supported by activities that used the flashcards, and students began making associations between different 
types of habits and possible consequences through the use of the worksheets and general classroom 
discussion. 
Through iterative use of the materials, the students had continued exposure to target content (both 
linguistic and conceptual). For example, the flashcards had a recurrent role in the on-going activities: 
students used them to create posters, play games, and exchange information in videoconferences with 
their online partners. The images used in the flashcards also served as visual aids to facilitate students’ 
comprehension of oral texts, as in the case studies (explained in more detail further on). These same 
figures were used in the supplementary handouts created for the lessons. For instance, students were 
required to reflect on cause and effect of the daily actions that were the focus of the project (e.g. brushing 
teeth, eating too many sweets, sleeping enough, etc.) by connecting the avatars’ differences in appearance 
and health, due to changed behavior (as illustrated in Susan’s case in Figure 6).
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
 
Figure 6. Handout of changes in Smelly Susan. 
Next, working in small groups, students were given three “cases” to observe as “scientists” in order to 
gather data about the subjects’ good and bad habits. The case studies (again, using machinima) consisted 
of Dr. Stella and Dr. Albert “interviewing” three teen avatars about their habits. The avatars were 
designed as teens in order to represent slightly older, more prestigious role models for the younger 
students. In each case, the “subjects” (Gameboy Gary, Hungry Helga, and Smelly Susan) had a mixture of 
healthy and unhealthy habits, with one predominant unhealthy one. To give an example, Gameboy Gary 
(see Figure 7) was addicted to videogames and subsequently did not sleep enough, had a backache, red 
eyes, hand pain, and so forth. His problems grew worse over each interview. 
Austria Version Spain Version 
  
Figure 7. Gameboy Gary interviews. 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
Each of the case study subjects was interviewed three times, with the dates given for each interview 
approximately one month apart. This was done to better illustrate the progression of the symptoms of 
each subject over time. 
The three interviews for each subject were edited together into one movie for the students to watch at the 
same time in their classrooms so that they could more easily notice the changes in behavior and 
symptoms of the subjects, with title screens before each clip giving the date of that interview segment. 
This also gave their teachers the ability to stop the machinimas at any time for questions and discussion 
and to repeat segments as needed. 
Two versions of each interview for each subject were created (one version for Austria and one for Spain), 
as shown for Gameboy Gary in Figure 8. This resulted in three interviews each for Gameboy Gary, 
Hungry Helga, and Smelly Susan (nine interviews total for the three case studies), with two variations of 
each of those interviews, resulting in 18 interview segments. 
 
Figure 8. Gameboy Gary interview schedule. 
All segments included sufficient repetition of similar phrasing for the students to become familiar with all 
of the key target structures. As partially detailed in Table 2, the basic context of the two versions is the 
same: Doctor Stella interviews Gameboy Gary three times over a three-month period, and Gary’s main 
health issues relate to his spending too much time playing video games. The exact dates of the interviews, 
the questions asked, and Gary’s responses, however, varied between the two versions. 
Table 2. Gameboy Gary: Austria versus Spain Versions 
Interview Detail Austria Spain 
Interview 1 date January 5th January 2nd 
Question 1 How are you today? How are you today? 
Question 1 response I’m so-so. I’m so-so. 
Question 2 Do you have healthy habits? Do you have healthy habits? 
Question 2 response Hmm, I don’t know. Hmm, I don’t know. 
Question 3 Do you eat fruit Do you eat vegetables? 
Question 3 response Yes, I do. Yes, I do. 
Question 4 Do you have a shower every day? Do you wash your hands? 
Question 4 response Yes, I do. No, I don’t. 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
The collaborative element of the project was brought into play by introducing the two classes to one 
another. This was done both asynchronously through individually produced online, voice-animated 
presentations (via the online platform VoiceThread™) along with photo “ID cards” with text descriptions; 
and synchronously through a whole-class videoconference (see Figure 2) via Skype. The impetus for oral 
production of the target language was reinforced by the need to think of unique features about themselves 
to be included in the VoiceThreads (no matter how short the oral texts, seventy slides that all repeat name, 
age, and where someone is from can become tedious, so students were asked to briefly explain something 
special about themselves). Once the students were more familiar with one other, the project moved on to 
focus on more content. 
Because the students in each country watched a different variation of the interview, the case study data 
(coming from their “scientific” observations) were different for each group, resulting in an Information 
Gap activity. Thus, although language use in all of the cases was similar, in the end each group had 
gathered different information 
Next, with the information gathered from their observations, the classes exchanged information about the 
cases in a Skype videoconference, filling each other in about missing information and then putting forth 
ideas for the “subjects” to improve detected bad habits. Following this, the students combined the 
information to make suggestions on how the subject avatars might improve their habits (see Figure 9). 
 
Name: Sabina 
Date: Thursday 2n of Mai 2012 
Healthy Habits Suggestions 
Susan 
 
Susan should… 
1.  Brush your teeth 
2. Practics [practice] sports 
3. Hae [have] a shower every 
4. Sleep 8 houers [hours] a day 
5. Eat fruits and vetables [vegetables] 
Wash your face 
 
Susan shouldn’t… 
1. Drink lots of coca-cola 
2. Sleep 4 houers [hours] a dai [day] 
3. Have a bad poster [posture] 
Figure 9. Suggestions worksheet for Smelly Susan. 
The results of their suggestions were communicated to the students by the avatar scientists during an 
“interview of the scientist” (again through machinima) to ensure that the learners were aware of the 
impact of their suggestions, thereby validating their learning (in both content and language—in this case, 
oral production). In the final step—and as a means of assessing the learning that had taken place—Drs. 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
Stella and Albert invited the two schools to participate in an online talk show (see Figure 10), during 
which, as experts, the students were asked increasingly difficult questions about the language and content 
that they had been exploring throughout the project. The students’ answers to the interview questions 
were not included in the video to protect student identities; however, a sample answer to the question, 
“Can you explain a healthy habit?” is transcribed in Extract 2. A final individual, written evaluation (see 
Figure 11) was also given to the students, based on the vocabulary and concepts learned during the 
project. 
  
Figure 10. Results video and talk show template. 
 
Figure 11. Examples of individual assessment. 
RESULTS 
The results show that the majority of the class participants not only assimilated the core curricular 
objectives set by the teachers but also that several students were able to produce target language structures 
far beyond the expected output of learners at this age and level (e.g. the use of modality and the creative 
“free-form” reproduction of language structures in other contexts). Although the focus of this study is on 
the interactional complexity of the integration of talk, gestures, and scaffolding resources, Table 3 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
provides a general overview of the levels of assimilation of the various objectives for each class at the 
initiation and end of the project. The percentages are based on recorded classes at the beginning of the 
project, teachers’ evaluation marks, and the final written and oral assessment exercises. Admittedly, this 
type of data analysis is inconsistent with a qualitative, ethnographic approach focused on learning 
processes, but it is presented here as a reference for measuring the assimilated objectives and outcomes of 
the project. 
Table 3. Comparison of Assimilation of Objectives Before and After Project for Catalonia (Classes 1 & 2) 
and Austria (Class 3) 
General curriculum objectives Start of the project End of the project 
 C1 C2 C3 C1 C2 C3 
Physical descriptions (understand, produce) 35% 30% 40% 95% 85% 100% 
Personality traits (understand, produce) None None 20% 70% 60% 70% 
Basic greetings (linguistic and sociopragmatic 
skills) 
40% 30% 30% 100% 100% 100% 
Daily routines (receptive and productive skills) 60% 55% 50% 100% 90% 85% 
Recognition and use of formulaic chunks (e.g. 
thank you, can you repeat please, etc.) 
10% 15% 25% 100% 95% 100% 
Project Objectives Start of the project End of the project 
 C1 C2 C3 C1 C2 C3 
Specialized lexicon (recognition, 
comprehension, and use in appropriate 
contexts) 
None None None 85% 70% 90% 
Formulaic language use for information 
exchange 
None None None 60% 60% 55% 
Giving suggestions None None None 30% 25% 20% 
Notes: Students in classes 1 and 2 had been introduced to descriptions in the previous academic year (Year 1 early childhood) 
but did not recall the information immediately. 
We now turn to the different sequenced activities supporting the socially constructed learning process that 
led to the assimilation of the majority of the project objectives. Our focus is on the interaction between 
the students, the avatars, and the students’ online partners (see Figure 12). In Extract 1, students give their 
online peers information they have gained about their case studies (i.e. a jigsaw puzzle type activity). 
 
Figure 12. Students exchange information about the case studies with their online partners. 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
Extract 1. Students exchange information with online partners (transcription key in Appendix B). 
Participants: Maria (teacher), Manuela (onscreen), Priscilla, Marvin (Austrian student onscreen) 
1 MAR: #### 
2 TCH: priscila? ((signalling with her hand for a student to reply to marvin)) 
3 PRI: 
qué (.) [qué?] ((sound from videoconference is very distorted; priscila looks at 
teacher for help)) 
4 
 
((trans.: is that (.) what?)) 
5 MAR:              [#] 
6 PRI: marvin, can you repeat? 
7 TCH: ºfantasticº ((compliments priscilla for her response)) 
8 MAN: # 
9 MAR: ##### 
10 
 
(.) ((students look confused)) 
11 TCH: can you show us the photo? marvin? can you show us the flashcard? 
  
 ((holds up two hands to imitate holding something in front of the screen)) ok 
what's this boys and girls? DRINking lots: of: 
12 SS: water= 
13 TCH: water (.) ah: in the video: they observed (.) that gary has a healthy habit:  
  
((pointing to students’ handouts)) was drinking lots of water ((gesticulates with 
a thumbs up)) can you circle please? ((circles with hand then snaps fingers and 
points to a student who is not paying attention)) (…) ((students take time to find 
and circle answer on their handouts)) 
14 TCH: drinking lots of water 
15 ?: 
drinking lots of water ((student imitates teacher accent while repeating the 
answer)) 
16 TCH: what do you say? 
17 PRI: thank you marvin ((others students join in)) 
In turns 6 and 17, Priscilla shows that she has the socio-pragmatic and linguistic competences to engage 
with others in the target language during a short, very guided videoconference. The students also 
demonstrate a growing recognition and use of lexicon associated with daily (healthy) habits such as 
drinking water (and frequency and amount). The individual final assessment (see Figure 11) showed that 
the majority (over 80%) of the students were able to associate the target lexicon with a picture of the 
activity and to then indicate whether it was a healthy habit, a bad habit, or a problem (conceptually quite 
difficult for seven year olds as they had to be able to differentiate between cause and effect; see Vander 
Zanden, Crandell, & Crandell, 2007). 
In the final “online talk show”, all of the students (including recently arrived immigrant students and 
students with special learning needs) were able to name concepts that they had learnt when asked by Dr. 
Albert or Dr. Stella to “explain to the audience” a healthy habit, bad habit, or problem. In Extract 2, 
Ruben is so excited about being requested to name some healthy habits that he refuses to give up the floor 
to the rest of his classmates. 
 
 
 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
Extract 2. Student responds to interview question. 
Participants: Maria (teacher); Ruben 
1 RUB: and: no no bad posture  (.) 
2 TCH: ## 
3 RUB: having a shower every day 
4 TCH: uh huh 
5 RUB: drinking lots of water 
6 TCH: uh huh uh huh 
7 RUB: washing hands and: no never brushing teeth 
8 TCH: uh huh (( students all turn to look at ruben)) 
9 RUB: em:: ((wanting to hold the floor)) no six hours pl- pl- play video games 
  
and: fifty minutes of playing video games 
10 TCH: uh huh 
11 RUB: no drinking lots of coca-cola  
12 TCH: uh huh ((begins to imitate falling asleep; other students giggle)) 
13 RUB: NO no hamburgers of mcdonald's every day AND eating fruit and eating 
  
vegetables every day ((gulps for air)) 
The questions gradually increased in difficulty. Some of the students were able provide recommendations 
for improving bad habits, while others gave answers that were results of re-creating input in a new 
construct and context: “Eating off the floor is a bad habit.” This was not a direct answer from any of the 
input (case studies, flashcards), but rather a re-construction of “Sit on the floor” (a common teacher 
instruction during many of the activities) and “eating fruits, vegetables, and so forth” which came from 
the machinima, flashcards, and handouts. Similarly, in Extract 2 Ruben is able to creatively mediate the 
content he has learnt thus far to construct negative syntax in turns 9, 11, and 13 (the students had not been 
introduced to negative constructions since they require the use of auxiliary forms). Likewise, he re-
invents the chunk linguistic forms that were available in the materials (flashcards, case studies, handouts) 
to provide alternatives to spending too much time with videogames. In turn 9 he stipulates that 50 minutes 
is sufficient time per day for playing by remediating an affirmative sentence into a negative one (“no six 
hours pl- pl- play video games”), followed by the contrastive information of what should be done: “and: 
fifty minutes of playing video games”. 
Moreover, as Extract 3 demonstrates, students were able to engage in conversation with all participants 
(including the avatars) as they worked together to negotiate the meaning of new words from the specially 
created contexts. In the extract, the students are just being introduced to the scientist avatars, Dr. Albert 
and Dr. Stella; the teacher makes it clear to the students that they are expected to respond to the avatars. 
The pupils were convinced of the veracity of the machinima characters (equating them with aliens, Star 
Wars, and other beings) and were willing to suspend belief to engage with them. 
Extract 3. Students are introduced to “scientists”. 
Participants: Maria (teacher), Stella (avatar), Carolina, Ruben 
4 MAR: HELLO  
5 STE: [good] morning boys and girls 
6 SS: [hello] ((carolina begins to wave, then stops, looking around at others)) 
7 
 
(.) 
8 MAR: ºsay helloº ((mock whisper voice)) 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
9 SS: HELLO 
10 MAR: she said how are you today? as- answer. 
11 SS: HOW ARE YOU TODAY? ((ruben in the front row is especially enthusiastic, 
clapping hands as he shouts)) 
12 MAR: she said, how are YOU today boys and girls  
13 SS: i'm fine, tha:nk you: ((ruben is very engaged, making a strumming movement with 
his hands as he answers)) 
14 
 
(.) 
15 STE: ### 
16 CAR: i'm- ((claps hand over mouth)) 
17 
 
(.) 
18 STE: my name is stella. (.) i am a scientist. 
19 ?: Ah 
20 MAR: oh? 
21 RUB: doctora? 
22 MAR: she said: (.) my name: is: (.) 
23 RUB: Stella 
24 MAR: My name is stella. i am_ did she say (.) i am a: i am a teacher? 
25 RUB: no: i am alien 
26 MAR: an alien? (.) no: i am a: 
27 
 
(.) ((students look around at each other)) 
28 RUB: science ((pronounced seance)) 
29 MAR: scien: tist 
Through the use of the materials (machinima, videoconferencing, cartoon flashcards) the teachers and 
researchers hoped to get their students to identify with their roles as scientists and experts in healthy 
habits. Extract 4 demonstrates that not only did the students assimilate their roles, but that they were also 
aware of the scientists’ responsibilities (i.e. observing boys and girls’ behavior). 
Extract 4. Students are introduced to “scientists” (2). 
Participants: Maria (teacher), Neus, Arnold, Sara 
1 TCH: are you scientists? 
2 SS: YES ((nodding heads)) 
3 TCH: is albert and estella (.) a scientists?  
4 SS: YES 
5 TCH: Yes they are. (.) they are scientists. and what they observe. what do they 
   observe? (.) neus? 
6 ARN: ## ((shouts something just as the teacher calls on neus to answer)) 
7 TCH: thank you neus, thank you very much (.) neus do they observe dinosaurs? 
8 NEU: no 
9 TCH: cars? 
10 NEU: no 
11 TCH: monkeys? 
12 SS: NO 
13 TCH: arnolds? 
14 SS: no 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
15 TCH: maybe (.) because arnold is having a horrible posture 
  ((students giggle)) 
16 TCH: what do they observe sara? 
17 SAR: ºboys and girls?º (.) boys and girls? 
18 TCH: yes or no? 
19 SS: YES 
The students also demonstrate recognition of the problematic behaviors discussed during the case studies 
by giggling when the teacher jokingly implies that, as scientists observing children’s good and bad 
behavior, Arnold may well serve as a subject matter, given his bad posture (turn 15). Indeed, several 
occurrences were captured in the video-recorded data of students reprimanding each other for their bad 
posture. One student went so far as to scold Dr. Albert during the showing of one of the machinima clips 
(the avatar had gone into “default mode” of slouching in the chair). 
Extract 5 not only displays more evidence of how the young language learners were motivated by their 
role as scientist but also the way in which the materials served as a means of mediating between the 
complex concepts and the target lexicon in order for the students to negotiate and take part in shared 
knowledge construction while providing them with purposeful moments to practice social language. 
Extract 5. Students provide recommendations. 
Participants: Maria (teacher), Rafael, Carla, Eduardo 
1 TCH: in your groups: (.) the groups of the scientists (.) professional scientists (.) you were 
observing the same boy and girl (.) for example <susan, susan, susan> all together 
((points at a group and circles hands to show inclusive group; students giggle; rafael 
imitates the teacher pointing)) you are a group: hello scientists observing susan (.) good 
morning ((paying attention to rafael's group)) 
2 RAF: GOOD MORNING ((others from his group join in; rafael imitates looking through a 
magnifying glass as if he were a scientist observing something)) 
3 TCH: and: the group: the group of helga helga helga ((pointing to another group)) and the 
group of <gary gary gary> ((using hands to show trio)) (.) YOU are going to THINK 
((raises hands to head to indicate thinking)) (.) can you think? (.) can you think? yes or 
no? 
4 SS: YES yes 
5 TCH: yes. you have to think of GOOD ideas (.) good ideas (.) to HELP helga susan or: gary (.) 
to have a healthy life: to be healthy boys and girls. (.) for example susan never- ((holds 
hands over head to imitate water falling)) 
6 CAR: brushing her teeth 
7 TCH: this is brushing your teeth? ((points to teeth then imitates shower again)) 
8 RAF: SHOWER shower every day ((standing up and raising hand)) 
9 TCH: susan never takes a shower never takes a shower everyday ((signals for rafael to sit 
down)) ºsit down properly pleaseº what is an idea? an idea? andrea? silvia? what is an 
idea for susan to have a healthy habit? (.) an idea (.) think 
10 EDU: a healthy habit? 
11 TCH: yes 
12 RAF: SPOTS 
13 TCH: spots? spots is a healthy habit? 
14 RAF: ### ((stands up very eager to answer; teacher signals for him to sit down)) 
15 TCH: no but (.) SHE has a bad habit  never taking a shower ((imitates shower)) (.) what is a 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
solution? 
16 EDU: ºducharseº 
  ((trans. take a shower)) 
17 TCH: YES (.) and how do we say this in english? SUSAN you should: 
18 RAF: a shower 
19 TCH: susan: you should take: 
20 RAF: a shower  
21 TCH: EXACTLY. give me five 
22 EDU: every every day 
23 TCH: AH: yes ((moves next to eduardo)) i will give five to eduardo too because eduardo said: 
24 EDU: every day 
15 TCH: susan: you should take a shower every: single: day 
CONCLUSIONS 
While it has almost become a cliché to emphasize the necessity of integrating technology into language 
teaching in today’s society, how to do so still remains a pending issue. Even as interest and enthusiasm 
for the use of computer-mediated communication and social networking has grown, there is still concern 
that there is not enough research and practice on how to systematically and effectively integrate 
technology into language teaching (Egbert, Paulus, & Nakamichi, 2002; Hubbard, 2013) to meet “the 
need for grounding learning in context, and the greater efficacy—at least where ICT integration is 
concerned—with emergent and developmental rather than arbitrary or fixed and imposed learning 
objectives and processes” (C. Richards, 2005, p. 73). 
There has been considerable research on telecollaborative task design (for recent work, see Brandl, 2012; 
Collentine, 2009, 2011; González-Lloret, 2003; Hampel & Pleines, 2013; Lund, 2013; O'Dowd & Waire, 
2009) as well as well-founded calls for more expansive use of telecollaboration (Towndrow, 2003); 
however, there are fewer studies on project-based telecollaborative learning. Particularly rare are 
longitudinal studies that take into account the entire project design and its temporality; similarly, the 
number of studies on project-based telecollaboration between young language learners are scarce. 
Analysis of this project indicates that telecollaborative tasks with young learners are more productive 
when they are nested within a variety of pre- and post-telecollaboration tasks that introduce and repeat the 
target language through many different modes within the TEPBLL approach. It can also be seen that 
through the carefully scaffolded, meticulously planned TEPBLL task sequencing, the learners gradually 
developed more sociopragmatic competences in their use of formulaic chunks in contextualized 
“everyday” talk. Moreover, the appropriate use of targeted (and highly specialized) lexicon acquired to 
deal with content-related topics such as good and bad habits was predominant among the learners by the 
end of the project. This was achieved through the intricate weaving of appropriate resources (developed 
materials, technology for communication, and specially designed didactic support), teacher scaffolding, 
and iterative opportunities for language input and production through the TEPBLL design. Finally, by 
encouraging students to act as scientists, telecollaborate with others, and explore cause-and-effect 
relationships of different habits, this project helped students to acquire basic research habits that will 
serve them well later in life. 
 
 
 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
APPENDIX A. Machinima Names and URLs 
Video Name URL 
Introduction Machinima http://youtu.be/ivhYrM_yY3I 
Healthy Habits Intro Machinima http://youtu.be/LpXa6mIBdKM 
Gameboy Gary Case Video: Austrian Version http://youtu.be/hXEKGtOf3AM 
Gameboy Gary Case Video: Spain Version http://youtu.be/nf1Dles1dQo 
Hungry Helga Case Video: Austrian Version http://youtu.be/XqutrkeTnBg 
Hungry Helga Case Video: Spain Version http://youtu.be/2OhfHeLFKfI 
Stinky Susan Case Video: Austrian Version http://youtu.be/qRl8cSGrQQg 
Stinky Susan Case Video: Spain Version http://youtu.be/OHBjaCdEKtA 
Results Video http://youtu.be/ZSn7mPye7kI 
Online Talk Show http://youtu.be/MG6l9eoxdPM 
 
APPENDIX B. Transcription Key 
text: elongated last sound 
ºtextº spoken softly 
TEXT spoken loudly 
te:xt dragging out word 
[text] 
[text] 
 
overlapping turns 
word= latching with next 
text- truncated word 
(.) Pause 
 high pitch (top) 
 low pitch (bottom) 
Word Stressed 
<text text> spoken more rapidly than usual 
(…) part of transcript has been left out 
((text)) metanarrative comments 
# exact words cannot be determined (one symbol per apparent syllable) 
TEX: name of speaker 
?: unknown speaker 
. Terminative 
, Continuative 
? appeal or question (final) 
? appeal (continuative) 
Note. Based on transcription symbols suggested by Jefferson (2002). 
 
NOTE 
1. Research carried out with the financing of the Spanish Ministry projects: EDU2010-17859 (2010-
2014) and (EDU2013-43932-P) 2014-2018. 
 
 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to thank the wonderfully inspirational teachers involved in this project, Maria 
Mont and Manuela Ebner, as well as their always enthusiastic students at the Escola Sant Jordi (Mollet 
del Vallès, Spain) and the Praxis Volkschule (Vienna, Austria), without whom this project would not 
have happened. We are also grateful to our university students (too many to list here) who assisted with 
materials development and offered constructive criticism on their design and implementation. We extend 
our gratitude to the reviewers of this article whose insightful comments helped greatly improve the 
original text and the continuous support of the journal editors during the process of revision and 
publication. Any remaining errors or oversights are our responsibility. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Dr. Melinda Dooly holds a Serra Húnter fellowship as teacher and researcher at the Education Faculty of 
the Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (Spain) where she teaches English as a Foreign Language 
Methodology (TEFL) and research methods courses. Her principal research addresses technology-
enhanced project-based language learning in teacher preparation. Her current research interest is in 
project-based telecollaborative language learning and very young learners. 
E-mail: melindaann.dooly@uab.cat 
Dr. Randall Sadler is an Associate Professor of Linguistics at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, where he teaches courses on Computer-Mediated Communication and Language Learning 
(CMCLL), Virtual Worlds and Language Learning (VWLL) and Teaching of Second Language Reading 
and Writing. His main research focus is on the role of technology in language learning, with a particular 
focus on how Virtual Worlds may be used to enhance that process. 
E-mail: rsadler@illinois.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Antaki, C. (2004). Conversation analysis. In S. Becker & A. Bryman (Eds.), Understanding research 
methods for social policy and practice (pp. 313–317). London: Policy Press. 
Beckett, G., & Slater, T. (2005). The project framework: A tool for language, content and skills 
integration. ELT Journal, 59(2), 108–116. doi: 10.1093/eltj/cci024 
Brandl, K. (2012). Effects of required and optional exchange tasks in online language learning 
environments. ReCALL, 24(1), 85–107. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/s0958344011000309 
Buck Institute of Education (2003). Project based learning handbook: A guide to standards-focused 
project based learning for middle and high school teachers. (2nd ed.). Hong Kong: QuinnEssentials. 
Collentine, K. (2009). Learner use of holistic language units in multimodal, task-based synchronous 
computer-mediated communication. Language Learning & Technology, 13(2), 68–87. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num2/collentine.pdf 
Collentine, K. (2011). Learner autonomy in a task-based 3D world and production. Language Learning & 
Technology, 15(3), 50–67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/collentine.pdf 
Coyle, D. (2008). Along the continuum - An exploration of integrating language and content learning in 
England. In M. Dooly & D. Eastment (Eds.), 'How we're going about it': Teachers' voices on innovative 
approaches to teaching and learning languages (pp. 139–151). Newcastle, UK: Cambridge Scholars. 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
Dooly, M. (2013). Promoting competency-based language teaching through project-based language 
learning. In M. Pérez Cañado (Ed.), Competency-based language teaching in higher education (pp. 77–
91). Dordrecht/London: Springer. 
Egbert, J., Paulus, T., & Nakamichi, Y. (2002). The impact of CALL instruction on classroom computer 
use: A foundation for rethinking technology in teacher education. Language Learning & Technology, 
6(3), 108−126. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num3/pdf/egbert.pdf 
Fried-Booth, D. (2002). Project work. (2nd ed.). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
González-Lloret, M. (2003). Designing task-based CALL to promote interaction: En busca de esmeraldas. 
Language Learning & Technology, 7(1), 86–104. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num1/pdf/gonzalez.pdf 
Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and embodiment within situated human interaction. Journal of Pragmatics, 
32(10), 1489–1522. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0378-2166(99)00096-x 
Goodwin, C., & Goodwin, M. H. (2004). Participation. In A. Duranti (Ed.), A companion to linguistic 
anthropology (pp. 222–224). Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell. 
Green, J. L., Skukauskaite, A., & Baker, W. D. (2012). Ethnography as epistemology: An introduction to 
educational ethnography. In J. Arthur, M. Waring, R. Coe, & L.V. Hedges (Eds.), Research methods and 
methodologies in education (pp. 309–321). London: Sage. 
Gruson, B. (2010). Analyse comparative d'une situation de communication orale en classe ordinaire et 
lors d'une séance en visioconférence. Distances et Savoirs, 8(3), 395–423. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3166/ds.8.395-423 
Gruson, B., & Barnes, F. (2012). Case study investigation of CMC with young language learners. Journal 
of E-Learning and Knowledge Society, 8(3), 79–90. Retrieved from http://www.je-
lks.org/ojs/index.php/Je-LKS_EN/article/view/644/643 
Gumock, J.-E., Debski, R., & Wigglesworth, G. (2005). Oral interaction around computers in the project-
oriented classroom. Language Learning & Technology, 9(3), 121–145. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/pdf/jeon.pdf 
Guth, S., & Helm, F. (2012). Developing multiliteracies in ELT through telecollaboration. ELT Journal, 
66(1), 42–51. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/elt/ccr027 
Hampel, R., & Pleines, C. (2013). Fostering student interaction and engagement in a virtual learning 
environment: An investigation into activity design and implementation. Calico Journal, 30(3), 342–370. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.11139/cj.30.3.342-370 
Helm, F., Guth, S., & O'Dowd, R. (2012). University language classes collaborating online: A report on 
the integration of telecollaborative networds in European universities. [Online report]. Retrieved from 
http://www.intent-project.eu/intent-project.eu/@q=node-2f34.htm 
Heritage, J. (1999). Conversation analysis at century’s end: Practices of talk-in-interaction, their 
distributions and their outcomes. Research on Language and Social Interaction, 32(1/2), 69–76. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08351813.1999.9683609 
Heritage, J. (2004). Conversation analysis and institutional talk: Analysing data. In D. Silverman (Ed.), 
Qualitative research: Theory, method and practice (2nd ed.) (pp. 222–245). London, UK: Sage. 
Heritage, J. (2010). Conversation analysis: Practices and methods. In D. Silverman (Ed.), Qualitative 
Sociology (3rd ed.) (pp. 208–230). London, UK: Sage. 
Hubbard, P. (2013). Making a case for learner training in technology enhanced language learning 
environments. Calico Journal, 30(2), 163–178. http://dx.doi.org/10.11139/cj.30.2.163-178 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
Jefferson, G. (2002). Is “no” an acknowledgement token? Comparing American and British uses of (+)/(-) 
tokens. Journal of Pragmatics, 34(10–11), 1345–1383. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s0378-2166(02)00067-x 
Johnson, K. E. (2009). Second language teacher education: A sociocultural perspective. New York: 
Routledge. 
Kennedy, C., & Miceli, T. (2013). In piazza online: Exploring the use of wikis with beginner foreign 
language learners. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 26(5), 389–411. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2013.770035 
Kessler, G. (2013). Collaborative language learning in co-constructed participatory culture. Calico 
Journal, 30(3), 307–322. http://dx.doi.org/10.11139/cj.30.3.307-322 
Ko, C.-J. (2012). Can synchronous computer-mediated communication (CMC) help beginning-level 
foreign language learners speak? Computer Assisted Language Learning, 25(3), 217–236. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2011.649483 
Lamy, M.-N., & Hampel, R. (2007). Online communication in language learning and teaching. 
Houndmills, UK/New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Lantolf, J., & Thorne, S. (2006). Sociocultural theory and the genesis of second language development. 
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Levon, E. (2013). Ethnography and recording interaction. In R. J. Podesva & D. Sharma, (Eds.), Research 
methods in linguistics (pp. 195–215). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Lund, A. (2013). Collaboration unpacked: Tasks, tools and activities. In C. Meskill (Ed.), Online teaching 
and learning: Sociocultural perspectives. Advances in digital language learning and teaching (pp. 77–
98). London: Bloomsbury Academics. 
Meskill, C. (Ed.). (2013). Online teaching and learning. Sociocultural perspectives. Advances in digital 
language learning and teaching. London, UK: Bloomsbury Academic. 
Milton, J., & Garbi, A. (2000). VIRLAN: Collaborative foreign language learning on the internet for 
primary age children: Problems and a solution. Educational Technology & Society, 3(3), 286–292. 
Retrieved from http://www.ifets.info/journals/3_3/d04.pdf 
Müller-Hartmann, A., & Schocker-v. Ditfurth, M. (2011). Teaching English: Task-supported language 
learning. Paderborn: Schöningh. 
O’Dowd, R., & Waire, P. (2009). Critical issues in telecollaborative task design. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 22(2), 173–188. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09588220902778369 
Olsher, D. (2004). Talk and gestures: The embodied completion of sequential actions in spoken 
interaction. In R. Gardner & J. Wagner (Eds.), Second language conversations (pp. 221–245). London, 
UK: Continuum. 
Poehner, M., & Lantolf, J. (2005). Dynamic assessment in the language classroom. Language Teaching 
Research, 9(3), 233–265. http://dx.doi.org/10.1191/1362168805lr166oa 
Ramírez Verdugo, D., & Alonso Belmonte, I. (2007). Using digital stories to improve listening 
comprehension with young Spanish learners of English. Language Learning & Technology, 11(1), 87–
101. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num1/pdf/ramirez.pdf 
Rea-Dickins, P., & Gardner, S. (2000). Snares and silver bullets: Disentangling the construct of formative 
assessment. Language Testing, 17(2), 215–241. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/026553220001700206 
Richards, C. (2005). The design of effective ICT-supported learning activities: Exemplary models, 
changing requirements, and new possibilities. Language Learning & Technology, 9(1), 60–79. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num1/pdf/richards.pdf 
Melinda Dooly and Randall Sadler Becoming Little Scientists 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
Richards, J. (2005). Communicative language teaching today. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Sacks, H. (1972). An initial investigation of the usability of conversational data for doing sociology. In D. 
Sudnow (Ed.), Studies in social interaction (pp. 31–74). New York: Free Press. 
Sadler, R., & Dooly, M. (2013). Language learning in virtual worlds: Research and practice. In H. R. M. 
Thomas (Ed.), Contemporary computer-assisted language learning (pp. 159–182). London, UK: 
Bloomsbury. 
Schegloff, E.A. (1988). Goffman and the analysis of conversation. In P. Drew & A. Wootton (Eds.), 
Erving Goffman: Exploring the interaction order (pp. 89–135). Cambridge, UK: Polity Press. 
Schegloff, E.A. (1989). Reflections on language, development, and the interactional character of talk-in-
interaction. In M. H. Bornstein & J.S. Bruner (Eds.), Interaction in human development (pp. 139–153). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Schenker, T. (2012). Intercultural competence and cultural learning through telecollaboration. Calico 
Journal, 29(3), 449–470. http://dx.doi.org/10.11139/cj.29.3.449-470 
Stoller, F. (2002). Project work: A means to promote language content. In J. Richards & W. Renandya 
(Eds.), Methodology in language teaching: An anthology of current practice (pp. 107–119). New York, 
NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Stoller, F. (2006). Establishing a theoretical foundation for project-based learning in second and foreign 
language contexts. In G. Beckett & P. Chamness Miller (Eds.), Project-based second and foreign 
language education. Past, present and future (pp. 19–40). Charlotte, NC: Information Age. 
Thorne, S. (2012). Massively semiotic ecologies and L2 development: Gaming cases and issues. In S. De 
Wannemacker, S. Vandercruysse, & G. Clarebou (Eds.), Serious games: The challenge. Vol. CCIS 280 
(pp. 18–31). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag. 
Tolosa, C., East, M., & Villers, H. (2013). Online peer feedback in beginners’ writing tasks: Lessons 
learned. IALLT, 43(1), 1–24. Retrieved from 
http://www.iallt.org/iallt_journal/online_peer_feedback_in_beginners_writing_tasks_lessons_learned 
Towndrow, P. (2003). Extending the scope of tele-collaborative projects. A commentary inspired by Jean 
W. LeLoup & Robert Ponterio's: “Tele-collaborative projects: Monsters.com?”. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(3), 160–163. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/pdf/towndrow.pdf 
Vander Zanden, J. W., Crandell, C. H., & Crandell, T. L. (2007). Human development. (8th ed.). New 
York: McGraw-Hill. 
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher mental processes. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
