Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2016/reinderswhite.pdf 
June 2016, Volume 20, Number 2 
pp. 143–154 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 143 
20 YEARS OF AUTONOMY AND TECHNOLOGY: 
HOW FAR HAVE WE COME AND WHERE TO NEXT? 
Hayo Reinders, Unitec Institute of Technology 
Cynthia White, Massey University 
Learner autonomy has become an assumed goal of language education in many parts of 
the world. In the 20 years since the launch of Language Learning & Technology, the 
relationship among computer-assisted language learning research and practice and 
autonomy has become both more complex and more promising. This article traces how the 
two fields have developed, how they have informed each other, and how they are now 
transforming our understanding of language learning and teaching. 
Language(s) Learned in this study: Various 
Keywords: Learner Autonomy, Language Learning Strategies, Learner Attitudes, Social 
Context 
APA Citation: Reinders, H., & White, C. (2016). 20 years of autonomy and technology: 
How far have we come and where to next? Language Learning & Technology, 20(2), 143–
154. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2016/reinderswhite.pdf 
Received: September 19, 2015; Accepted: October 30, 2015; Published: June 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Hayo Reinders & Cynthia White 
INTRODUCTION 
Learner autonomy has become an assumed goal of language education in many parts of the world. In the 
20 years since the launch of Language Learning & Technology (LLT), the relationship between computer-
assisted language learning (CALL) research and practice and autonomy has become both more complex 
and more promising. Early thinking considered a direct and often one-directional impact of the use of 
technology on learners’ independence by providing them with access to resources and the possibility of 
working at times and in locations of their own choosing. Research and teachers’ experiences in many 
different settings have shown, however, not only that the use of technology for learning often requires a 
degree of autonomy, but also that our understanding of the impact of technology is changing our 
understanding of learner autonomy and, more broadly, the roles of learners and teachers. 
This article will therefore provide a critical overview of the relationship between technology and 
autonomy by describing some of the key developments in the study of learner autonomy and the role 
technology has played in them. We look specifically at five themes that have emerged in autonomy 
research in the last 20 years (learner training and strategies, teacher autonomy, self-access and language 
advising, telecollaboration, and social technologies for learning) and use exemplar studies to describe the 
role of technology within each of them. 
Although great strides have been made in the last two decades, we argue that we are currently entering a 
phase in educational practice and thinking where the use of technology is enabling a shift of focus away 
from the classroom—and indeed in some cases formal education—taking instead the learners’ lives and 
their experiences as the central point for learning. Our understanding of how learners design their own 
learning experiences and environments and the role technology plays in this design are starting to merge, 
requiring a re-visioning of the role and shape of education. We conclude the article by proposing a 
number of future directions for research and practice in the area of technology and autonomy. 
 
Hayo Reinders and Cynthia White 20 Years of Autonomy and Technology 
 
Language Learning & Technology 144 
WHAT IS AUTONOMY? 
One of the earliest definitions by Holec (1981) characterises autonomy as “the ability to take charge of 
one’s own learning” (p. 3). Although this basic principle has not changed over the years, a great deal of 
nuance has been added and our understanding now includes the impact that developing this ability has on 
both learners and teachers, and the wider role of education. As a comprehensive review of the history of 
autonomy is outside the scope of this article, we refer the reader to Benson (2011). 
Since the early 1980s, the field of autonomy in language education has undergone significant change as a 
result of influence from other fields, such as (educational) psychology, the study of motivation, teacher 
development, and—especially in the last two decades—(educational) technology. All these have led to a 
reconceptualisation of autonomy as a multifaceted construct that operates on a number of dimensions. 
Benson (2011) summarises these as comprising four modalities: (a) location, or the physical setting for 
learning; (b) formality, or “the degree to which learning is independent of organized courses leading to 
formal qualifications” (p. 10); (c) pedagogy, or the type of learning or instruction; and (d) locus of 
control, or who makes decisions about the learning. Table 1 summarises these modalities. These more 
nuanced dimensions resulted from a deeper understanding about the (increasingly) wide range of settings 
in which learning can take place, how learning can be supported, and who controls that learning. Below, 
we will show how technology in particular has impacted this understanding. 
Table 1. Dimensions of Autonomy (based on Benson, 2011)  
Dimension Opposition Refers to... Other terms 
Location Out-of-class vs. 
in-class 
The setting in which the learning 
takes place 
After-class, extra-curricular, self-
access, out-of-school, distance 
Formality Informal vs. 
formal 
The degree to which the learning 
is structured and/or linked to 
educational qualifications 
Non-formal, naturalistic 
Pedagogy Non-instructed 
vs. instructed 
The senses in which teaching is 
involved 
Self-instructed 
Locus of 
control 
Self-directed vs. 
other-directed 
How decisions are distributed 
between the learner and others 
Autonomous, independent, self-
regulated 
THEMES IN TECHNOLOGY-MEDIATED AUTONOMY RESEARCH AND PRACTICE 
Although the field of learner autonomy is over three decades old, it was not much influenced by 
technology until the mid-1990s, in particular with the advent of the Internet and the possibilities for 
online collaboration and communication. Although areas of interest come and go and are often revisited 
over time there are several areas of autonomy research and practice that have received considerable 
attention. Below, we identify five autonomy-related themes which have emerged as strong trajectories of 
research and practice in language learning and technology. We do not aim to be comprehensive in our 
discussion or referencing. Instead, for each area we have selected exemplar studies to illustrate some of 
the findings from this type of research. We also address how these have shaped our understanding of both 
autonomy and technology, and the relationship between them. 
 
Hayo Reinders and Cynthia White 20 Years of Autonomy and Technology 
 
Language Learning & Technology 145 
Learner Training and Strategies 
One of the earliest areas of intense interest and research activity in the field of autonomy centred on 
identifying the characteristics of successful language learners (Naiman, Fröhlich, Stern, & Todesco, 1978) 
and the strategies they use to develop skills for learning the target language (Oxford, 1990). A number of 
influential taxonomies of learner strategies were developed, which broadly agreed on a distinction 
between social, affective, cognitive, and metacognitive strategies. In particular, metacognitive strategies 
were considered important in developing skills for lifelong learning (Boud, 1981; Candy, 1991), enabling 
learners to manage their learning throughout their lifetime in order to respond to changes in their lives and 
work circumstances. An important concern was how teachers could assist learners in developing optimal 
strategies for learning both within and outside the classroom. Learning to learn became a specific 
component in many language courses, and specialised print-based materials were developed for this 
purpose (Ellis & Sinclair, 1989;Willing, 1988). Technology had very little impact during this time period. 
However, as personal computers and networks became more widely available particularly in institutional 
settings, some attempts were made to use technology to support learners in developing independent 
learning skills. 
One example was the Electronic Learning Environment, an online program designed to give learners 
access to resources and support them in developing skills for managing their own learning. Reinders 
(2007) describes how at the University of Auckland at the time, a significant increase in international 
students and falling standards in academic language skills among domestic students meant there was a 
significant demand for language improvement, which could not be met by traditional language courses. A 
self-access centre was established to enable learners to study by themselves and get advice from language 
advisors. In addition, a computer program was developed that guided learners in their self-directed 
learning by helping them to identify learning needs, prioritise goals, find appropriate materials, record 
their learning, and reflect on their progress. The program also included a number of monitoring tools with 
varying fuctions, such as prompts that reminded learners of upcoming goal deadlines or that identified 
mismatches between set goals and materials used (e.g., excessive use of grammar resources where a 
learner had set speaking as their priority goal). 
Technology allowed a more interactive implementation of some of the earlier ideas about learner training 
and facilitated research into its effects. A mixed-method study was conducted that included extensive 
queries of an SQL database containing records of all the learners’ interactions with the program and their 
responses to the various prompts they had received, as well as surveys and interviews which gauged 
satisfaction and identified possible impediments to using the program. The latter showed that students 
were highly satisfied with the program as well as their ability to use it as and when they pleased. Usage 
records showed that many students had accessed the resources and had done so frequently and over 
periods of several months. Many students also reported using more resources and more often than they 
normally did or would have done without the program. In this sense, the program’s access features were a 
clear advantage. Staff too were satisfied in that they could look up students’ progress and did not have to 
spend much time on administration—an advantage of the automatic storage and retrieval of learners’ 
work. However, the SQL queries of 1,200 student database records collected over a period of one year 
gave a somewhat less positive picture. Despite numerous automated suggestions, many students did not 
complete their initial needs analysis and very few updated their learning plans as a result. Similarly, the 
suggestions made by the computer were seldom followed by students. When students had set their minds 
on learning with particular materials or in a particular way, it was clearly difficult to encourage them to 
change. Another finding from this study was that although the online provision of learning resources had 
made it easier for students to access materials, most still felt they had not been able to spend nearly as 
much time on their English as they wanted. Part of the reason was that time spent using the program was 
not recognised by some of their (degree) programmes or language courses. Some also reported that they 
received no follow up in their language classes on work they had done. Clearly, self-study had not been 
Hayo Reinders and Cynthia White 20 Years of Autonomy and Technology 
 
Language Learning & Technology 146 
given the same recognition as formal, classroom-based learning. This lack of validation for learners’ own 
work is a recurring theme in autonomy research as is the lack of clear links between classroom and out-
of-class learning. 
Teacher Autonomy 
Developments in technology introduced new ways for learners to access increasingly rich environments 
for language learning. At the same time, significant shifts were being made towards learner-centredness in 
language education (Nunan, 1988), focusing on the relevance of the learning experience, a responsiveness 
to individual learners, a commitment to knowledge construction by teachers, and the development of a 
prevailing culture of enquiry (for a critical overview of learner-centredness in technology-mediated 
language teaching, see White, 2007a). These principles of learner-centredness signalled a profound shift 
in language education which meant that teachers had to reconceptualise their roles and develop new skills. 
The concept of teacher autonomy (Lamb & Reinders, 2008) was introduced into the field to capture the 
notion that teachers had to have a degree of agency themselves, together with requisite knowledge, 
attitudes, and skills, to foster autonomy. However, in practice, assumptions about teacher autonomy 
proved to be more problematic than initially envisaged. 
White (2007b) provides one study enquiring into the experience of teachers as they moved to new 
technology-mediated language teaching environments and the ways in which they chose to respond to the 
more autonomous settings. She traces how teacher identities were disrupted and challenged as they began 
to work in new learning spaces which gave more control to learners in terms of participant structures and 
choice of learning opportunities by referring to a number of separate studies—one relating to a new online 
programme for adult migrant ESL students in Canada (Reynard, 2003) and another relating to the 
introduction of an information and communications technology format for French and Italian tertiary 
language programmes (Strambi & Bouvet, 2003). Despite prior training which aimed to support the shift 
in roles, teachers experienced evident conflicts in the richer, more open learning environments, and a 
degree of resistance to the changes required of them. Such responses had not been anticipated, and 
affected the ways in which the learning environments evolved and, more broadly, the course of 
innovation. White’s (2007b) critical commentary highlights issues relating to teacher identity in 
innovation with new technologies, arguing that questions of identity go far beyond questions of adequate 
knowledge, a shift in teacher roles, and a need to acquire new skills. It also highlights that the ways in 
which teachers are prepared to exercise their autonomy in technology-mediated environments may not 
align with principles of learner-centredness and may not always be facilitating or beneficial for learners. 
Questions of teacher autonomy also underpin the paper by Lund and Smørdal (2006) entitled “Is there a 
space for the teacher in a WIKI?”. Their study explored the introduction of MediaWiki in a class of upper 
secondary school learners in Norway. While no collaborative technologies had been used in that setting, 
there was a Learning Management System in place. Lund and Smørdal analysed teacher practices in two 
wiki-based projects with differing designs. Referring to the multiple, rapidly evolving, complex learning 
environments that emerged in the wiki space, they argue that “teachers may find themselves lost in the 
online environment because the more common structuring functions of LMSs are not found in wikis” (p. 
44). Focusing more explicitly on autonomy, working with wikis was seen as challenging the idea of an 
individual who is an autonomous knower. Lund and Smørdal’s study highlights further the need to re-
examine language teacher autonomy working within the open environment of wikis based on the 
collective activity of participants. 
A more recent study of teacher autonomy and computer-assisted language learning (CALL) comes from 
Kessler (2010) who argues that “the ability to utilize, create, and manage CALL environments for 
integrated language skill development is a critical foundation upon which CALL teacher autonomy rests” 
(p. 378). The discourse of 33 pre-service teachers across a 10-week CALL course was analysed, drawing 
on student-led in-class discussions, web-based wiki, chat, and discussion forums. A pervasive theme in 
Hayo Reinders and Cynthia White 20 Years of Autonomy and Technology 
 
Language Learning & Technology 147 
the discussions was that of CALL as a threat, articulated most strongly in a “sustained concern over a 
potential loss of control over the teaching environment and students” (p. 376). However, a number of 
interesting points of shifts in attitudes were also identified, including the value of reflections from 
teachers who had initially felt most threatened by CALL; it was their questioning of their preconceptions 
in class-based discussions that had an evident impact on the attitudes of their peers. Kessler’s study 
contributes to our understanding of the contested and often conflicted nature of teacher autonomy and 
control in CALL, and the importance of enquiring into teacher expectations and perceptions alongside 
knowledge and skills in specific domains. 
Technology in Self-access and Language Advising 
Language advising (also known as language counseling) is “a type of language support where teachers 
meet with students on an individual basis to offer advice and feedback and to help students develop self-
directed learning skills” (Reinders, 2008, p. 16). Although it can be followed by language instruction, the 
primary focus of language advising is on guiding learners in their own learning. Technology has had an 
impact on the way in which this type of language support is offered. In particular, communications 
technology has made online access easier for learners and has enabled multiple forms of communication 
(e.g., synchronous vs. asynchronous exchanges, the use of multimedia, shared editing of documents, etc.). 
Beyond offering a wider range of locations for such advising to take place (see Table 1), language 
advising also enables alternative pedagogies, greater learner control, and alternatives or complements to 
formal education (the formality dimension in Table 1) by placing the learner’s experiences and needs first. 
Technology has been used to further enable learners to developing their language learning skills outside 
of the context of formal instruction—for example, by developing online advising software. One example 
of this was the Virtual English Language Advisor (VELA) developed at the University of Science and 
Technology in Hong Kong. The aim of the program was to help learners identify their strengths and 
weaknesses and to recommend appropriate learning strategies. It comprised a Browse section to help 
learners find online resources, a Plan section to enable them to develop a personalised and manageable 
learning plan, and a Diary section to record and monitor their learning. A key feature of the VELA 
discussed by Oxford (2008) is that it provides opportunities in a gradual way and through many different 
pathways for learners to become autonomous in the sense of taking responsibility and making decisions 
about their learning. In this way, students were able to access support anonymously and on their own 
terms. 
Another, more recent example is Kaleidoscope, developed at the University of Helsinki (Kidd & von 
Boehm, 2012). Its aim is to encourage reflection and to help learners “situate themselves in their own 
language-learning context” (p. 130). It does this by using awareness-raising prompts that require learners 
to reflect on their language learning history, their needs, motivation, learning preferences, and current 
skills, in order to build a language learning profile. Responses to prompts and students’ overall profiles 
are shared with other learners, and posted comments and advisors’ responses are visible to them. As such, 
Kaleidoscope includes a broader, social component that is often missing in traditional advising sessions, 
which usually occur between one learner and one teacher. Kidd and von Boehm used action research to 
establish how many students used the program, why they did so, and how effective they thought it was. 
Students indicated that they liked the structured approach to learning to learn and appreciated the other 
students’ comments and advisors’ responses. An interesting finding was that most students did not find 
much additional benefit from working with an advisor as they felt the program had already helped them 
enough. Developments such as VELA and Kaleidoscope are giving greater control to learners and are 
using the benefits of technology to enhance learner awareness, both as individuals and in the social 
context of learning communities. 
Telecollaboration 
From the late 1980s, a range of online collaborative experiences—based initially on email exchanges—
Hayo Reinders and Cynthia White 20 Years of Autonomy and Technology 
 
Language Learning & Technology 148 
were designed to enable learners to come together to learn collaboratively or learn each other’s language. 
Early research into these forms of Internet-mediated tandem learning opened up important theoretical 
developments in learner autonomy, particularly through the work of Little and Brammerts (1996) who 
argued the following: 
If learning is essentially an interactive process, then the development of learner autonomy is a 
collaborative matter; and the support that learners can give to one another plays a crucial role in 
the transition from dependence on the teacher to wholly independent task performance. (p. 28) 
The kinds of experiences available through tandem partnerships on the Internet—including decisions 
about the topic of the cooperative exchanges, the nature, extent and focus of feedback and correction, and 
the balance between conversational activity and peer feedback as decided by the learners—were all 
identified as the means by which learners develop and exercise autonomy in their language learning. 
Importantly, the responsibility learners were required to assume for their own learning and for the nature 
of the learning was seen as the product of an interdependent, collaborative process (Little, 2001), thus 
introducing the notion of collaborative autonomy. It was at this point too that Little identified writing as 
central to autonomy-focused pedagogy in that it acts as a focus for metalinguistic reflection, a point which 
is part of wider assertion concerning the potential of the written medium to promote attention to language 
form (e.g., Tudini, 2003). 
Telecollaboration—whether focusing more on language learning or intercultural exchange—gave rise to 
further theoretical perspectives on learner autonomy. Fuchs, Hauck, and Müller-Hartmann (2012), for 
example, describe two task-based telecollaborative projects involving four countries. Participants in the 
first case study were teacher trainees (in Germany and the USA), and learners of German (in Poland and 
the UK), while the second case study involved a mix of pre-service and in-service teachers in the four 
countries. In these settings, autonomy was defined as entailing “the informed use of a range of interacting 
resources in context” (p. 82), and the aim was to promote autonomy through the development of 
multimodal communicative competence and multiliteracy. In the two case studies, the authors refer to the 
importance of telecollaboration 2.0 (Guth & Helm, 2010) which is seen as an important site for 
developing and enacting this form of autonomy. Emphasis is placed on dialogue building using 
commonly available social networking tools which require the on-going development of multimodal 
competence, language proficiency, and intercultural communicative competence. The projects described 
by Fuchs et al. bring together the notions of learner autonomy and teacher autonomy in that a longer-term 
goal was to prepare teachers to design tasks which would in turn foster their learners’ multimodal 
competence and autonomy. The study exposes further gaps in our understanding of the complex 
interrelationships between autonomy, multimodal competence, and multiliteracy, a point which leads into 
our final theme focusing on autonomy and social technologies. 
Social Technologies for Learning 
Over the past two decades, the field of learner autonomy and technology has been dramatically shaped by 
the development and diffusion of social technologies for learning. Such technologies introduced the 
possibility of forming learner networks (Candlin & Byrnes, 1995) through which learners could interact, 
share experiences and resources, raise questions, and so on—all of which were seen as supporting 
learning processes. One of the earliest examples came from Lamy and Goodfellow (1999) who used 
computer-mediatated communication technologies to provide opportunities for reflective conversation 
around both language topics and language learning in a Lexica Online project for tertiary learners of 
French at the Open University, UK. An important finding at this stage was that developing learner 
networks as a means of fostering learner autonomy involved new expectations of language learners, 
including the ability to develop individual competence within a context of effective participation in 
networks and communities. It also required both technological and pedagogical inspiration. 
Hayo Reinders and Cynthia White 20 Years of Autonomy and Technology 
 
Language Learning & Technology 149 
These same themes re-appear—inflected slightly differently—in a recent study by Lee (2011) on the use 
of blogging to promote autonomy and intercultural competence for studying abroad. For the blog project, 
three principles of learner autonomy were identified as key to the study: self-directedness, critical 
reflection, and cognitive engagement. Task type was found to promote autonomy in different ways: More 
open topics were identified as giving students opportunities to control their own learning, while teacher-
assigned topics were seen as promoting critical reflection and cognitive engagement. Issues of identity 
and community also emerged in the study. Students reported that using blogs gave them “a sense of 
belonging, as they collaboratively shared and exchanged cultural perspectives” (p. 103) and collaborative 
interaction was in turn related to critical reflection. In a concluding discussion of the affordances and 
challenges of using blogs to foster learner autonomy through intercultural learning, Lee suggests that 
future research could usefully focus on the teacher’s role in such settings and on teacher autonomy using 
personal reflections. 
Social technologies for language learning draw our attention back to the value of ecological approaches to 
understanding learner autonomy. They focus on the multiple environments in which individuals pursue 
their learning, the role of others and their contributions, and the ways in which learners work with and 
restructure aspects of their learning environments to establish more optimal learning conditions moment 
by moment. Importantly too, as Lamy and Mangenot (2013) point out, social media-based language 
learning highlights the role of learners, their personal use of technology, and their ability to learn 
autonomously. This means that affordances include “the ways in which users appropriate the tools, 
dealing with constraints as well as spaces allowing them opportunities for action” (p. 201). 
Social technologies are ubiquitous and significant constituents of everyday life—obscuring the 
boundaries between the educational and the everyday in terms of activities and settings. Yet tracing the 
interrelationships between learner autonomy and social technologies in the contemporary experiences of 
language learners provides a challenge to the field. In a survey of 587 foreign language students in 
Australia, Steel and Levy (2013) investigate the technologies that students use in class and also outside of 
formal classrooms as well as applications they identify as beneficial for language learning. Findings 
revealed that social technologies tended not to be used within class settings, but were deployed 
extensively out of class to initiate and develop activities and networks around their language work. From 
this study, we have a picture of students actively setting up and drawing on social networks to underpin 
and support their learning activities. Referring to the language students in the survey, Steel and Levy 
conclude that “the evidence suggests they are becoming more independent and autonomous, and more 
able to use their own technologies purposefully to meet their goals” (p. 319), with social technologies 
playing a key role. Clearly, social technologies provide significant tools and settings in which students 
can be, as White (2008) describes, “active agents who evaluate the potential affordances within their 
environments, and then create, select and make use of tasks, experiences and interlocutors in keeping with 
their needs, preferences, and goals as learners” (p. 7). More empirical studies are now needed which 
include observational data of individuals engaged in language learning using social technologies and of 
the ways in which “formal and informal processes are perpetually combining and recombining” (Lamy & 
Mangenot, 2013 p. 212), with learners as central orchestrators of these processes. An important 
component of such studies would be the on-going critical re-examination of the construct of learner 
autonomy, to address the critique put forward by Sockett and Toffoli (2012), who argue that a dynamic 
systems view of the informal learning of English using social technologies displaces the learner autonomy 
paradigm. 
AUTONOMY AND TECHNOLOGY: A TRANSFORMATIVE FUSION OF IDEAS 
What the above examples show is an unfolding development of ideas and practices in what were initially 
seen as two separate domains: learner autonomy and technology-mediated language teaching. At the 
earlier stages, each of these operated largely in isolation and with relatively little reference to each other, 
Hayo Reinders and Cynthia White 20 Years of Autonomy and Technology 
 
Language Learning & Technology 150 
or indeed to any other domains. The movements had a number of common features: Each was often 
treated as an idea or an innovation, to be bolted onto existing classroom practice. Each largely involved a 
focus on individual rather than collaborative learning. Each also had a significant, often unforeseen, 
impact on learner and teacher roles. Both were initially seen as peripheral to standard language teaching 
practices and struggled to be recognised as valuable contributors to the field. Both, however, also 
attracted enthusiasm around the world and significant research and development activity. In both domains 
existing pedagogy largely prevailed. Formal instruction continued to be seen as the most efficient form 
and initiator of all learning, the classroom was the place where learning should take place, and the teacher 
was in control of the learning process. Assessment practices, funding models, and language policies all 
perpetuated this paradigm. 
However, an idealistic shift began to take place in the late 1990s. In the area of technology, the advent of 
the PC and the Internet greatly contributed to making technologies for learning more visible and available 
to teachers, opening up new language learning opportunities within the classroom. At the same time, 
learner-centredness became a key principle of language learning and teaching (Fotos & Browne, 2004), 
and both autonomy and technology were seen as offering potential ways for teachers to realise these ideas 
in the classroom. From this point on, both technology and autonomy increasingly became features of 
mainstream practice. A great deal of experimentation took place by teachers and researchers, keen on 
exploring the use of technology to enhance the learning experience. At the same time, teachers began to 
find ways to implement learner autonomy in the classroom context as well as through self-access centres. 
The focus, however, remained clearly on formal learning settings as the key locus of learning, and 
teachers being the primary facilitators. A common theme from within this period is teachers’ 
characterisation of learners as reluctant to take on additional responsibility for their learning. In addition, 
the explicit use of technology for developing autonomy was still limited. 
In recent years, technology has become ubiquitous and ever-faster developments are putting considerable 
pressure on our conceptualisation of language learning and teaching. Technological changes are placing 
new tools and options in the hands of learners, available to them in the context of their own lives. This 
has required a radical rethink of the roles of teachers and our perspective on pedagogical practices in 
general. While there have been numerous calls to respond to these challenges, much practice remains 
unchanged. This is partly because established educational structures remain as they were, with limited 
recognition and understanding of learning outside formal settings and structures. 
The model in Figure 1 represents this development across the last two decades with increasing rates of 
change being evident. The model also shows that while formerly the domains were clearly separated, they 
have moved together and started to exert mutual influences. Also evident is the increasing permeability of 
the field, in terms of influence from other fields. Over time, the fusing of autonomy research, technology 
research, and practice is enabling a wider range of pedagogies in more locations that are less formal and 
that give more control to learners. 
Hayo Reinders and Cynthia White 20 Years of Autonomy and Technology 
 
Language Learning & Technology 151 
 
Figure 1. A model of convergence 
IMPLICATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH AND PRACTICE 
The October 2011 special issue of LLT on learner autonomy reflected the widening of the agenda for 
research and practice in technology-mediated learner autonomy. Nielson’s (2011) study into workplace 
language learning marked the shift to lifewide learning and its challenges. The collaborative digital video 
project by Hafner and Miller (2011) showed the value of drawing on students’ literacy practices 
developed in informal learning contexts. Collentine’s (2011) use of user-tracking technologies extended 
the tools to examine learners’ autonomous moves in a task-based 3D World. Finally, Lee’s (2011) 
study—discussed earlier—examined the potential of blogs to develop intercultural competence through 
reflective and social processes. As such, the special issue articles highlight the kinds of developments 
which now shape the fields of learner autonomy and language education. 
Our aim in this article was to provide a critical perspective on developments in learner autonomy, while 
pointing to the expansion and diffusion of everyday contexts and practices for language learning. A key 
implication arising from the overview is that future enquiry and practice into technology-mediated learner 
autonomy will need to be increasingly aligned to the tools, settings, and activities that are of significance 
to language learners. To achieve such an alignment will require increasing flexibility on the part of 
teachers as well as an openness to learners’ lives, their technologies and literacy practices and a 
willingness to relinquish control—like never before. It will also involve finding new ways to validate and 
assess out of class learning and to pragmatically bridge the shifts between the tools, practices, and 
contexts which now define language learning. A fundamental question for research and practice is as 
follows: How can we extend our understandings of learner autonomy to match the dynamic contexts and 
practices for language learning within and across online settings? A further implication relates to the 
diversity of contemporary arenas for language learning: Given that the potential range of settings, tools, 
and experiences is now virtually limitless, individuals need to be increasingly adept at critical adaptive 
learning in order to benefit from and contribute effectively to those settings. There is an urgent need for 
studies which address this perspective through such questions such as the following: How do students 
evaluate the affordances of technology-mediated environments? How do they engage with technology-
mediated environments to develop learning experiences that meet their needs and goals as language 
learners? How do individuals become adept at configuring their online learning experiences in optimal 
ways, orchestrating the emergent dynamics in those settings? Teachers and teacher education are part of 
this broad challenge stemming from the diversity of contexts, tools and practices for contemporary 
language learning, hence the following questions: What do the on-going shifts in online language learning 
Hayo Reinders and Cynthia White 20 Years of Autonomy and Technology 
 
Language Learning & Technology 152 
contexts and communities mean for teacher autonomy? How can teachers adapt to those shifts and learn 
to add value to learners’ autonomy within and across new contexts and settings? To conclude, the 
complex, diverse inter-relationships that emerge between learner autonomy and technology-mediated 
language learning will continue to challenge our understandings of both language learning and 
technology. Now that everyday technologies have emerged as contemporary dwelling places for language 
learning, learner autonomy is required, developed, and exercised in ways that we are only just beginning 
to understand. 
 
NOTE 
Further resources can be found on the autonomy bibliography, containing over 1,000 autonomy-related 
references. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Dr. Hayo Reinders is Professor of Education and Head of Department at Unitec in New Zealand and Dean 
of the Graduate School at Anaheim University in the United States. He is also Editor-in-Chief of 
Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching. His most recent books are on teaching methodologies, 
digital games, and second language acquisition. He edits a book series titled New Language Learning and 
Teaching Environments for Palgrave Macmillan. 
E-mail: info@innovationinteaching.org 
Dr. Cynthia White is Professor of Applied Linguistics, Massey University, New Zealand. She has 
published widely on distance and online learning, learner autonomy, learning strategies, and teacher 
identity and agency in online language teaching. She is a member of Editorial Boards of seven 
international journals, and has been plenary speaker at international conferences in Germany, Thailand, 
Singapore, China, UK, Hawai’i and Malaysia. Her publications include two books (Cambridge University 
Press, Multilingual Matters), 43 refereed articles, 15 book chapters, and several guest editorships of 
journal special issues.  
E-mail: c.j.white@massey.ac.nz 
 
REFERENCES 
Benson, P. (2011). Language learning and teaching beyond the classroom: An introduction to the field. In 
P. Benson & H. Reinders (Eds.), Beyond the language classroom (pp. 7–16). Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Boud, D. (1981). Developing student autonomy in learning. London, UK: Kogan Page. 
Candlin, C., & Byrnes, F. (1995). Designing for open language learning: Teaching roles and learning 
strategies. In S. Gollin (Ed.), Language in distance education. How far can we go? Proceedings of the 
NCELTR conference (pp. 126–141). Sydney, Australia: NCELTR. 
Candy, P. C. (1991). Self-Direction for Lifelong Learning. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
Collentine, K. (2011). Learner autonomy in a task-based 3D world and production. Language Learning & 
Technology, 15(3), 50–67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/collentine.pdf 
 
Hayo Reinders and Cynthia White 20 Years of Autonomy and Technology 
 
Language Learning & Technology 153 
Ellis, G., & Sinclair, B. (1989). Learning to learn English: A course in learner training. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Fotos, S., & Browne, C. (2004). The development of CALL and current options. In S. Fotos & C. Browne 
(Eds.), New perspectives on CALL for second language classrooms (pp. 3–14). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum. 
Fuchs, C., Hauck, M., & Müller-Hartmann, A. (2012). Promoting learner autonomy through multiliteracy 
skills development in cross-institutional exchanges. Language Learning & Technology, 16(3), 82–102. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2012/fuchsetal.pdf 
Guth, S., & Helm, F. (2010). Telecollaboration 2.0: Language, literacies, and intercultural learning in 
the 21st Century (Vol. 1). Frankfurt, Germany: Peter Lang. 
Hafner, C. A., & Miller, L. (2011). Fostering learner autonomy in English for science: A collaborative 
digital video project in a technological learning environment. Language Learning & Technology, 15(3), 
68–86. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/hafnermiller.pdf 
Holec, H. (1981). Autonomy and Foreign Language Learning. Oxford, UK: Pergamon Press. 
Kessler, G. (2010). When they talk about CALL: Discourse in a required CALL class? CALICO Journal, 
27(2), 376–392. 
Kidd, K., & von Boehm, S. (2012). Kaleidoscope, an online tool for reflection on language learning. In J. 
Mynard & L. Carson (Eds.), Advising in language learning. Dialogue, tools, and context (pp. 213–230). 
Harlow, UK: Longman. 
Lamb, T., & Reinders, H. (Eds.). (2008). Learner and teacher autonomy: Concepts, realities, and 
responses. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Lamy, M.-N., & Goodfellow, R. (1999). “Reflective conversation” in the virtual language classroom. 
Language Learning & Technology, 2(2), 43–61. Retrieved from 
http://www.llt.msu.edu/vol2num2/article2/ 
Lamy, M.-N., & Mangenot, F. (2013). Social media-based language learning: insights from research and 
practice. In M.-N. Lamy & K. Zourou (Eds.), Social networking for language education (pp. 197–213). 
Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Lee, L. (2011). Blogging: Promoting learner autonomy and intercultural competence through study 
abroad. Language Learning & Technology, 15(3), 87–109. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/lee.pdf 
Little, D. (2001). Learner autonomy and the challenge of tandem language learning via the Internet. In A. 
Chambers & G. Davies (Eds.), ICT and language learning: A european perspective (pp. 29–38). Lisse, 
Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger. 
Little, D., & Brammerts, H. (1996). A guide to language learning in tandem via the Internet. CLCS 
Occasional Paper No. 46. Dublin, Ireland: Trinity College, Centre for Language and Communication 
Studies. 
Lund, A., & Smørdal, O. (2006). Is there a space for the teacher in a WIKI?. In Proceedings of the 2006 
international symposium on Wikis (pp. 37–46). Odense, Denmark: ACM. 
Naiman, N., Fröhlich, M., Stern, H. H., & Todesco, A. (1978). The Good Language Learner. Toronto, 
Canada: Ontario Institute for Studies in Education. 
 
 
Hayo Reinders and Cynthia White 20 Years of Autonomy and Technology 
 
Language Learning & Technology 154 
Nielson, K. B. (2011). Self-study with language learning software in the workplace: What happens. 
Language Learning & Technology, 15(3), 110-129. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/nielson.pdf 
Nunan, D. (1988). The learner-centred curriculum : A study in second language teaching. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Oxford, R. L. (1990). Language learning strategies: What every teacher should know. Rowley, MA: 
Newbury House. 
Oxford, R. L. (2008). Hero with a thousand faces: Learner autonomy, learning strategies, and learning 
tactics in independent language learning. In S. Hurd & T. Lewis (Eds.), Language learning strategies in 
independent settings (pp. 41–66). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Reinders, H. (2007). Big brother is helping you: Supporting self-access language learning with a student 
monitoring system. System, 35(1), 93–111. 
Reinders, H. (2008). The what, why, and how of language advising, MexTESOL, 32(2), 13–22. 
Reynard, R. (2003). Internet-based ESL for distance adult students: A framework for dynamic language 
learning. Canadian Modern Language Review, 60(2), 123–143. 
Sockett, G., & Toffoli, D. (2012). Beyond learner autonomy: A dynamic systems view of the informal 
learning of English in virtual online communities. ReCALL, 24(2), 138–151. 
Steel, C. H., & Levy, M. (2013). Language students and their technologies: Charting the evolution 2006–
2011. ReCALL, 25(3), 306–320. 
Strambi, A., & Bouvet, E. (2003). Flexibility and interaction at a distance: A mixed-mode environment 
for language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 81–102. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/pdf/strambi.pdf 
Tudini, V. (2003). Using native speakers in chat. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 141–159. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/tudini/ 
White, C. (2007a). Focus on the language learner in an era of globalization: Tensions, positions, and 
practices in technology-mediated language teaching. Language Teaching, 40(4), 321–326. 
White, C. (2007b). Innovation and identity in distance language learning and teaching. Innovation in 
Language Learning and Teaching, 1(1), 97–110. 
White, C. (2008). Language learning strategies in independent language learning: An overview. In T. W. 
Lewis & M. S. Hurd (Eds.), Language learning strategies in independent settings (pp. 3–24). Clevedon, 
UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Willing, K. (1988). Learning styles in adult migrant education. Adelaide, Australia: National Curriculum 
Resource Centre. 
