Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/review1.pdf 
October 2016, Volume 20, Number 3 
pp. 24–27 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 24 
REVIEW OF DEVELOPING ONLINE LANGUAGE TEACHING 
Developing Online Language Teaching: Research-Based 
Pedagogies and Reflective Practices 
Regine Hampel & Ursula Stickler (Eds.) 
2015 
ISBN: 978-1137412256 
US $95.00 
206 pp. 
Palgrave Macmillan 
London, UK 
 
 
Review by Hope M. Anderson, University of Massachusetts Lowell 
Developing Online Language Teaching takes a comprehensive look at issues related to both teaching 
languages online and providing online technology training to language teachers. As the newest addition to 
the New Language Learning & Teaching Environments series, it contributes to the series’ technology 
focus, not only with ideas for pedagogically sound uses of new resources, but also with real-world 
examples of websites and trainings that have put these ideas into practice. Many of the contributors, 
including editors Hampel and Stickler, have been heavily involved in European Center for Modern 
Languages (ECML) projects that aim to make technology more accessible to teachers of English and 
other languages. Specific information about the training procedures and participants’ reactions are among 
the strengths of the book. 
The volume’s rationale derives from The Open University’s struggles in applying face-to-face teaching 
methods to online courses. Teachers often encounter administrative pressure to incorporate technology 
with the expectation of improved pedagogy, necessitating a new model for the development of 
instructors’ skills in information and communication technology (ICT). In their introductory chapter, 
Hampel and Stickler explain the sociocultural and socio-constructivist theories underlying the work, 
referencing the social turn identified by Firth and Wagner (1997). 
Throughout the book, contributors emphasize the importance of materials and trainings that meet the 
needs of teachers and students as well as accessible, hands-on trainings from which instructors can benefit 
without having to travel long distances. The studies combine quantitative data, typically from participant 
surveys, with qualitative data, from reports on the process of developing materials and trainings through 
accounts of their implementation and interviews with participants. Brief interview quotations exemplify 
themes that arise from both the data and the authors’ impressions about ICT. These to-the-point 
quotations provide insight into real issues facing teachers. Each chapter offers a useful reflective task to 
help readers connect the book’s content to their own practice and self-train with technological tools. 
The background chapter by Germain-Rutherford and Ernest responds to European reports that 
technological integration in language classes is slowed due to cost, accessibility, instructor beliefs, and 
the need for pedagogical training. They detail the Developing Online Teaching Skills (DOTS) project, an 
online platform for distance teacher training. In addition to this open resource, the ECML-supported 
Hope M. Anderson Review of Developing Online Language Teaching 
 
Language Learning & Technology  25 
project includes both online and face-to-face workshops and an associated community of practice (CoP) 
to support online teaching. The background about DOTS nicely sets up the subsequent chapters in that the 
initial diagnostic survey leading to the development of the program reveals instructor interests and needs, 
which are themes addressed throughout the book. These themes include an interest in using ICT for 
authentic materials, a desire for collaboration, a need to learn about interactive tools, and the concern for 
the time commitment necessary to integrate ICT. 
Stanojević’s chapter reports on the implementation of the DOTS project in several European countries. 
Although language instructors feel pressured to use ICT and desire hands-on training relevant to their 
current needs, prior research shows that many lack formal training in teaching with ICT. The DOTS 
project responds to this need. Its Moodle site includes self-training activities for implementing ICT, 
pedagogical guidelines, sample lesson plans, and ideas to mitigate privacy issues, and it allows instructors 
to share experiences. The development of the site, which has been used in trainings across Europe, was 
hands-on and bottom-up, based on socioconstructivist theory and instructors’ reported needs to efficiently 
integrate technology with pedagogy, and it was revised based on feedback from teacher training 
workshops. Each DOTS module includes questions and statements to guide teachers’ reflection after 
using the module on their own and with classes. Projects related to DOTS continue to be supported by the 
ECML, allowing new instructors exposure to the activities and community. The workshops, follow-up 
projects, and inclusion of stakeholders in the action research component seem to be crucial to making the 
system work. Although the CoP in the sites has not been consistently maintained since the workshops 
ended, future goals for the project include making it more interactive and self-sustainable, incorporating 
mobile learning, and broadening the online communities to encourage continued participation. The DOTS 
approach provides lessons for reflection about the implementation of ICT. The chapter includes 
guidelines on how to use the action research spiral to transform one’s own practice and a list of questions 
to help instructors evaluate tools and their relevance to classes and students. 
The chapter by Başaran, Cinkara, and Cabaroğlu reflects on the implementation of the DOTS project in 
Turkey, where a shift in government policy promotes ICT to enrich classes through the provision of 
hardware, software, and training programs. This shift is accompanied by pressure on teachers to improve 
the quality of education, spurring some to participate voluntarily in workshops. The authors translated the 
DOTS resources into Turkish and implemented face-to-face workshops with teachers of English from 
primary and secondary schools to promote the use of the materials and provide hands-on practice. Their 
pre- and post-workshop survey data deal with the teachers, problems, facilities, existing ICT use, 
workshops, and materials. In hands-on sessions, participants practiced using the tools and connecting 
them with pedagogical content, such as selecting materials for class use. Teachers prepared activities such 
as podcasts and reflected on how they could use them with their own classes. Most participants had not 
comfortably used ICT previously but found the workshops motivating and useful in improving their 
knowledge and confidence, producing lessons and worksheets as evidence. Despite a demoralizing lack of 
technological integration in some instructors’ schools, ideas emerged from the workshops to facilitate ICT 
use in their classes. The chapter provides substantial quantitative data, presented in a readable graphical 
format, as well as concise quotations from interview responses. The three authors conclude that more 
workshops should be organized and training should be provided for new tools in the future. 
In their chapter, Stickler and Emke consider the needs of part-time instructors, who make up a large 
proportion of language teachers but are under-supported and under-researched. Professional development, 
including assistance incorporating ICT, often is not available to part-time teachers, who also may not 
have as much pedagogical preparation and may be more constrained by contextual factors such as 
teaching at multiple institutions. Collected through conversations, surveys, and semistructured interviews 
with instructors of face-to-face, blended, and online courses, the data of Stickler and Emke suggest that 
professional development is important for part-timers to keep up with changing technology, improve their 
effectiveness, and understand technology in their students’ lives, and that they could be well served by 
Hope M. Anderson Review of Developing Online Language Teaching 
 
Language Learning & Technology  26 
computer-mediated communication (CMC) in training. Existing continuing professional development 
(CPD) is often too simplistic, expensive, time-consuming, or disconnected from the reality of teaching, 
causing these teachers to rely on reading and conversing with peers for CPD. The authors suggest that 
research on CPD could be better addressed by studying the gap between context and identity and the 
realities of development and teaching with technology, rather than the prior “deficit model” (p. 36). Their 
findings indicate that attitudes toward ICT influence its role in teaching, and they highlight professional 
identity and motivation as factors affecting successful CPD. Their practical recommendations for 
improving effectiveness of training include directing it toward problems as they arise, using open 
educational resources, and designing one’s own training plan. 
In “Online language teaching: The learner perspective,” Murphy reports on research conducted at The 
Open University. Using a theoretical background of demands on teachers in distance education, the online 
teaching skills pyramid (Hampel and Stickler, 2005), and a community of inquiry framework, her study 
addresses a gap in the literature about learners’ views on online L2 courses and connects teachers’ and 
learners’ perspectives. With a carefully-constructed mixed-methods sequence, Murphy surveyed and 
interviewed learners about the teaching skills that instructors had previously identified as necessary for 
online language courses. Although some of the skills are associated with good pedagogy in general, some 
related to teaching presence are more crucial online because instructors cannot as easily gauge learners’ 
reactions and need to be flexible when technical problems occur. Overall, Murphy finds that teachers 
need to use technical expertise to create a positive social and cognitive environment online, motivating all 
students to participate. 
Three subsequent chapters, by Stickler and Hampel, Hopkins, and Comas-Quinn and Borthwick, 
provide—in connection with their data and arguments—a wealth of websites for readers to explore. In 
“Transforming teaching: New skills for online language learning spaces,” Stickler and Hampel update 
their skills pyramid (Hampel & Stickler, 2005) for new technological affordances—in particular, online 
spaces. In online teaching, instructors need to translate technology into sound pedagogy, help learners 
take control of their use of online spaces for learning, and analyze and develop their own skills. Starting 
from a theoretical frame showing that teachers often use new technology in old ways, rather than 
developing new teaching styles to incorporate new technology, the authors go through each level of the 
skills pyramid, explaining what skills are necessary to implement ICT in online spaces. Social presence 
and patterns of communication differ between online and face-to-face spaces, necessitating adoption of 
new skills. They address issues of online etiquette, academic integrity, and privacy, helping instructors set 
useful guidelines to counter potential problems. Examples of how to use tools and spaces such as chatbots 
and voice forums mention specific websites but also offer broader suggestions that will outlast the 
particular resources listed. 
In “Free online training spaces for language teachers,” Hopkins outlines an approach to help trainees self-
direct their own informal learning about ICT. It can be difficult to find the most useful materials and 
communities on the Internet out of those available. Using criteria from the literature related to content, 
design, pedagogical approach, examples, usability, and more, Hopkins describes and evaluates existing 
resources by including screenshots, critical analysis, and pitfalls. He concludes with suggestions on how 
to self-train with what is available. As in the chapter by Stickler and Hampel, the list is beneficial for both 
the specific resources mentioned as well as the concepts for evaluating similar materials in the future. 
The contribution by Comas-Quinn and Borthwick takes on the issue of open educational resources 
(OERs) and open educational practices (OEPs). Starting from a perspective of social responsibility (that 
knowledge is a public good), they make the issue accessible for teachers who may not know what OERs 
are available or how to implement them in classes. They address issues of licensing and use, highlighting 
benefits and challenges of these resources based on user surveys. They also take OERs to the next level 
with OEPs, activities that involve students and teachers consuming, producing, and researching OERs. 
They end with an extensive list of useful websites as well as questions for instructors who are starting to 
Hope M. Anderson Review of Developing Online Language Teaching 
 
Language Learning & Technology  27 
employ and evaluate OERs in their own practice. 
Germain-Rutherford introduces online CoPs and their benefits for professional development such as 
shared materials, dialogue, perspectives, feedback, and collaboration. She surveyed instructors and 
teacher trainers during two ICT workshops and used a case study methodology to evaluate several online 
CoPs. Starting from a social theory of learning and a socio-constructivist framework, her discussion 
suggests that CoPs, with their diverse membership and perspectives, aid language development and 
intercultural awareness, which is especially helpful for non-native speaker teachers. The structure and 
effectiveness of the three case study CoPs from the United States and Europe depend upon scale, 
moderator roles, topics discussed, workshops and other community events, shared resources, and patterns 
of interaction. She concludes with questions for assessing online CoPs. 
In a chapter aimed at teachers wanting to investigate their own teaching, Hampel addresses approaches 
for practice-based research on online language instruction, specifically on CMC and mobile learning. 
Stressing that ICT use needs to be grounded in theory, she illuminates the iterative cycle of selecting, 
implementing, and evaluating technology in one’s own classes. She provides a concise background about 
learning and pedagogical theory, addresses qualitative research methods through examples from existing 
studies, and provides suggestions for readers’ own research. Following the sociocultural perspective of 
the book, methods addressed are participatory research, action research, ethnography, and discourse 
analysis. 
Overall, the book is well organized, with each chapter proceeding logically from the previous. The 
authors reference each other’s chapters, lending the work cohesion. The volume contributes to the 
scholarship of the field through its research on in-service teachers of English and other languages at a 
variety of levels in multiple countries. It also contributes to the research on teacher development, both 
face-to-face and online, which has direct application for similar programs all over the world. The 
additional focus on conducting action research and other types of investigation helps connect research and 
practice—a welcome contribution to the field. With its synthesis of literature, original research, and 
suggested websites, the book is a valuable resource for teachers, teacher trainers, and researchers. Its 
blend of research and practical guidance will benefit teachers at all points in their careers. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Hope M. Anderson is an Assistant Professor of Spanish and lower-division Spanish Program Coordinator 
in the Department of World Languages & Cultures at the University of Massachusetts Lowell. Her 
primary area of research is technology integration in second language courses in higher education, 
specifically the blended model. 
E-mail: hope_anderson@uml.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Firth, A., & Wagner, J. (1997). On discourse, communication, and (some) fundamental concepts in SLA 
research. Modern Language Journal, 81(3), 285–300. 
Hampel, R., & Stickler, U. (2005). New skills for new classrooms: Training tutors to teach languages 
online. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 18(4), 311–326. 
