Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2016/al-seghayer.pdf 
June 2016, Volume 20, Number 2 
pp. 179–184 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 179 
CELEBRATING THE STORY OF MY FIRST CONTRIBUTION TO CALL 
Khalid Al-Seghayer, Al-Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University 
In the realm of second language acquisition, investigations of the efficacy of multimedia 
annotations for learning unknown lexical items has attracted considerable interest during 
the past decade. This commentary discusses the story of my first contribution to the field 
of computer-assisted language learning (CALL) 14 years ago. In particular, it sheds light 
on motivating factors that led me to do so and also presents the intellectual and practical 
contributions of my study. The commentary concludes by describing some important 
technological and pedagogical factors that should be considered to fully exploit the 
potential of an electronic glossary. Within the domains of technology and pedagogy, I 
identify specific points that cover a wide range of issues and highlight their implications. 
APA Citation: Al-Seghayer, K. (2016). Celebrating the story of my first contribution to 
CALL. Language Learning & Technology, 20(2), 179–184. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2016/al-seghayer.pdf 
Received: May 27, 2015; Accepted: December 17, 2015; Published: June 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Khalid Al-Seghayer 
MOTIVATING FACTORS THAT LED TO MY FIRST CONTRIBUTION TO CALL 
When I happily received the invitation to write a commentary on my first-ever contribution to the field of 
computer-assisted language learning (CALL) 14 years ago, I had to travel years back to remember the 
motivating factors for my study, which would unknowingly become one of the highest-cited articles in 
the history of Language Learning & Technology (LLT), an outstanding CALL journal. At the time, I had 
just developed an interest in CALL and had a strong belief that contemporary technological capabilities 
could enhance second language (L2) reading and accelerate L2 vocabulary acquisition by enabling the 
simultaneous presentation of target vocabulary in multiple modalities such as text, audio, still pictures, 
and dynamic videos. In other words, I believed glossing individual vocabulary items via annotations 
embodied by different modes, media, and forms, could improve L2 acquisition when presented digitally 
on a computer screen. 
When I was a PhD candidate, I maintained close contact with several English as a second language (ESL) 
learners, mainly to conduct small-scale studies to fulfill my doctoral coursework requirements. In one of 
my studies, I interviewed a Mexican ESL learner on the specific strategies he used to acquire English 
vocabulary. In this interview, he told an interesting story about something that happened when he first 
arrived in the United States knowing only a little English. In a restaurant, when the waitress served his 
meal and he did not see a ketchup bottle either on the table or served with the meal, he asked, “Where is 
the checkup?” She looked at him, deciphering what he was trying to say. After some failed attempts, the 
waitress realized he was asking for ketchup but was mistakenly using the word checkup. She kindly asked 
him to wait; after a short while, she brought out a bottle of ketchup. She said, “We call this ketchup” as 
she pointed to the bottle and pronounced the word ketchup. This incident, along with the multimedia 
technological capabilities available at that time, made me think we could provide an optimal L2 
vocabulary learning environment to ESL learners in which they could acquire English vocabulary in more 
efficient, innovative ways and in multiple modalities by exploiting multimedia features. After a bit of 
investigation, I learned I could accomplish this ambitious plan via what is known in the CALL field as an 
electronic glossary or, more specifically, multimedia vocabulary annotation. 
To avoid developing a multimedia glossary environment without consulting the related literature—as was 
the case with most computerized language learning programs developed in the 2000s—and to examine 
Khalid Al-Seghayer Celebrating the Story of My First Contribution to CALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 180 
the effect of multimedia annotation modes on L2 vocabulary acquisition, I began researching and 
designing multimedia glosses. I factored in state-of-the-art L2 vocabulary theories, as the lexicon plays a 
central role in second language acquisition. I then conducted a study to measure the effect of this type of 
multimedia gloss environment. At the time, I was taking a course on L2 reading, which greatly enhanced 
my knowledge of L2 vocabulary acquisition and opened my eyes to the potential of electronic glossaries 
in acquiring unknown or unfamiliar L2 vocabulary words. 
In the early 2000s, few studies had undertaken a thorough empirical examination of the L2 reading 
process in the computer-assisted context and its effect on L2 reading comprehension. In fact, most of the 
few studies on L2 reading and computer technology focused on hypermedia rather than hypertext and 
investigated L2 vocabulary rather than reading comprehension. Together, these factors motivated me to 
examine the effect of annotation features in a multimedia reading environment on L2 vocabulary 
acquisition. 
INTELLECTUAL AND PRACTICAL CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE STUDY 
My study was among the first—if not the first—to examine whether simultaneously presenting 
information about an individual lexical item via multiple modes would improve learning. Although 
studies on the efficacy of computer-mediated multimodal glosses in vocabulary acquisition existed at the 
time, no study had compared the efficacy of different types of pictorial annotations. More specifically, the 
difference between the effect of static pictures and dynamic video on learning annotated words remained 
uninvestigated. Therefore, I designed my study to investigate the effects of different types of annotations 
on vocabulary acquisition and, on the microscale, to compare the efficacy of coupling printed text 
definitions with still pictures and with video. 
The study demonstrated that exposing learners to multiple modalities of presentation (i.e., printed text, 
sound, picture, or video) produces a language-learning environment that can have a significant effect on 
learning. The overall findings provided a better understanding for curriculum designers, program 
developers, and teachers of what accounts for students’ success in target language vocabulary acquisition 
via the assistance of multimedia annotations. Specifically, the study found that providing glossary 
annotations with both textual and visual information supports L2 vocabulary acquisition more than textual 
information or traditional glosses alone. 
As far as theoretical implications are concerned, the study’s results supported the generative theory of 
multimedia learning (Mayer, 1997). This theory holds that the design of multimedia instruction affects the 
degree to which learners engage in the cognitive processes required for meaningful learning in the visual 
and verbal information processing system (Mayer, 1997). Thus, presenting a vocabulary item using both 
words and corresponding illustrations is effective because it helps guide learners’ cognitive processes. In 
vocabulary learning, learners tend to build visual and verbal cues for retrieving stored information from 
memory. Storing information is generally not a complex task, but retrieving it is often arduous. To make 
the task easier for learners, we can provide multiple retrieval cues by integrating two different forms of 
mental representations. 
With respect to the study’s contribution to the practice of L2 vocabulary instruction, the study 
demonstrated that incorporating glosses into authentic online texts in multimedia environments can 
facilitate incidental L2 vocabulary acquisition. Accordingly, my study contributed a more efficient means 
of teaching target lexical items, primarily by exposing learners to unfamiliar words via multiple resources 
and providing quicker and more convenient access to their meaning. 
CRITICAL ISSUES STILL TO BE CONSIDERED 
Many studies on L2 electronic vocabulary glosses have been published since my article first appeared in 
LLT, but various critical issues still require thorough examination. More specifically, researchers need to 
Khalid Al-Seghayer Celebrating the Story of My First Contribution to CALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 181 
consider a myriad of essential technological and pedagogical factors to amplify the potential effectiveness 
of electronic glossaries in incidental and intentional L2 vocabulary learning. First, studies did not develop 
practical ways to aid learners in paying equal attention to both visual and audio input, especially 
audiovisual input from videos, as they interact with multimedia annotation presentations. This unresolved 
issue is vital because the working memory’s processing capacity is limited; to the detriment of audio 
input, learners predominantly rely on visual input. 
Second, an electronic glossary environment requires learners to select relevant information and retain the 
encountered vocabulary items simultaneously. However, studies have yet to examine ways to help 
learners effectively manage various stimuli. 
Third, various elements in multimedia environments can disrupt the reading process. Determining how to 
limit these disruptions is imperative. Currently, there is no conclusive evidence that consulting 
multimedia annotations does not interrupt the process of understanding the text under study. 
Finally, studies have yet to identify an optimal interface, platform design, and location for annotated 
multimedia glossaries. Specifically, there is no consensus on various technological issues that should 
guide the design of multimedia glosses or on the positioning of multimedia annotations that would best 
facilitate L2 vocabulary acquisition. The way in which a glossed word is displayed and its location are 
important technical parameters, especially knowing that cluttered screens hinder readers. Likewise, the 
literature has yet to identify the best means of ensuring users actually consult the available glossary and 
motivating them to do so. Although a program may make glosses available to readers, there is no way to 
ensure readers view each provided electronic entry. Additionally, the method of gloss presentation may 
affect cognitive aspects of target L2 vocabulary acquisition. Overall, additional resources should be 
invested in the design of multimedia glosses. 
UPDATED PROGRESS 
To date, the potential efficacy of multimedia annotations or glosses in both incidental and intentional L2 
vocabulary acquisition has attracted many researchers. Early studies focused on comparing the 
effectiveness of multimedia to that of traditional dictionaries in facilitating L2 vocabulary acquisition, 
whereas later works focused on further issues, including clicking behavior, different modes of multimedia 
annotation, the effects of native language (L1) glosses on L2 vocabulary acquisition, and L1 translations 
or definitions. Recently, researchers have begun to explore areas of investigation such as teachers’ and 
students’ perspectives of electronic dictionaries, the locations of glossed words in computer-based 
annotated texts, and the varying benefits of particular types of vocabulary annotations for learners with 
certain perceptual learning styles. 
Future studies will likely examine multimedia vocabulary annotation based on cognitive psychology 
theories on memory, working memory, and spaced retrieval in L2 processing. Presumably, these studies 
will also closely consider all aspects of lexical acquisition, such as input, processing, storage, retrieval, 
and output, all of which will improve our understanding of how multimedia can enhance L2 vocabulary 
acquisition. 
FUTURE NEEDS OF AN EFFECTIVE ELECTRONIC GLOSSARY 
That said, future studies on multimedia glossaries should consider several issues, including (a) learning 
training, (b) criteria for selecting words to be glossed, (c) accommodating individual differences, (d) 
learners’ proficiency levels and context-specific definitions, and (e) assessment. This section will 
introduce each effective factor, shed light on the reasons for considering it, and offer some practical 
suggestions for implementation. 
 
Khalid Al-Seghayer Celebrating the Story of My First Contribution to CALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 182 
Learning Training 
With respect to the issue of learning training, training students on the most beneficial way to utilize an 
electronic glossary is vital. Most students are accustomed to traditional or printed dictionaries and might 
be unfamiliar with how to operate and efficiently interact with a multimedia glossary. Informing potential 
users beforehand of the best ways to use an electronic glossary can familiarize them with both the 
program features and effective consulting techniques. 
Orienting a user to an electronic glossary also reduces the cognitive load imposed on learners in the new 
computerized instructional environment. Such orientation enables users to exploit their experience with 
the multimedia glossary to the fullest. This preparatory information can be presented in introductory 
sessions that introduce glossing features to users and provide practice sessions on how to consult glossed 
entries. Tutorial sessions should have clear, concise, and useful descriptions of the program content. 
Instructors can also train students on how to use the electronic features most effectively. 
Criteria for Selecting Words to be Glossed 
The criteria for selecting the words to be glossed are another important pedagogical consideration. 
Beyond limiting the overall number of glosses, instructional designers of multimedia glosses (IDMGs) 
should avoid selecting words based on their intuitive sense or personal judgment. Instead, they should set 
criteria to guide their selections. When selecting target words, IDMGs can choose between or combine 
two approaches: systematic selection and less systematic selection. Systematic selection involves 
consulting or basing the selection on the available word lists and frequency corpora (e.g., Francis & 
Kucera, 1982; Hindmarsh, 1980). Some words occur frequently, while others appear only in specific 
contexts. Overusing low-frequency words can have a comical effect. Thus, Nation (1990) proposed 
selecting words based on their usefulness and importance in the text. Furthermore, readers often see no 
point in looking up words that seem familiar to them and, therefore, refrain from doing so (Black, Wright, 
Black, & Norman, 1992). 
In contrast, the second selection method (less systematic selection) entails asking representatives of the 
target user group to read the selected text and highlight the words they do not know. This activity enables 
IDMGs to measure pre-knowledge of the keywords. IDMGs can also ask the teachers of the target group 
to provide insight based on their experience into whether the target group would be familiar with the 
selected words. 
Learners’ Proficiency Levels and Context-specific Definitions 
On this note, advance consideration should be given to learners’ proficiency levels. IDMGs need to tailor 
definitions to learner proficiency levels and abilities. Definitions should be concise and include simple 
syntactical structures and basic vocabulary. Additionally, the suggested definitions for the target words 
should fit the context of the text at hand. The relevance of a definition is significant. When readers 
perceive that a definition helps them understand a text, they are more willing to pay attention to word 
meaning (Hulstijn, 1993; Hulstijn, Hollander, & Greidanus, 1996). According to Reinking (1990), one 
advantage of an electronic glossary over a traditional dictionary is that it provides immediate access to 
context-specific definitions. Context-specific definitions eliminate the need to determine which of the 
several dictionary meanings apply to a given context. Echoing this argument, Leffa (1992) contended that 
context-specific definitions free readers from making a decision concerning which definition entirely 
relates to the passage being read. 
Accommodating Individual Differences 
The accommodation of individual differences is also important in electronic glossary design. Each student 
brings a unique approach to learning experiences. Language educators continue to acknowledge the effect 
of individual differences on vocabulary learning in relation to rapid advances in the application of 
Khalid Al-Seghayer Celebrating the Story of My First Contribution to CALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 183 
instructional and educational technology (e.g., Chun, 2001; Plass, Chun, Mayer, & Leutner, 1998; 
Reinking, 1990). Computer technology enables us to negotiate an electronic glossary in an individualized 
fashion. Thus, accommodating individual differences entails providing learners with different modes of 
learning based on individual needs and allowing learners to choose their preferred mode of learning to 
derive meaning from the studied text. Accommodation ensures the presentation of information is tailored 
to suit individual learners and particular situations. In particular, one can design an electronic glossary to 
provide personalized adjunct aid that accedes to the user’s preferences and learning styles. For example, 
the program could provide options for selecting different types of dictionary information for each word, 
such as definitions in the target language, translation into L1, pronunciation, and verbal and visual 
explanations. 
Assessment 
Finally, studies should examine several factors concerning the assessment of learned lexical items offered 
in an electronic glossary. First, the mode of assessment and the presentation of the vocabulary should 
match. In other words, a link should be established between the way target glossed vocabulary is 
presented and the assessment measures that the multimedia glosses program employs. Second, assessment 
exercises should move beyond the discrete-point level—that is, the level at which users check for 
matching items, provide fill-in-the-blank responses, and complete crossword puzzles. Given the current 
capabilities of computers, assessment should provide opportunities to use introduced vocabulary in new 
situations. For instance, programmers can utilize notebooks and word-processing capabilities to pursue 
novel uses of the newly acquired lexical items. These types of assessment exercises offer multiple 
response types and produce more active learning while exploring and processing vocabulary from various 
modalities, including verbal (textual definitions) and nonverbal (static pictures, dynamic video, and 
animations). 
FINAL REMARKS 
The CALL field has evolved significantly since I first published my study on multimedia vocabulary 
annotation. Much has been accomplished, yet much more remains unexplored. It is expected that 
forthcoming studies will consider conducting an in-depth investigation, be grounded on second language 
theory and language pedagogy, thoroughly tackle the issue of cognitive perspective, and adhere to 
principles of designing multimedia instructional materials. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Khalid Al-Seghayer earned his Ph.D. in Applied Linguistics from the University of Pittsburgh in 2003. 
His research interests include CALL and L2 reading. He has taught English in the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia and the United States of America. His work has been published in TESOL Quarterly, Language 
Learning & Technology, CALL Journal, Internet TESL Journal, CALICO Journal, and CALL-EJ Online. 
His recent books are English Teaching in Saudi Arabia: Status, Issues, Challenges, Various Thoughts 
Concerning Teaching and Learning English, and Real Face of Saudi Arabia: Critical Insider 
Perspectives on Educational, Lifestyle, and Social Issues in the Kingdom. He served as the chair-elect of 
the EFL Interest Section in TESOL, the editor of the Non-Native English Speakers (NNEST) Newsletter 
in TESOL, the chair-elect of the NNEST in TESOL, and the editor of the CALL Media Software of 
Reading Matrix Journal. He was the chair of the English Department at Imam University, and now is the 
chair of the English Department at Saudi Electronic University. He serves currently as an editorial board 
member and reviewer for a number of journals. 
E-mail: alseghayer@yahoo.com 
Khalid Al-Seghayer Celebrating the Story of My First Contribution to CALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 184 
 
REFERENCES 
Black, A., Wright, P., Black, D., & Norman, K. (1992). Consulting on-line dictionary information while 
reading. Hypermedia, 4(3), 145–169. 
Chun, D. (2001). L2 Reading on the Web: Strategies for accessing information in hypermedia. CALL 
Journal, 14(5), 367–403. 
Francis, W., & Kucera, A. (1982). Frequency analysis of English usage: Lexicon and grammar. 
Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin. 
Hindmarsh, R. (1980). Cambridge English Lexicon. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Hulstijn, J. (1993). When Do Foreign‐Language Readers Look Up the Meaning of Unfamiliar Words? 
The Influence of Task and Learner Variables. Modern Language Journal, 77(2), 139–147. 
Hulstijn, J., Hollander, M., & Greidanus, T. (1996). Incidental vocabulary learning by advanced foreign 
language students: The influence of marginal glosses, dictionary use, and reoccurrence of unknown 
words. Modern Language Journal, 80(3), 327–339. 
Leffa, V. (1992). Making foreign language texts comprehensible for beginners: An experiment with an 
electronic glossary. System, 20(1), 63–73. 
Mayer, E. (1997). Multimedia learning: Are we asking the right questions? Educational Psychologist, 
32(1), 1–19. 
Nation, I. (1990). Teaching and learning vocabulary. New York, NY: Newbury House. 
Plass, J., Chun, D., Mayer, R., & Leutner, D. (1998). Supporting visual and verbal learning preferences in 
second-language multimedia learning environment. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90(1), 25–36. 
Reinking, D. (1990). The effects of computer-mediated texts on the vocabulary learning and 
comprehension of intermediate-grade readers. Journal of Reading Behavior, 22(4), 395–411. 
