Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/mompeanfouzgonzalez.pdf 
February 2016, Volume 20, Number 1 
pp. 166–190 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 166 
TWITTER-BASED EFL PRONUNCIATION INSTRUCTION 
José Antonio Mompean, University of Murcia  
Jonás Fouz-González, Universidad Católica de Murcia (UCAM) 
This paper looks at the use of Twitter as a language teaching/learning tool. It describes the 
results of a study aimed at testing Twitter’s effectiveness for pronunciation teaching. The 
purpose of the study was to determine whether Twitter can foster online participation and 
whether it may have a positive effect on the pronunciation of a number of words 
commonly mispronounced by EFL students. The study was carried out with students from 
a Language School in Spain. The students were sent a number of tweets on a daily basis, 
each of them featuring the pronunciation of a word considered to be difficult given 
unusual sound-spelling correspondences, lexical stress or the presence of silent letters. The 
results show that the instruction had a beneficial effect on the students’ pronunciation of 
the target words and that participants were actively engaged during the study. Implications 
of the results for the teaching of English pronunciation and the use of Twitter in language 
teaching are also offered. 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English 
Keywords: Pronunciation, Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Mobile Learning, 
Online Teaching & Learning, Second Language Acquisition, Social Networking Sites 
APA Citation: Mompean, J. A., & Fouz-González, J. (2016). Twitter-based EFL 
Pronunciation Instruction. Language Learning & Technology, 20(1), 166–190. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/mompeanfouzgonzalez.pdf 
Received: March 28, 2014; Accepted: January 16, 2015; Published: February 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Jose A. Mompean, Jonás Fouz-González 
INTRODUCTION 
Unlike previous generations, today’s learners are surrounded by interactive media-sharing technologies 
leading to different learning styles (McBride, 2009). The advent of Web 2.0 tools and various electronic 
devices has led to the emergence of hybrid or blended learning (Buzzetto-More & Sweat-Guy, 2006; 
Goertler, 2011; Graham, 2005). This type of learning is characterized by a combination of different 
modes of delivery, modes of teaching and learning styles. Regarding foreign language learning, hybrid or 
blended learning “generally implies a learning space where instruction takes place in a traditional 
classroom setting and is enhanced or supplemented—sometimes even replaced—by computer-based or 
online activities” (Ducate, Lomicka, & Lord, 2012, p. 68), with students interacting with the teacher and 
other students both in person and virtually. 
In this new scenario, foreign language teaching/learning is increasingly benefiting from a wide range of 
heterogeneous Web 2.0 tools such as e-learning environments, blogs, wikis, or social networking services 
(SNSs). The latter, for example, are rapidly gaining attention as teaching/learning tools (Godwin-Jones, 
2008; Guth & Helm, 2010; Lamy & Goodfellow, 2010; Lomicka & Lord, 2009; Stockwell & Tanaka-
Ellis, 2012; Thomas, 2009; Zourou, 2012) in an attempt to capture learners’ new technological habits. 
Researchers are moving from the question of whether or not to use SNSs in language learning to the 
question of which ones to use and how. The alternatives include not only worldwide SNSs (e.g., 
Facebook, MySpace, or Google+) but also more local SNSs (e.g., Nasza-Klasa in Poland, Tuenti in 
Spain, Mixi in Japan, etc.) and SNSs specifically devised for language learning (SNSLL) like Babel, 
Busuu or Livemocha. In the last decade, some researchers have focused on SNSs not originally intended 
as educational tools such as Facebook or Twitter (e.g., Antenos-Conforti, 2009; Blattner & Fiori, 2009, 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 167 
2011; Blattner & Lomicka, 2012; Ota, 2011) as well as SNSLL (e.g., Brick, 2012; Harrison, 2013; Liu et 
al., 2013; Stevenson & Liu, 2010). 
In this study, the focus was set on Twitter. This SNS serves the primary purpose of allowing its users to 
share their plans, engage in discussions, or express their views on different topics, events, news, etc. 
Twitter’s popularity has not passed unnoticed amongst researchers, who have pointed out its potential for 
educational purposes, including language teaching/learning (Baker, 2010; Dunlap & Lowenthal, 2009; 
Grosseck & Holotescu, 2008; Java, Song, Finin, & Tseng, 2007; Lamy & Zourou, 2013; Promnitz-
Hayashi, 2011; Rinaldo, Tapp, & Laverie, 2011). Research suggests that Twitter can be used to create and 
encourage membership within a virtual community and social interaction and communication between 
teachers (Lord & Lomicka, 2014) or language learners (Antenos-Conforti, 2009; Borau, Ullrich, Feng, & 
Shen, 2009). Twitter can also be used to make students communicate with native speakers or peers (Liu et 
al., 2013) as well as professionals in the field (Dunlap & Lowenthal, 2009). Twitter has also been found 
to foster collaboration among students towards completion of a common task (Kassens-Noor, 2012), to 
stimulate output production (Kim, Park, & Baek, 2011) and to lead to better recall of important concepts 
(Blessing, Blessing, & Fleck, 2012) and better grades provided that teachers interact actively with 
students (Junco, Elavsky, & Heiberger, 2013; Junco, Heibergert, & Loken, 2010). Twitter can also be 
used to ask questions to the teacher or to open up a discussion (Briggs, 2008; Junco et al., 2010; Kassens-
Noor, 2012), to carry out composition tasks, vocabulary exercises and listening activities (Mork, 2009) or 
to solve doubts and inform students about course-related events (Lowe & Laffey, 2011). 
USING TWITTER FOR TEACHING ENGLISH PRONUNCIATION: THE CASE OF 
POTENTIALLY PROBLEMATIC WORDS 
Apart from the educational uses and advantages of Twitter mentioned above, Twitter can also be used to 
address pronunciation (see a pilot study by Fouz-González & Mompean, 2012), as exemplified by a few 
popular Twitter accounts such as Pronunciation Book, Confident Voice, or Forvo (Pronunciation). The 
latter, for example, offers the pronunciation of English words and sentences pronounced by a vast range 
of speakers from different parts of the world. Related to these accounts, although not exclusively devoted 
to pronunciation, accounts like Oxford Words or Cambridge Words tweet “words of the day” with a link 
to the online dictionaries where readers can find the definition of the word and its pronunciation or 
phonemic transcription. 
Although the available pronunciation-related Twitter accounts are a useful step forward in the use of 
SNSs for pronunciation teaching, further efforts should be made to explore Twitter’s potential in this 
respect. One motivation for this is the need to reestablish pronunciation as a core element of language 
curricula as pronunciation instruction still suffers, to some extent, the effects of its initial neglect by 
proponents of communicative language teaching (CLT) approaches (Celce-Murcia, Brinton, & Goodwin, 
2010; Fraser, 2000; Isaacs, 2009). As is well-known, pronunciation enjoyed a prominent position in the 
structural, audiolingual approach to teaching. However, the advent of CLT, with its stress on meaningful 
communicative contexts and the use of authentic materials, marked the decline of L2 pronunciation 
instruction. The latter was perceived to be related more to accuracy and linguistic competence than to 
communicative competence. Since the mid-1980s, a renewed interest in pronunciation sought to relocate 
pronunciation within communicative approaches (Morley, 1991; Pennington & Richards, 1986; Setter & 
Jenkins, 2005). However, despite highlighting the importance of suprasegmentals for communication, 
communicative proponents have typically failed to equip teachers adequately with strategies for teaching 
pronunciation in a communicative way, with most materials far from presenting pronunciation in a truly 
communicative and holistic manner (Gilbert, 2010). 
Given that SNSs like Twitter enhance social presence, encouraging interaction and communication 
between teachers and learners (Antenos-Conforti, 2009; Liu et al., 2013; Lord & Lomicka, 2014) and 
given the need for teachers to have a repertoire of strategies for teaching pronunciation in a more 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 168 
communicative manner, the current study aims to explore the usefulness of Twitter for the teaching and 
learning of English pronunciation. In doing so, the study addresses two research questions: a) can the use 
of Twitter bring about active participation on the part of the (Spanish EFL) students? and b) can Twitter 
help learners improve their pronunciation of commonly mispronounced lexical items? Given the alleged 
educational advantages of Twitter mentioned above, it is hypothesized that a) Twitter will foster active 
online participation from students; and b) Twitter will be useful in making learners improve their 
pronunciation of commonly mispronounced lexical items. 
The first hypothesis is based on the claim that the social nature of online networking lends itself to 
gratification of social and personal needs (Dixon, 1996; Ebersole, 2000) and encourages users to ‘share’ 
and ‘participate’. Given the positive results in terms of students’ engagement in studies focusing on 
Twitter with populations such as marketing students (Rinaldo et al., 2011) or pre-health professional 
majors (Junco et al., 2010), we believe that Twitter would also foster EFL students’ participation. This is 
due to the fact that computer-mediated communication (CMC) can relieve learners from time or 
psychological pressure to express themselves (Chun, 1994). CMC can also allow more equal 
opportunities to interact (Warschauer, 1996), increase motivation (Beauvois, 1995), self-expression 
(McBride, 2009) and facilitate recall (Blessing et al., 2012). Furthermore, CMC can induce the experience 
of losing track of time as a result of being fully engaged in an activity (Egbert, 2005). Finally, CMC 
engages students in more authentic social and communicative behavior than typically happens in 
classrooms where other modes of interaction are often merely simulated (Sykes, Oskoz, & Thorne, 2008). 
Hence, the gratification of social needs obtained through interactions in SNSs could be considered an 
important supplemental element to support and enhance learning. 
The rationale for the first hypothesis is also based on the fact that Twitter is characterized by conciseness 
in content and high accessibility through computers, smartphones, tablet computers, etc. Additionally, 
given the fact that posts on Twitter (or tweets) are short—up to 140 characters—users do not spend a long 
time reading a given tweet and they can do so basically anywhere and at any time, as long as they have 
the appropriate technology. This can encourage opportunistic learning, enabling students to fill in time 
gaps between other tasks with bite-size learning, or to combine learning with tasks demanding low 
concentration (Kenning, 2007). Since a number of studies suggest that vocabulary can be taught 
effectively through SMS (Kennedy & Levy, 2008; Levy & Kennedy, 2005; Thornton & Houser, 2001, 
2005) and MMS (Saran, Seferoglu, & Cagiltay, 2009), the same should apply to Twitter, as SMS, MMS 
and Twitter are all characterized by conciseness in content and high accessibility. 
The second hypothesis is based on the fact that the target pronunciation aspects in this study were not 
considered problematic due to students’ perceptual or articulatory capacities. Participants in this study 
were not required to discriminate or learn to produce totally unfamiliar sounds since, leaving fine-grained 
phonetic difference aside, the target phonemes addressed in this study have near equivalents in the 
students’ L1 (Spanish). Instead, participants were required to learn that they needed to use a sound they 
could already produce in a particular contextual position in a word or to avoid pronouncing it for silent 
letters. Similarly, participants’ ability to modify stress within a word was not in question, since Spanish is 
a variable-stress language (see e.g., Ashby & Maidment, 2005) and students can manipulate and shift 
stress in syllables within a word. The current study assumes that students’ errors may be due to a lack of 
exposure to the target words, an overgeneralization in the use of some phonological units or grapheme-
phoneme patterns in the L2 to other contexts (e.g., <ph> /f/, Stephen, commonly mispronounced as 
*/estifen/), a lack of conscious attention and explicit instruction, or a combination of these. 
Two problematic aspects of pronunciation for Spanish EFL learners were addressed: (1) learners’ 
inappropriate choices of sounds due to the influence of orthography; and (2) learners’ incorrect stress 
placement. Regarding the inappropriate choice of sounds, typical errors often derive from: a) unusual 
sound-spelling correspondences in English (e.g., /v/ for <ph> in Stephen rather than /f/); b) an association 
of an English grapheme/digraph with the Spanish phonemic value rather than the English one (e.g., /tʃ/ for 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 169 
<ch> in archives rather than /k/ as Spanish <ch> is always /tʃ/, e.g., ocho /otʃo/ ‘eight’); and c) letters in 
orthography that do not materialize in pronunciation (e.g., <s> in aisle, or <l> in walk) given that silent 
letters are rare in Spanish. As for learners’ incorrect stress placement, errors often derive from unexpected 
lexical stress due to the existence of cognates in English and Spanish with different stress patterns, as in 
interMIttent-intermiTENte (see Mairs, 1989; Monroy, 2001 for a more comprehensive account and 
examples of these errors). 
As regards the one factor mentioned above that can explain student’s errors in this study and that depends 
on teaching, such as conscious attention/explicit instruction, opinions differ. Some approaches 
deemphasize the role of explicit instruction and knowledge in SLA on the assumption that explicit 
knowledge cannot be converted into implicit knowledge (e.g., Krashen, 1985, 1993). In contrast, other 
approaches maintain that learners can benefit from explicit knowledge, which can either become implicit 
knowledge or at least play a role in developing implicit knowledge (Ellis, 1993; Gass, 1997; DeKeyser, 
2003). 
The view that learners can benefit from explicit knowledge has resulted in different approaches in the 
field of SLA. Their common assumption is that paying conscious attention to the formal features of L2 
input is beneficial for its processing and optimal L2 development (Schmidt, 1990, 2010). These 
approaches include, amongst others, consciousness-raising instruction (Ellis, 2003), input enhancement 
(Sharwood-Smith, 1993), and focus on form (Long, 1991; Long & Robinson, 1998). As Lightbown and 
Spada (2008) point out, the fact that instruction is most effective when it includes attention to form and 
meaning is not in question any longer. In this respect, explicit instruction seems particularly suitable for 
pronunciation (Couper, 2003; Pennington & Ellis, 2000; Saito, 2013). Pronunciation attainment is 
hindered by numerous factors (e.g., the learners’ age, L1, aptitude, or motivation; for a review, see Celce-
Murcia et al., 2010 or Pennington, 1998), which is aggravated by the fact that pronunciation involves not 
only cognitive (Fraser, 2001) but also perceptual (Flege, 1995; Kuhl & Iverson, 1995) and psychomotor 
abilities (Leather & James, 1991). As Pennington (1998, 1999) suggests, as learners grow older, they get 
to a point in which any improvements will become extremely difficult without explicit instruction. In 
light of the above, we consider that Twitter may be a convenient instrument to help students with the 
types of pronunciation errors addressed in this study, provided that attention is drawn to the former 
through explicit instruction. 
METHOD 
Participants 
Sixteen native Spanish EFL students (N=16) took part in this study. These participants were between the 
ages of 18 and 54. There were 5 males and 11 females (mean age 33.5). These students were learning 
English at an official Language School in Murcia (Spain) and following no other English course at the 
time the study was conducted.1 Participants were recruited from several classes and from different 
branches of the same language school. Their level of English was B1 (intermediate) according to the 
Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR). Participants were recruited via 
advertisement of the study from their teachers, although the latter did not take part in the study and the 
participants were not the researchers’ students either. Participants volunteered to take part in the study, for 
which they were not paid nor given academic credit, as the study was not part of their course. 
Stimuli 
Given the interlanguage problems described above, a list of potentially problematic items was compiled 
given their structural properties and proven difficulties and differences between Spanish and English in 
terms of pronunciation and spelling conventions, often described as leading to problems in the 
interlanguage of Spanish EFL learners (see Mairs, 1989; Monroy, 2001). 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 170 
The list included 75 items featuring segmental and suprasegmental aspects. More specifically, three 
subgroups of 25 words each featured silent letters often pronounced by students (aisle */aɪsl/), unusual 
grapheme-phoneme correspondences (steak, mispronounced */stiːk/), and misplaced lexical stress 
(*caTHOlic). Silent letters included, amongst others, <t> (hasten), <l>, (half), and <w> (sword). Unusual 
grapheme-phoneme items featured either sound-letter correspondences like <s> = /ʃ/ (sugar) or sound-
digraph correspondences like <th> = /ð/ (worthy). The stress pattern items addressed stress in specific, 
underived lexical items (e.g., politics, mispronounced *poLItics) or affixed words (e.g., guitarist, 
mispronounced *GUItarist). Given Spanish EFL learners’ preference for standard BrE or AmE 
pronunciation models (see e.g., Mompean, 2004), all reference phonological values for graphemes and 
lexical items in the current study apply at least to these two varieties as indicated in authoritative 
pronunciation dictionaries (e.g., Jones, Roach, Setter, & Esling, 2011; Wells, 2008). 
In order to create a pre-test, the 75 words were intermixed with 25 distractors, or items whose stress 
pattern and grapheme-phoneme correspondences were uncontroversial for students (see Appendix A). 
The results obtained from the pre-test led to the choice of seven to ten items for each item subgroup. With 
these items, a set of tweets was created featuring the target words. The original plan was to use the same 
number of tweets for each item subgroup. However, the final figures depended on the data obtained from 
the pre-test. A target word was included in the set of tweets only if it had been mispronounced in the pre-
test by at least 95% of the participants—a 100% rate of mispronunciation would have led to an 
undesirably low number of tweets. The final number of items was 27. Silent letters were featured in 11 
tweets, grapheme-phoneme correspondences in 10, and lexical stress in six. Specific target words in 
tweets can be found in Appendix B in chronological order. A transcript of all tweets with links to the 
audio and video files can be found in Appendix C. 
An attempt was made to make tweets as simple, short and student-friendly as possible. Target words were 
embedded in authentic language in an attempt to foster meaningful learning. Tweets contained audio and 
video links between one and two minutes long. These multimedia files contained excerpts from 
interviews, video clips, news, or songs covering a variety of subjects. Videos were downloaded with 
RealPlayer from YouTube or news sites like the BBC or the CNN. Audio clips were downloaded directly 
from the BBC website. Files were created and edited with Windows Movie Maker. After the edition of 
materials, files were uploaded to a private YouTube account. 
As indicated above, the current study assumes that pronunciation instruction can be improved through 
conscious attention to form as well as input enhancement. In this respect, there are many ways in which 
the input can be enhanced (see Wong, 2005 for different techniques). For example, changing typography 
to highlight the saliency of particular forms (Han, Park, & Combs, 2008; Saito, 2013), or providing 
metalinguistic information (Ioup, 1995). The current study used both resources. Capital letters were used 
to signal stressed syllables. Pronunciation-related familiar words were also often used as examples 
alongside target words to foster meaningful learning (e.g., tweet 7 “Listen to the ‘ch’ in archives. Careful! 
It’s the same sound as the ‘k’ in key or the ‘c’ in come”). Finally, occasional translations of target words 
into Spanish were included. Phonemic transcription was kept to a minimum and full transcriptions of 
items were not used at all to avoid problems with symbol displays as well as extra difficulty in the tweets. 
Tweets typically drew participants’ attention to the pronunciation of a target word in a straightforward 
manner (see sample tweet on aisle in Figure 1). Nevertheless, a few tweets asked participants to listen to a 
target word from a video/audio file and decide what they considered to be remarkable about its 
pronunciation. This strategy intended to prompt discussion among students, thus favoring a more active 
role on their part. In these latter cases the researchers would use a follow-up tweet with the focus on the 
intended pronunciation features, irrespective of whether students participated or not. 
 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 171 
 
Figure 1. Sample tweet featuring the word ‘aisle’, with silent ‘s’ 
PROCEDURE 
As a preliminary step to the Twitter-based teaching/learning program, a pre-test was administered to 
participants, followed by a questionnaire. The pre-test consisted in an oral task in which participants were 
asked to associate words with colors based on their impressions. The 100 word stimuli were arranged in 
25-item columns. Students saw the words in blocks of five, each block containing at least one distractor 
as well as an example of each of the problematic aspects under study (see Appendix A). Next, students 
pronounced the words in the carrier sentence “____is____” (e.g., “house is blue”, in the sense that the 
word house evokes in the participant the color blue). This task was meant to elicit the students’ 
pronunciation of the target words without them knowing that pronunciation was the focus of the study. 
Apart from this, the 100-word list (75 potential targets + 25 distractors) was long enough to guarantee that 
participants would find it difficult to look the pronunciation of items up in the dictionary and/or discuss a 
significant number of items after the pre-test, which could have compromised the results of the study. 
After the pre-test, participants were given an initial questionnaire with items addressing, amongst others, 
their SNS e-routine. All but one student claimed to use SNSs on a daily basis. Two students logged in 
once a day and the rest several times a day. Information regarding log-in time routines was used in an 
attempt to decide on a convenient time for sending tweets in this study. As for the most used SNSs, 
Facebook was used by 100% of the participants, Twitter by 80%, and Tuenti by 50%. As not all 
participants used Twitter before the beginning of the study, a video-tutorial was sent via email to all 
participants explaining how to log in and use Twitter. Participants were encouraged to use their personal 
accounts since this might facilitate integrating the study as part of their non-academic e-routine. However, 
participants could also create a specific account for the study if they preferred to do so. 
The Twitter-based program took place during 27 working days, with one new tweet posted from Monday 
to Friday. Most target words were featured in one single tweet although, in a few cases, a second tweet 
was sent immediately to complete the first. This was only done on special occasions, for example if we 
suspected the word would be unknown for students and offered a translation or the sentence in context, or 
when we did not have enough space so as to copy the link to the audio/video file. 
Because Twitter’s timeline shows tweets in reverse chronological order, each tweet was sent twice a day, 
around 11:00 am and 18:00 pm respectively. This was done in order to make tweets more visible, as 
tweets are often replaced by other tweets received by participants later in the day. When participants 
logged in and read tweets, they were required to confirm that they had done so with a reading 
confirmation tweet (henceforth RC). Participants could also include comments or questions on the 
tweet/item (see Figure 2 as an example) or send more than one tweet. A register of student participation 
was kept during the study, including the number of RCs and the type of contribution they made (see 
details below). At all times during the Twitter-based instruction, the researchers provided feedback on 
demand from specific participants. This would include further clarifications, examples, or even links to 
additional audio or audiovisual material. 
 
 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 172 
 
Figure 2. Tweet featuring the word ‘weapon’, followed by a reading confirmation tweet 
After completion of the Twitter-based program, participants received a post-test interview one to seven 
days after the study. The post-test consisted in an oral production task aimed at assessing the participants’ 
pronunciation of the target words for a second time. During the interviews, participants were asked to 
pronounce the target words in the same carrier sentence as in the pre-test, associating each word with a 
color (e.g., “Greenwich is green”). Participants’ occasional mispronunciation of other aspects of the 
target words—for instance, /e/ at the beginning of Stephen, that is, */esˈtivn/— were not taken into 
account in order to consider that participants had succeeded in learning the target pronunciation aspect 
(e.g., /v/ for <ph> in Stephen rather than /f/). 
The post-test was followed by a final questionnaire aimed at obtaining information about the students’ 
experience with Twitter in general and the study in particular. Questionnaire items enquired about the 
time participants went online during the study, perceived positive and negative aspects of the study, 
suggested changes to a similar Twitter-based program for future programs/studies, etc. A delayed post-
test was administered a month after the post-test but it was only possible to meet up with four of the 
participants, so no conclusions can be offered in this respect due to the scarcity of data. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
This section presents the analysis of the data collected, which provide empirical evidence to suggest an 
informed answer to the study’s research questions. 
Regarding the first research question, namely whether Twitter can bring about active participation on the 
part of EFL students, three measures of participation are discussed below: the number of completers and 
drop-outs, the number of RCs and the types of contribution participants made. 
Drop-outs are participants who, despite following the study to various degrees, did not eventually take the 
post-test. In this study, ten participants took the post-test (62.5%) while 6 (37.5%) did not. These results 
suggest that the use of Twitter did not prompt unconditional participation on the part of all students. One 
possible reason for some students dropping out could be a loss in motivation due to insufficient bi-
directional (researcher-student) interaction and feedback. However, data from the final questionnaires 
show that participants’ perception of student-researcher interactions and feedback provision was 
adequate. Just as tweets were considered to be interesting by most participants, all of them claimed that 
sufficient feedback had been provided by the researchers. Thus, drop-out rates and varying degrees of 
participation seem to be due to reasons other than disruption of fluent student-teacher interaction. 
The amount of information received could also have had an impact on the number of drop-outs. For 
example, an excessive amount of information (or scarcity of it) when students logged in could have 
caused students to lose interest in the study. The decision to post a new tweet each day was taken given 
the researchers’ intention of making students focus on a single target word per day and find at least one 
new item each day when they logged in. Therefore, frustration at not finding new tweets when logging in 
or finding too many was reduced to a minimum. Nonetheless, an inspection of the dates of the RCs and 
statements in the post-test questionnaires reveals that most participants often sent several RCs at a time. 
In the open-ended questions, one of the students commented that one tweet a day was too much, while 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 173 
others claimed that they would have liked to receive even more. Thus, even though most participants 
considered the amount of tweets appropriate, some of them read several tweets at a time and regretted not 
having had the time to read them one by one as they were posted. Hence, although students may 
occasionally read several tweets at a time due to their busy schedules, a frequency of one different tweet 
(sent twice) per day does not seem to have affected the number of drop-outs significantly. 
Another possible explanation for drop-out rates could be the duration of the study. The program involved 
the daily posting of tweets during 27 working days. Figure 3 below shows the number of participants 
producing RCs over time. 
 
 
Figure 3. Number or participants (N=16) producing RC tweets from first tweet (1) to last (27) 
The data reveal that, in general, participants were relatively diligent in producing RCs. Thus, the length of 
the study does not seem to have been a problem for most participants. Nevertheless, while on average 
86.8% of participants produced RCs during the first 22 tweets, from item 23 on, tweets were confirmed 
by less than 68.7%. As can be seen in Figure 3, there is a clear decrease in the number of RCs following 
the 18th tweet. This suggests that participation declined towards the end of the study, after about the 
middle of the fifth week. Therefore, it could be considered that the duration of the study may have had a 
negative impact on the rate of drop-outs. 
Some studies have looked at the number of students who volunteer to ‘follow’ the study as a measure of 
participation (e.g., Lowe & Lafey, 2011). In our study, six of the 16 participants did not complete the 
post-test. However, taking drop-out rates as the only measure of students’ participation is somewhat 
limited. Although the fact that people drop-out may suggest that the program was not successful at 
prompting participation, it could be argued that taking the post-test is independent of participation during 
the teaching/learning sessions. Some participants could have been actively involved in the study but 
found it inconvenient to carry out the post-test for some reason. The convenience of looking at 
participants’ actual performance during the study requires alternative measures of participation. One such 
measure is the number of RCs. One of the limitations acknowledged by Junco et al. (2010) and Junco et 
al. (2013) is that they measured engagement through students’ self-report. Students’ RCs, on the other 
hand, are empirical instances of their engagement in the study. RCs do not guarantee that participants 
have carefully read or even understood the tweets, but it is a measure of participants’ actual encounter 
with them. Given this, Table 1 shows the number of RCs per participant, irrespective of whether they had 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27
Participants 
(N=16) 
Sequence of tweets (N=27) 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 174 
pronounced the words well or not in the pre-test. The table also shows the RC rate by participants given 
the number of total tweets (i.e., 27), for both those who eventually took the post-test (completers) and for 
those who did not (drop-outs). The total number of RC was 244 (90.4%) for completers (range 70.4%-
100%), 111 (68.5%) for drop-outs (range 18.5%-100%), and 355 (82.2%) for all participants. 
Table 1. Participants (Ps) and Number and Rate of RC Tweets: Completers and Drop-outs 
  
RC % 
Completers P1 26 96.3 
 
P2 19 70.4 
 
P3 26 96.3 
 
P4 25 92.6 
 
P5 24 88.9 
 
P6 26 96.3 
 
P7 25 92.6 
 
P8 27 100 
 
P9 19 70.4 
 
P10 27 100 
Drop-outs P11 14 51.9 
 
P12 17 63 
 
P13 24 88.9 
 
P14 24 88.9 
 
P15 5 18.5 
 
P16 27 100 
These data show that completers confirmed most of the tweets while non-completers confirmed a more 
modest, yet high number of tweets. Interestingly, the drop-outs had a relatively high level of RCs. In fact, 
a Mann-Whitney U test showed that there were no statistically significant differences in the production of 
RCs between completers and drop-outs (Z = -1.754, p = 0.084). This means that the number of RCs was 
rather similar between the two groups. This supports the view that failure to take the post-test does not 
necessarily entail lack of participation in the study. In fact, except for P15, who had a RC rate of 18.5%, 
all the other five drop-outs had a RC rate over 50% and over 85% in three cases. 
A further measure of participation that can be used in order to find out whether the use of Twitter did 
actually stimulate participation is to analyze the types of contribution students made. The instructions 
participants received did not require them to comment on every tweet. Asking participants to comment on 
tweets was considered very demanding as participants might at times find themselves with little or 
nothing to say. Instead, participants were told to reply to every tweet they read to notify the researchers. 
However, participants were given the chance to comment on the tweets or discuss them if they wished to 
do so. Given this, an analysis of the tweets sheds light on the type of contribution the study prompted. In 
this respect, a distinction can be made between I-have-read-it (henceforth OK) tweets and 
comment/content (henceforth CC) tweets. 
OK tweets are simple confirmations of reading while CC tweets are confirmations including some type of 
content-related, self-motivated contribution referring to the researchers’ tweets or other participants’ 
contributions. In this study, participants’ CCs provided their own examples (on silent ‘s’ in ‘aisle’: “it’s 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 175 
like in ‘island’, isn’t it?”), comments on the videos/audios relating them to their previous language 
experience (on ‘sword’: “... reminds me of my favourite song... saying ‘be my mirror, my sword and 
shield’”), comments on their own mispronunciations (on ‘catholic’: “I used to say caTHOlic!!”), etc. 
In terms of participation, Table 2 shows the number of OKs and CCs for each participant, including 
completers and drop-outs. Table 3 shows the overall data per group (completers, drop-outs, all 
participants), specifying the mean number of tweets per participant in each group. When the number in 
Table 2 is lower than the number of tweets (i.e., 27), the implication is that the student participated less 
than minimally expected. Conversely, if the number is higher than 27, participation exceeded the minimal 
expectations, which reflects a higher degree of participation. 
Given this, an analysis of the data reveals that eight participants produced more tweets than the minimum 
required for the total number of target tweets, one participant produced the expected amount (i.e., 27) and 
seven produced fewer than expected. Tables 2 and 3 reveal that the mean production of tweets was 30.8 
for completers and 20.5 for drop-outs. The data also indicate that completers produced more CCs (54.9%) 
than OKs (45.1%), although the same does not apply for drop-outs. 
Table 2. Number of Tweets and Tweet Type Produced for Each Participant 
 P T Ok % CC % 
Completers P1 26 14 53.8 12 46.2 
 P2 21 9 42.9 12 57.1 
 P3 38 10 25.6 28 71.8 
 P4 33 23 69.7 10 30.3 
 P5 29 13 44.8 16 55.3 
 P6 37 19 50 18 47.4 
 P7 36 16 44.4 20 55.6 
 P8 37 25 64.1 12 30.8 
 P9 20 9 45 11 55 
 P10 31 1 2.9 30 88.2 
Drop-outs P11 14 7 50 7 50 
 P12 17 17 100 0 0 
 P13 36 14 37.8 22 59.5 
 P14 24 24 100 0 0 
 P15 5 4 80 1 20 
 P16 27 27 100 0 0 
Notes. Participants (P), Tweets (T) Number and Rate of OK and CC Tweets: Completers and Drop-outs 
The data in Tables 2 and 3 show that completers participated more actively than drop-outs and produced 
more CCs. However, these data treat the two different types of contribution equally. Alternatively, CCs 
could be considered to have a greater value in terms of participants’ involvement than mere OK tweets, so 
the analysis should reflect this difference. Similarly, the absence of participation (i.e., not reading the 
tweets) could be somehow penalized when assessing the level of participation in the study. Thus, an 
alternative measure of participation is to quantify participants’ engagement by assigning some sort of 
grade to each type of contribution. 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 176 
Table 3. Overall Tweet Production per Group and Tweet Type 
 Completers Drop-outs All 
T 308 123 431 
Mean T/P  30.8 20.5 26.9 
Ok 139 93 232 
% 45.1 75.6 53.8 
C 169 30 199 
% 54.9 24.4 46.2 
Notes. Tweets (T), Mean Tweets Per Participant (Mean T/P), and Number and Rate of OK and CC Tweets: Completers, Drop-
outs, All Participants 
In this respect, Table 4 shows the grades for the two different types of contribution: OKs (1 point each), 
and CCs (1.5 points each) for each participant. In addition, the absence of participation is graded as -1 
point. Table 5 shows the same results per subgroup. The final number of points awarded to each 
participant in each case is converted into a participation rate scheme where 27 points equal 100% 
participation for a given participant—given that 27 were the number of tweets sent—and lower or higher 
number of points represent lower and higher participation rates respectively. Although finding a perfect 
scheme is not an easy matter, in the authors’ opinion, these criteria can be used as an informative measure 
of participants’ actual engagement in the study. 
Table 4. Points Awarded to Each Type of Contribution and Participation Rate 
 Ps No 
Reply 
Points 
(x[-1]) 
OK Points 
(x1) 
CC Points 
(x1.5) 
All points Participation 
rate (%) 
Completers 
 
P1 1 -1 14 14 12 18 31 114.8 
P2 8 -8 9 9 12 18 19 70.4 
P3 1 -1 10 10 28 42 51 188.9 
P4 2 -2 23 23 10 15 36 133.3 
P5 3 -3 13 13 16 24 34 125.9 
P6 1 -1 19 19 18 27 45 166.7 
P7 2 -2 16 16 20 30 44 163 
P8 0 0 25 25 12 18 43 159.3 
P9 8 -8 9 9 11 16.5 17.5 64.8 
P10 0 0 1 1 30 45 46 170.4 
Drop-outs 
 
P11 13 -13 7 7 7 10.5 4.5 16.7 
P12 10 -10 17 17 0 0 7 25.9 
P13 3 -3 14 14 22 33 44 163 
P14 3 -3 24 24 0 0 21 77.8 
P15 22 -22 4 4 1 1.5 -16.5 0 
P16 0 0 27 27 0 0 27 100 
Notes. Participants (Ps), number of No replies, OK and CC tweets, points awarded to each type of contribution and participation 
rate. (No Replies = -1 p. OK = 1 p. C = 1,5 p.): Completers and drop-outs 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 177 
Table 5. Overall Points and Mean Participation Rate per Group 
 No 
Reply 
Points OK OK 
points 
CC CC 
points 
Overall 
points 
Mean 
participation rate 
Completers 26 -26 139 139 169 338 477 135.7% 
Drop-outs 51 -51 93 93 30 60 153 63.9% 
All 77 -77 232 232 199 398 630 108.8% 
Notes. Number of No Replies, OK and CC tweets, and points awarded to each type of contribution, overall points, and mean 
participation rate per group (completers, drop-outs and all participants) 
As Table 5 shows, the mean participation rates are 135.7% for completers and 63.9% for drop-outs, with 
a mean participation rate of 108.8% for all participants. The participation rates for completers and drop-
outs are also shown in the boxplot in Figure 4 below. 
 
Figure 4. Bloxplot for Participation rates: drop-outs (mean: 63.9%) and completers (mean: 135.7%) 
In order to find out whether there are statistically significant differences regarding the type of contribution 
between the participation rates of drop-outs and completers, a Mann-Whitney U test was conducted, 
revealing that the differences were significant (Z = -2.117, p = .031). This shows that completers 
participated to a very satisfactory level, based on the fact that they produced more CCs than OKs 
compared with the drop-outs’ rates. Although the participation rate in terms of type of contribution 
obtained by the drop-outs is moderately high (63.9%), students who completed the study until the end and 
attended the final interviews participated even more actively. Therefore, if we consider Twitter’s potential 
to stimulate participation, we can conclude then that the use of Twitter in this study encouraged 
participation. Participants were asked to simply reply that they had read the tweets, but the majority went 
beyond that and provided additional comments/information voluntarily. In almost half of the replies 
(46.2%) students provided their own examples, commented on the materials and shared their experience. 
The rate rises to 54.8% in the case of completers. These results should not be surprising as computer-
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 178 
assisted instruction can be considered to foster a more active role on the part of learners. Chun (1994) 
states that CMC “allows students to play a greater role in managing the discourse, for example, they feel 
freer to suggest a new topic, follow up on someone else’s idea, or request more information” (p. 17). The 
results obtained seem to indicate that these patterns of behavior were also observed in this study. 
The conclusion reached in this study that the use of Twitter stimulated participation is also supported by 
the fact that, unlike other studies (e.g., Borau et al., 2009), the study’s participants were not given any 
academic reward for their participation. This is considered to be important as the granting of academic 
credits or economic rewards could potentially lead to students’ participating simply to obtain the reward, 
therefore rendering a false measure of motivation and of the potential of Twitter to encourage 
participation. In addition, the participants were not the researchers’ students. Recruiting participants from 
researchers’ courses could have led to students feeling compelled to participate in some way. Thus, the 
results obtained suggest that the use of Twitter can encourage participation out of intrinsic motivation, 
without academic pressures or rewards. 
With regard to the second research question, i.e., whether Twitter can be useful for English pronunciation 
teaching, only data from students who took the post-test are considered, as the performance of pre-test 
and post-test can be compared only for those participants. The measure used to assess potential benefits in 
students’ pronunciation is the number of pronunciations errors in the target items in the post-test as 
opposed to the number of pronunciation errors in the pre-test. The data suggest that the use of Twitter can 
indeed bring some benefits to students’ production. 
Table 6 below shows, for each completer in the study, the number of target words that were 
mispronounced in the pre-test, the number of target words that were pronounced correctly in the post-test, 
and the gain rate. It should be borne in mind that even though all tweets were sent to all participants, not 
all tweets are taken into account in the analysis of results. The figures exclude the tweets participants read 
but whose target words had already been pronounced well in the pre-test, as no gains can be inferred from 
them. 
Table 6. Individual Gain Rate from Pre-test to Post-test  
 P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P10 All 
Non-acceptable (pre-test) 25 24 26 27 25 27 21 27 26 27 255 
Acceptable (post-test) 22 22 26 24 12 16 17 17 16 19 191 
Rate of gain (%) 88 91.7 100 88.9 48 59.3 81 63 61.5 70.4 74.9 
Note. Participants (P), Number of Items Pronounced Well in Pre-test and Post-test, and Rate of Total Gain 
The results show that the mean score for the completers was 74.9%, with a standard deviation (SD) of 
17.1% (95% CI, 62.95%, 87.38%). We can conclude then that instruction did influence the participants’ 
pronunciation of the target items in a positive manner. However, the standard deviation is sizeable enough 
to suggest that a uniform effect of instruction is not observed, which means that not every participant 
benefited equally. Possible reasons for these individual differences may be due to the learners’ aptitudes 
for assimilating the information we shared, individual preferences towards the materials, the location 
where tweets were read (at home, on public transport, etc.), the number of tweets read at the same time, or 
their degree of engagement in the study (i.e., their participation rate). Nonetheless, despite these 
individual differences the general trend is that instruction had a positive effect on the study’s population. 
The data above show that completers succeeded in pronouncing target items during the post-test as 
opposed to their performance during the pre-test. It would be interesting to see, however, whether they 
were more successful with some types of items than others. Thus, considering tweets featuring silent 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 179 
letters, phoneme/grapheme correspondences, and lexical stress patterns as three different groups, gain 
rates were calculated by taking the number of target words that the participants pronounced acceptably. 
The results reveal that performance with items featuring silent letters (with a gain rate of 83.8%) was 
better than with items featuring lexical stress patterns (73.5%), which was in turn higher than with items 
featuring grapheme-phoneme correspondences (65.1%). From the production point of view, these 
findings are not surprising. Given the psycho-motor requirements of articulation (Leather & James, 1991), 
suppressing a sound might be considered easier than pronouncing a target sound since no articulatory 
effort has to be made in the first case. As regards the differences between grapheme-phoneme 
correspondences and stress placement, from the authors’ point of view, modifying stress within a word 
should also be easier, since both English and Spanish are variable-stress languages and there are no 
interferences between spelling and lexical stress. 
CONCLUSION 
As Levy and Kennedy (2005) point out, “widespread acceptance and use of new communication 
technologies does not necessarily point to effectiveness or value in the educational context” (p. 76). 
However, their existence is a strong motivation for empirical research and careful evaluation of the 
existing tools. In this respect, the current study has looked at the potential of Twitter as a tool for teaching 
pronunciation and fostering student participation amongst a group of Spanish EFL students. The results 
obtained from the study show that, in general, the use of Twitter encouraged participation and that the 
instruction had a beneficial effect on the students’ pronunciation of the target words. 
Regarding participation, the majority of participants followed the study satisfactorily as revealed by the 
overall RC rate of 82.4%. One interesting fact about the learners’ participation was that, even though six 
students did not take the final interview, these drop-outs were nevertheless moderately diligent in 
following the study, as suggested by their 68.5% mean RC rate. This suggests that drop-outs’ not taking 
the post-test does not mean that they did not participate actively. Furthermore, the results show that, on 
many occasions, the use of Twitter prompted genuine CC contributions other than mere reading 
confirmation tweets, the minimum required. 
As for the benefit of the study for students’ pronunciation of the target words, the gain rate for completers 
was 75.2%, which leads us to conclude again that the Twitter-based program, with its mixture of authentic 
materials and focus on form through metalinguistic information and typographic saliency, had a beneficial 
effect. Whether the benefits of this type of instruction can last over time could not be elucidated given the 
scarcity of data from the delayed post-test, which is a limitation of the current study. 
The current study has other limitations that should be acknowledged. One of these is the lack of a control 
group, often used in similar studies to test possible gains from pre/post-test alone and to test that 
improvements are a result of instruction and not due to other factors. Given the limited number of 
volunteers for the study, we considered having the biggest number of students possible a priority over 
splitting the subjects into treatment and control groups. Future studies could include a control group 
receiving, for example, different tweets with a focus on vocabulary or grammar and not pronunciation. 
However, we consider that the lack of a control group is not a major limitation for this study. Firstly, the 
target items in the pre-test were presented as part of a 100-word set, and the task used to elicit the 
students’ output was supposed to measure ‘synesthesia’ in an attempt to distract participants’ attention 
from the actual purpose of the task. Secondly, learners did not hear the words pronounced during the pre- 
and post-tests, so the former had no chance of learning the pronunciation by reading the items. Thirdly, it 
is improbable that learners would remember the words from the pre-test, were able to look them up in 
case they wondered how to pronounce a particular word, or even encountered a significant variety of 
them— the most part low-frequency lexical item—during the (relatively short) duration of the study in 
academic or non-academic contexts. Finally, another reason for not including a control group was that the 
study was not only of scientific value but also considered to be potentially useful for students’ learning. 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 180 
As Lord (2008) notes, depriving a control group of instruction when the project seems promising is 
always unfair. The students that participated in this study were expecting to learn something in return. 
Another possible limitation of the study is the fact that asking participants to ‘confirm’ reading tweets 
may have been considered by some participants as too controlling on the part of researchers. This may 
have prevented more spontaneous participation. Other methods of checking reading such as asking 
learners to perform a certain task after each tweet, using online tracking software, or asking participants to 
record their productions and sending/uploading them could be used in future studies. In fact, the lack of 
the latter option was regretted by some participants, who pointed out in their final questionnaire that oral 
practice combined with feedback would have been helpful in order to improve their pronunciation. In any 
case, it can be said that the results obtained show that Twitter “fitted the task” it was used for, that is, to 
illustrate the pronunciation of words students had trouble with and help them pronounce those 
problematic aspects acceptably through self-correction. Data from the final questionnaires reveal that 
most students considered the tweets to be useful to learn ‘tricky’ words whose pronunciation differed 
significantly from the students’ expectations. The results of the study showed that this was actually the 
case even in the absence of researchers’ feedback on the participants’ imitation/production of the target 
items during the study. 
The limitations mentioned above suggest directions for future research related to issues like students’ e-
routines, types of tweets and content, or the learning setting and its resources. 
Regarding students’ e-routines, an analysis of students’ online activity and habits could be useful in an 
attempt to better implement SNSs such as Twitter in language teaching. Hargittay and Hsieh (2010), for 
example, found that students who were already engaged in social networking showed higher levels of 
participation. It would also be interesting to analyze whether learners who already use Twitter in their 
private lives are more likely to benefit from this type of instruction, or whether the learners who use it 
more actively (the most avid tweeters) obtain better results than those who use it less or who do not use it 
at all. 
As far as types of tweets and content are concerned, future studies could investigate possible differences 
between tweets that include audio or video, differences between tweets that ask students a question and 
tweets that already give the information to students, or even differences in acquisition rate of items that 
are sent in a single tweet and items that are sent in several tweets. The topics covered could also have an 
impact on the effectiveness of the instruction. Moreover, research could also look into pronunciation-
related issues not addressed in this study such as further segmental and suprasegmental features, 
attitudinal meanings of intonation, variation across English accents, morphophonological regularities in 
the L2, or L1/L2 contrasts. 
Finally, regarding learning settings and resources, research could investigate the influence of the 
environment, location where students read tweets, or the devices used to access Twitter (a computer, a 
smartphone, a tablet computer). This may yield interesting insights for the field of mobile learning. In 
addition, given the existence of different SNSs, future studies should also look at the advantages and 
disadvantages of Twitter over other SNSs. The latter are relatively new tools to the language classroom 
and merit additional research to reveal their full educational potential (Ducate et al., 2012; Zourou, 2012). 
Despite the limitations of the current study and the need for further research, the results obtained may 
encourage instructors to use Twitter in their classes. It is true that even if teachers are aware of the 
potential benefits of using SNSs in the FL classroom, they may find the implementation of these tools 
difficult (McBride, 2009). In fact, some have suggested that it would not be easy to integrate Twitter into 
the regular curriculum because of students’ busy schedules (e.g., Kim, 2010). However, unlike SNSLL 
such as Busuu or LiveMocha, Twitter does not require students to log into an overt learning environment. 
Instead, it allows for an integration of learning into students’ e-routine. 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 181 
Teachers may use Twitter in numerous ways, depending on the educational context and students involved. 
One possible idea could be to use Twitter to send a “tweet of the day” featuring problematic aspects from 
the course syllabus. For pronunciation, common interlanguage problems for a particular target group may 
be featured. In any case, the results obtained suggest that Twitter can be beneficial for both pronunciation 
teaching and learning, encouraging teachers to implement this SNS alongside other educational resources, 
be it as part of an online or on-campus learning program. 
 
APPENDIX A. Pre-test stimulus set targeting unusual sound-grapheme correspondences (underlined 
items), silent letters (items in italics), and unexpected stress patterns (items in capitals). The rest of items 
represent distractors. 
house 
castle 
TERRORISM 
monarch 
talk 
clean 
chalk 
POLITICS 
social 
money 
heir 
ORGANISE 
shepherd 
grass 
aisle 
MODERNISM 
cough 
Graham 
cloud 
ATHLETE 
northern 
bristle 
drive 
ELITE 
archives 
tree 
chemical 
Buckingham 
REALISE 
sugar 
receipt 
RHETORIC 
trough 
computer 
half 
PACIFY 
southern 
greenhouse 
INTERMITTENT 
charlatan 
stop 
debt 
CLARIFY 
although 
table 
calm 
PARIAH 
Thames 
mountain 
would 
MOTIVATE 
worthy 
river 
should 
GUITARIST 
Stephen 
lake 
coup 
PROPRIETOR 
weapon 
sofa 
bomb 
COMPOUND 
crucial 
wood 
fasten 
FLORIDA 
sure 
kitchen 
yacht 
LUNATIC 
laugh 
bravery 
combing 
mishap 
cater 
t-shirt 
hasten 
CATHOLIC 
status 
water 
sword 
CANTERBURY 
Thai 
rubber 
Greenwich 
TRANQUIL 
savour 
pen 
bombing 
COMMENTARY 
spatial 
sky 
comb 
Munich 
gauge 
book 
island 
steak 
COMMITTEE 
 
APPENDIX B. Target words in the teaching/learning sessions. 
Chronological order 
Tw1 pariah, Tw2 mishap, Tw3 bombing, Tw4 lunatic, Tw5 Greenwich, Tw6 catholic, Tw7 archives, 
Tw8 heir, Tw9 Buckingham, Tw10 aisle, Tw11 debt, Tw12 Stephen, Tw13 gauge, Tw14 charlatan, 
Tw15 coup, Tw16 politics, Tw17 weapon, Tw18 combing, Tw19 worthy, Tw20 trough, Tw21 
intermittent, Tw22 sword, Tw23 Graham, Tw24 southern, Tw25 guitarist, Tw26 hasten, Tw27 
rhetoric 
Pronunciation error type 
Silent letters (11 items): Tw3 bombing, Tw5 Greenwich, Tw8 heir, Tw9 Buckingham, Tw10 aisle, 
Tw11 debt, Tw15 coup, Tw18 combing, Tw22 sword, Tw23 Graham, Tw26 hasten 
Phoneme-grapheme c. (10 items): Tw1 pariah, Tw2 mishap, Tw7 archives, Tw12 Stephen, Tw13 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 182 
gauge, Tw14 charlatan, Tw17 weapon, Tw19 worthy, Tw20 trough, Tw24 southern 
Lexical stress (6 items): Tw4 lunatic, Tw6 catholic, Tw16 politics, Tw21 intermittent, Tw25 guitarist, 
Tw27 rhetoric 
 
APPENDIX C. Tweets. 
1. Item: Pariah 
  Bridget Jones is a love pariah no more. Careful with “pariah”, “riah” being pronounced as 
“Mariah” or “fire”. http://youtu.be/AB4bh1CpZyo 
2. Item: Mishap 
 a. Did you know the word “mishap”? (percance) What do you think about the “h”? Is it 
pronounced or not? 
 b. Have a look at this video, a “mishap” in the musical version of Spiderman. The “h” is 
pronounced! http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h1Uau120T_M 
3. Item: Bombing 
  In this piece of news you have 2 examples of the word “bombing”. CAREFUL! The “b” in 
the middle is NOT pronounced! http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-63qtqE_dGk 
4. Item: Lunatic 
  Listen to this special by the BBC about George Orwell. Careful with the word “LUnatic", 
the stress on the 1st syllable! http://www.goear.com/listen/efa400e/lunatic-bbc 
5.  Item: Greenwich 
  Watch this video about Greenwich University and pay attention to the way “Greenwich” is 
pronounced: the “w” is silent! http://youtu.be/l6gosssl0ts  
6. Item: Catholic 
  Pay attention to the word CAtholic (católico). Spaniards tend to say caTHOlic, but the stress 
is on the first syllable! http://www.goear.com/listen/8000b73/catholic-bbc  
7. Item: Archives 
  Listen to the “ch” in “archives” (archivo). Careful! It’s the same sound as the “k” in “key” 
or the “c” in “come”! http://www.goear.com/listen/922fed4/archives-bbc 
8.  Item: Heir 
  As ‘The Smiths’ say: “I am the son and the heir”. CAREFUL with the word “heir”! 
(heredero) The H is not pronounced!! http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qghCe_5Kea0 
9. Item: Buckingham 
  How do you pronounce “Buckingham”? The “h” is not pronounced! Listen to this link from 
the BBC about “Buckingham Palace” and try to imitate it. http://youtu.be/tP4d7XpstYQ  
10. Item: Aisle 
  Phoebe chooses Joey to walk her down the “aisle”! Careful! the “s” in “aisle” is not 
pronounced! http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1vPr0dQtn7o 
11. Item: Debt 
 a. Today’s tweet is going to be different. Can you figure out what’s special about the 
pronunciation of ‘debt’? (we’ll give the answer  
 b. tomorrow) Listen to this piece of news and give us your opinion! PLEASE don’t look it up, 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 183 
just your thoughts! 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/worldservice/learningenglish/newsenglish/witn/2005/12/051223_imf_
debt_mtg.shtml 
12. Item: Stephen 
  Notice how Kesha pronounces the name “Stephen”. Many Spaniards say the “ph” with an /f/ 
but it is a /v/!! as in “vein”. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rYbTizdXG3w 
13. Item: Gauge 
 a. Today’s word is one of the most difficult words! Careful! Listen to the word “Gauge” 
(medida/indicador/medir) 
 b. Pay attention to the “au”, pronounced as the “a” in game, and the “ge” as “J” in John 
http://youtu.be/ovENFXZXBjE 
14. Item: Charlatan 
  Pay attention to the word “Charlatan”, the “ch” being pronounced as the “sh” in “she”. 
http://youtu.be/Uu3vyFUmDDs 
15. Item: Coup 
  Did you know the word ‘coup’ (golpe)? The “p” is not pronounced and the “ou” is the same 
as in grOUp. http://youtu.be/sqmhu_EpFz8 
16. Item: Politics 
  Today’s word may be really useful these days: POlitics. Careful with the stress! it’s not 
poLItics, but POlitics! http://youtu.be/QXWXXMrkRJE 
17. Item: Weapon 
  Did you know the word ‘weapon’? (arma). Careful with the “ea”, it’s the same sound as the 
vowel in “bed”. http://youtu.be/ksRLiyOtk78 
18. Item: Combing 
 a. Ok, this time you decide: What do you think it’s peculiar about the pronunciation of the 
word “combing”? http://youtu.be/tqGltm0E_6Q 
 b. Exactly! The “b” is not pronounced! 
19. Item: Worthy 
  Listen to the word “worthy”. Do not pronounce the “th” as in “THink",“th” here is actually 
pronounced as in “THis" /ð/. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rCD5m3SVLlg 
20. Item: Trough 
 a. We are happy to introduce the new, the amazing, the latest...water trough! Careful! “trough” 
(abrevadero) is NOT “through”! 
 b. Two problematic sounds: “ou”, pronounced as the “o” in “hot” & “gh” as the “f” in “fly” 
http://youtu.be/hKYCkzBn2lo 
21. Item: Intermittent 
  Do you know what IED is? Beware of the pronunciation of interMIttent, many people stress 
“ter” but the stress is on “mi”! http://youtu.be/6V827tIi-h4 
22. Item: Sword 
  Pay attention to the pronunciation of “sword”. Notice that the “w” is not pronounced! 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d1RYsZc9KJE 
23. Item: Graham 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 184 
  How do you pronounce “Graham”? Don’t say it pronouncing the “h” as the “j” in Jamón, 
the “h” is not pronounced! http://youtu.be/gi_MHn8ZGis 
24. Item: Southern 
  Listen to the word ‘southern’, the ‘th’ is NOT pronounced as in ‘think’. It’s pronounced as 
in ‘these’. You don’t have to listen to the full song, just a minute or so ;) 
http://youtu.be/o2EpucxN558 
25. Item: Guitarist 
  Are you familiar with Jimy Hendrix? He was a great “guiTArist” (careful! stress on the 2nd 
syllable). http://youtu.be/RcKKz_Sp7ik 
26.  Item: Hasten 
  Did you know the word ‘hasten’ (acelerar/apresurarse)? Careful! The ‘t’ is not pronounced! 
http://youtu.be/QXYXbid-frE 
27. Item: Rhetoric 
  Careful with the stress of the word “Rhetoric”, it’s not rheTOric as in Spanish “retórica” but 
RHEtoric! http://youtu.be/LW0rJ5mpkS8 
 
NOTES 
1. An official Language School is a state-run, public language school offering language tuition and 
officially recognized diplomas of several foreign languages. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We would like to thank Antonio Maurandi (University of Murcia) for his invaluable assistance with the 
statistical analyses as well as the three anonymous reviewers for their useful comments and suggestions in 
earlier versions of this paper. We would also like to thank the students who volunteered to participate in 
the study. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Jose A. Mompean is a senior lecturer in English phonetics at the University of Murcia, Spain. He has also 
worked at the University Paris 3 - Sorbonne Nouvelle. He has an MA in Phonetics (UCL, England) and a 
PhD in Phonology (University of Murcia). His research interests center on English phonetics and 
phonology, cognitive phonology, variation in English pronunciation, and English pronunciation/phonetics 
teaching. 
E-mail: mompean@um.es 
Jonás Fouz González is a lecturer and researcher at Universidad Católica de Murcia (UCAM), Spain. He 
holds a BA in English Philology and an MA in Teacher Training for Secondary Education and Language 
Teaching. His Ph.D deals with the training of pronunciation with accessible and affordable technologies. 
His research interests are Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Computer-Assisted Pronunciation 
Training, English Phonetics and Phonology and Second Language Acquisition (in particular, 
pronunciation acquisition). 
E-mail: jfouz@ucam.edu 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 185 
 
REFERENCES 
Ashby, M., & Maidment, J. (2005). Introducing phonetic science. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Antenos-Conforti, E. (2009). Microblogging on Twitter: Social networking in intermediate Italian classes. 
In L. Lomicka & G. Lord (Eds.), The next generation: Social networking and online collaboration in 
foreign language learning (pp. 59–90). San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Baker, J. D. (2010). The impact of instructor immediacy and presence for online student affective 
learning, cognition, and motivation. The Journal of Educators Online, 7(1), 1–30. 
Beauvois, M. H. (1995). E-talk: Attitudes and motivation in computer-assisted classroom discussion. 
Computers and the Humanities, 28, 177–190. 
Blattner, G., & Fiori, M. (2009). Facebook in the language classroom: Promises and possibilities. 
Instructional Technology and Distance Learning, 6(1), 17–28. 
Blattner, G., & Fiori, M. (2011). Virtual social network communities: An investigation of language 
learners’ development of sociopragmatic awareness and multiliteracy skills. CALICO Journal, 29(1), 24–
43. 
Blattner, G., & Lomicka, L. (2012). Facebook-ing and the social generation: A new era of language 
learning. Alsic, 15(1). Retrieved from: https://alsic.revues.org/2413 
Blessing, S. B., Blessing, J. S., & Fleck, B. K. B. (2012). Using Twitter to reinforce classroom concepts. 
Teaching of Psychology, 39(4), 268–271. 
Borau, K., Ullrich, C., Feng, J. J., & Shen, R. M. (2009). Microblogging for language learning: Using 
Twitter to train communicative and cultural competence. In M. Spaniol, Q. Li, R. Klamma, & R. W. Lau 
(Eds.), International Conference on Web-based Learning 2009 (pp. 78–87). Berlin, Germany: Springer-
Verlag. 
Brick, B. (2012). The role of social networking sites for language learning in UK higher education: The 
views of learners and practitioners. International Journal of Computer Assisted Language Learning and 
Teaching, 2(3), 35–53. 
Briggs, L. (Interviewer), & Parry, D. (Interviewee). (2008). Micro blogging with Twitter [Interview 
Transcript]. Retrieved from http://campustechnology.com/articles/2008/03/micro-blogging-with-
Twitter.aspx 
Buzzetto-More, N. A., & Sweat-Guy, R. (2006). Hybrid learning defined. Journal of Information 
Technology Education, 5, 153–156. 
Celce-Murcia, M., Brinton, D. M., & Goodwin, J. M. (2010). Teaching pronunciation: A reference for 
teachers of English to speakers of other languages (2nd ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Chun, D. M. (1994). Using computer networking to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence. 
System, 22(1), 17–31. 
Couper, G. (2003). The value of an explicit pronunciation syllabus in ESOL teaching. Prospect, 18(3), 
53–70. 
DeKeyser, R. (2003). Implicit and explicit learning. In C. Doughty & M. Long (Eds.), The handbook of 
second language acquisition (pp. 313–349). Oxford, UK: Blackwell. 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 186 
Dixon, J. (1996). Uses and gratifications theory to predict use of computer-mediated communications. 
International Journal of Education Telecommunications, 2(1), 3–27. 
Ducate, L., Lomicka, L., & Lord, G. (2012). Hybrid learning spaces: Re-envisioning language learning. In 
J. Thoms & F. Rubio (Eds.), Hybrid language teaching and learning (pp. 67–91). Boston, MA: Heinle 
Cengage Learning. 
Dunlap, J. C., & Lowenthal, P. R. (2009). Tweeting the night away: Using Twitter to enhance social 
presence. Journal of Information Systems Education, 20(2), 129–136. 
Ebersole, S. (2000). Uses and gratifications of the web among students. Journal of Computer Mediated 
Communication, 6(1). doi: 10.1111/j.1083-6101.2000.tb00111.x 
Egbert, J. (2005). Flow as a model for CALL research. In J. Egbert & G. M. Petrie (Eds.), CALL research 
perspectives (pp. 129–140). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Ellis, R. (1993). Second language acquisition and the structural syllabus. TESOL Quarterly, 27, 91–113. 
Ellis, R. (2003). Task-based language learning and teaching. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Flege, J. (1995). Second-language speech learning: Theory, findings and problems. In W. Strange (Ed.), 
Speech perception and linguistic experience (pp. 233–277). Baltimore, MD: York Press. 
Fouz-González, J., & Mompean, J. A. (2012). Twitter and English pronunciation teaching. In Pixel (Ed.), 
ICT for language learning 5th edition. Conference proceedings (pp. 341–344). Florence, Italy: Libreria 
Universitaria. Retrieved from http://conference.pixel-
online.net/ICT4LL2012/common/download/Paper_pdf/118-IBT24-FP-Fouz-ICT2012.pdf 
Fraser, H. (2000). Coordinating improvements in pronunciation teaching for adult learners of English as 
a second language. Canberra, Australia: Department of Education Training and Youth Affairs. 
Fraser, H. (2001). Teaching pronunciation. Sydney, Australia: TAFE NSW Access Division. 
Gass, S. M. (1997). Input, interaction and the second language learner. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Gilbert, J. (2010). Pronunciation as orphan: What can be done?. SpeakOut, 43, 3–7. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2008). Emerging technologies: Web-writing 2.0: Enabling, documenting, and 
assessing writing online. Language Learning & Technology, 12(2), 7–13. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num2/emerging.pdf 
Goertler, S. (2011). Blended and open/online learning: Adapting to a changing world of language 
teaching. In A. Arnold & L. Ducate (Eds.), Present and future promises of CALL (pp. 470–501). San 
Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Graham, C. R. (2005). Blended learning systems: Definition, current trends, and future directions. In C. J. 
Bonk & C. R. Graham (Eds.), Handbook of blended learning (pp. 3–21). San Francisco, CA: Pfeiffer. 
Grosseck, G., & Holotescu, C. (2008). Can we use Twitter for educational activities?. In Proceedings of 
the 4th eLSE Conference. Retrieved from https://adlunap.ro/else/papers/015.-
697.1.Grosseck%20Gabriela-Can%20we%20use.pdf 
Guth, S., & Helm, F. (Eds.). (2010). Telecollaboration 2.0: Language, literacies and intercultural 
learning in the 21st century. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Hammerly, H. (1991). Fluency and accuracy: Toward balance between language teaching and learning. 
Bristol, UK: Longdunn. 
 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 187 
Han, Z., Park, E., & Combs, C. (2008). Textual enhancement of input: Issues and possibility. Applied 
Linguistics, 29(4), 597–618. 
Hargittai, E., & Hsieh, Y. P. (2010). From dabblers to omnivores: A typology of social network site 
usage. In Z. Papacharissi (Ed.), A networked self: Identity, community, and culture on social network sites 
(pp. 146–168). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Harrison, R. (2013). Profiles in social networking sites for language learning – Livemocha revisited. In 
M.-N. Lamy & K. Zourou (Eds.), Social networking for language education (pp. 100–116). Basingstoke, 
UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Honeycutt, C., & Herring, S. C. (2009). Beyond microblogging: Conversation and collaboration via 
Twitter. In Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 1–10). Los 
Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society.  
Ioup, G. (1995). Evaluating the need for input enhancement in post-critical period language acquisition. 
In D. Singleton & Z. Lengyel (Eds.), The age factor in second language acquisition (pp. 95–123). 
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Isaacs, T. (2009). Integrating form and meaning in L2 pronunciation instruction. TESL Canada Journal, 
26(2), 1–12. 
Java, A., Song, X., Finin, T., & Tseng, B. (2007). Why we Twitter: Understanding microblogging usage 
and communities. Proceedings of the Joint 9th WEBKDD & 1stSNA-KDD Workshop 2007 (pp. 56–65). 
San Jose, California.  
Jones, D., Roach, P., Setter, J., & Esling, J. (2011). Cambridge English pronouncing dictionary (18th 
ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.  
Junco, R., Heibergert, G., & Loken, E. (2010). The effect of Twitter on college student engagement and 
grades. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 27, 119–132. 
Junco, R., Elavsky, M. C., & Heiberger, G. (2013). Putting twitter to the test: Assessing outcomes for 
student collaboration, engagement and success. British Journal of Educational Technology, 44(2), 273–
287. 
Kassens-Noor, E. (2012). Twitter as a teaching practice to enhance active and informal learning in higher 
education: The case of sustainable tweets. Active Learning in Higher Education, 13(1), 9–21. 
Kennedy, C., & Levy, M. (2008). L’italiano al telefonino: Using SMS to support beginners’ language 
learning. ReCALL, 20(3), 315–330.  
Kenning, M-M. (2007). ICT and language learning. From print to the mobile phone. Basingstoke, 
UK/New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan 
Kim, H. (2010). Three teachers’ initial efforts to use Twitter for teaching English in public 
schools. Multimedia Assisted Language Learning, 13(2), 129–154.  
Kim, H., Park, S.-M., & Baek, S-H. (2011). Twitter and implications for its use in EFL learning. 
Multimedia Assisted Language Learning, 14(2), 113–137. 
Krashen, S. (1985). The input hypothesis: Issues and implications. Oxford, UK: Pergamon. 
Krashen, S. (1993). The effect of formal grammar teaching: still peripheral. TESOL Quarterly 27(4), 722–
725. 
Kuhl, P., & Iverson, P. (1995). Linguistic experience and the “perceptual magnet effect”. In W. Strange 
(Ed.), Speech perception and linguistic experience (pp. 121–154). Baltimore, MD: York Press. 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 188 
Lamy, M.-N., & Goodfellow, R. (2010). Telecollaboration and learning 2.0. In S. Guth & F. Helm (Eds.), 
Telecollaboration 2.0 (pp. 107–138). Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Lamy, M.-N., & Zourou, K. (2013). Introduction. In M.-N. Lamy & K. Zourou (Eds.), Social networking 
for language education (pp. 1–7). Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Leather, J., & James, A. (1991). The acquisition of second language speech. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 13(3), 305–341. 
Levy, M., & Kennedy, C. (2005). Learning Italian via mobile SMS. In A. Kukulska-Hulme & J. Traxler 
(Eds.), Mobile learning: A handbook for educators and trainers (pp. 76–83). London, UK: Taylor and 
Francis. 
Lightbown, P., & Spada, N. (2008). Form-focused instruction: Isolated or integrated?. TESOL Quarterly, 
42(2), 181–207. 
Liu, M., Evans, M., Horwitz, E., Lee, S., McCroy, M., Park, J.-B., & Parrish, C. (2013). A study of the 
use of social network sites for language learning by university ESL students. In M.-N. Lamy & K. Zourou 
(Eds.), Social networking for language education (pp. 137–157). Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Lomicka, L., & Lord, G. (Eds.). (2009). The next generation: Social networking and online collaboration 
in foreign language learning. San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Long, M. (1991). Focus on form: A design feature in language teaching methodology. In K. de Bot, R. 
Ginsberg, & C. Kramsch (Eds.), Foreign language research in cross-cultural perspective (pp. 39–52). 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Long, M., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research and practice. In C. Doughty & J. 
Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp.15–41). Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Lord, G. (2008). Podcasting communities and second language pronunciation. Foreign Language Annals, 
41, 374–389. 
Lord, G., & Lomicka, L. (2014). Twitter as a tool to promote community among language teachers. 
Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 22(2), 187–212. 
Lowe, B., & Laffey, D. (2011). Is Twitter for the birds? Using Twitter to enhance student learning in a 
marketing course. Journal of Marketing Education, 33(2), 183–192. 
Mairs, J. L. (1989). Stress assignment in interlanguage phonology: An analysis of the stress system of 
Spanish speakers learning English. In S. M. Gass & J. Schachter (Eds.), Linguistic perspectives on SLA 
(pp. 260–283). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
McBride, K. (2009). Social networking sites in foreign language classes: Opportunities for re-creation. In 
L. Lomicka & G. Lord (Eds.), The next generation: Social networking and online collaboration in foreign 
language learning (pp. 35–58). San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Mompean, J. A. (2004). Options and criteria for the choice of an English pronunciation model in Spain. 
In J. M. Oro (Ed.), Linguistic perspectives from the classroom (pp. 1043–1059). Santiago de Compostela, 
Spain: Servizo de Publicacións. 
Monroy, R. (2001). Profiling the phonological processes shaping the fossilized IL of adult Spanish 
learners of English. Some theoretical implications. International Journal of English Studies, 1, 157–217. 
Retrieved from http://revistas.um.es/ijes/article/view/47661/45871 
Morley, J. (1991). The pronunciation component in teaching English to speakers of other languages. 
TESOL Quarterly, 25(3), 481–520. 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 189 
Mork, C. (2009). Using Twitter in EFL education. JALT CALL Journal, 5(3), 41–56. 
Ota, F. (2011). A study of social networking sites for learners of Japanese. New Voices, 4, 144–167. 
Pennington, M. C. (1998). The teachability of phonology in adulthood: A re-examination. International 
Review of Applied Linguistics, 36(4), 323–341. 
Pennington, M. C. (1999). Computer-aided pronunciation pedagogy: promise, limitations, directions, 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 12(5), 427–440. 
Pennington, M. C., & Ellis, N. C. (2000). Cantonese speakers’ memory for English sentences with 
prosodic cues. Modern Language Journal, 84(3), 372–389. 
Pennington, M. C., & Richards, J. C. (1986). Pronunciation revisited. TESOL Quarterly, 20, 207–225. 
Promnitz-Hayashi, L. (2011). A learning success story using Facebook. Studies in Self-Access Learning 
Journal, 2(4), 309–316. 
Rinaldo, S. B., Tapp, S., & Laverie, D. A. (2011). Learning by tweeting: Using Twitter as a pedagogical 
tool. Journal of Marketing Education, 33(2), 193–203. 
Saito, K. (2013). Reexamining effects of form-focused instruction on L2 pronunciation development: The 
role of explicit phonetic information. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 35, 1–29. 
Saran, M., Seferoglu, G., & Cagiltay, K. (2009). Mobile assisted language learning: English 
pronunciation at learners’ fingertips. Eurasian Journal of Educational Research, 34, 97–114. 
Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 11(2), 
129–158. 
Schmidt, R. (2010). Attention, awareness, and individual differences in language learning. In W. M. 
Chan, S. Chi, K. N. Cin, J. Istanto, M. Nagami, J. W. Sew, T. Suthiwan, & I. Walker (Eds.), Proceedings 
of CLaSIC 2010 (pp. 721–737). Singapore: National University of Singapore. 
Setter, J., & Jenkins, J. (2005). State-of-the-art review article. Language Teaching, 38(1), 1–17. 
Sharwood-Smith, M. (1993). Input enhancement in instructed SLA: Theoretical bases. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 15(2), 165–180. 
Stevenson, M. P., & Liu, M. (2010). Learning a language with web 2.0: Exploring the use of social 
networking features of foreign language learning websites. CALICO Journal, 27(2), 233–259. 
Stockwell, G., & Tanaka-Ellis, N. (2012). Diversity in environments. In G. Stockwell (Ed.), Computer-
Assisted Language Learning (pp. 71–89). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Sykes, J. M., Oskoz, A., & Thorne, S. L. (2008). Web 2.0, synthetic immersive environments, and mobile 
resources for language education. CALICO Journal, 25, 528–546. 
Thomas, M. (Ed.) (2009). Handbook of research on web 2.0 and second language learning. Hershey, PA: 
IGI Global. 
Thornton, P., & Houser, C. (2001). Learning on the move: Vocabulary study via e-mail and mobile phone 
SMS. In C. Montgomerie & J. Viteli (Eds.), Proceedings of EdMedia 2001 (pp. 1896–1897). Chesapeake, 
VA: Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education. 
Thornton, P., & Houser, C. (2005). Using mobile phones in English education in Japan. Journal of 
Computer Assisted Learning, 21(3), 217–228. 
Warschauer, M. (1996). Comparing face-to-face and electronic discussion in the second language 
classroom. CALICO Journal, 13(2-3), 7–26. 
Jose A. Mompean and Jonás Fouz-González Twitter-Based EFL Pronunciation Instruction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 190 
Wells, J. C. (2008). Longman pronunciation dictionary. Harlow, UK: Longman. 
Wong, W. (2005). Input enhancement: From theory and research to the classroom. New York, NY: 
McGraw-Hill. 
Zourou, K. (2012). On the attractiveness of social media for language learning: A look at the state of the 
art. Alsic, 15(1). Retrieved from http://alsic.revues.org/2436 
