Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/bikowskivithanage.pdf 
February 2016, Volume 20, Number 1 
pp. 79–99 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 79 
EFFECTS OF WEB-BASED COLLABORATIVE WRITING ON 
INDIVIDUAL L2 WRITING DEVELOPMENT 
Dawn Bikowski, Ohio University 
Ramyadarshanie Vithanage, Ohio University 
This study investigated the effect of repeated in-class web-based collaborative writing 
tasks on second language writers’ (L2) individual writing scores. A pre-test post-test 
research model was used in addition to participant surveys, class observations, and teacher 
interviews. Participants included 59 L2 writers in a writing class at a large U.S. university. 
The 32 participants in the experimental group engaged in four in-class web-based 
collaborative writing tasks, while the 27 participants in the control group engaged in the 
same four in-class web-based writing tasks but individually. A paired samples t-test 
revealed that both groups experienced statistically significant gains from their pre- to post-
test scores. An independent sample t-test of pre- to post-test gains revealed that the 
participants in the collaborative web-based writing group experienced statistically 
significant writing gains in their individual writing over the participants in the individual 
web-based writing group. Participant survey results showed that the L2 writers valued the 
collaborative in-class writing tasks overall and that many participants in the individual 
group wished they had done in-class collaborative web-based writing. Three types of 
collaborative groups emerged. Pedagogical implications for technology-enhanced 
collaborative writing are discussed, and a Teaching Cycle for Web-Based Collaborative 
Writing is introduced. 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English 
Keywords: Collaborative Learning, Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Language 
Teaching Methodology, Web-Based Instruction, Writing. 
APA Citation: Bikowski, D., & Vithanage, R. (2016). Effects of web-based Collaborative 
writing on individual L2 writing development. Language Learning & Technology, 20(1), 
79–99. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/bikowskivithanage.pdf 
Received: March 22, 2014; Accepted: November 28, 2014; Published: February 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Dawn Bikowski & Ramyadarshanie Vithanage 
INTRODUCTION 
The field of second language (L2) writing continues to lack a comprehensive theory (Ferris & Hedgcock, 
2014). Among the many evolving approaches, technology enhanced collaborative tools have taken L2 
writing instruction into new and exciting spheres. Research has focused on many aspects including 
collaboration between novice and expert students (Lee, 2004); relationships between pairs of students 
(Storch, 2004); features of collaboration (Fung, 2010); the effect of the environment (Kessler, 2009); the 
effect of the context, tools, and participants on collaborative writing (Arnold & Ducate, 2006); teacher 
interference in collaboration (Kessler, 2009); the role of task-type (Aydin & Yildiz, 2014); and the use of 
online tools (Kessler, 2009; Kessler & Bikowski, 2010; Kessler, Bikowski, & Boggs, 2012; Lee, 2004). 
No research has been published to date, however, focusing on the possible individual English language 
learning gains via technology enhanced collaborative writing projects.  
The current study seeks to fill this need. It specifically explores the extent to which in-class technology-
enhanced collaborative writing helps students improve their individual writing gains in a U.S. 
undergraduate L2 writing class. It also explores learner and instructor attitudes towards collaborative 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
writing. This study responds to a call by Wigglesworth and Storch (2012) for more research on how 
learning within collaborative writing occurs, focusing on the role of technology, and to the question posed 
by Elola and Oskoz (2010) about “the extent to which learners’ writing is enhanced when using these 
tools [social technologies]” in L2 collaborative writing (p. 51). It investigates the effect of repeated in-
class web-based collaborative writing tasks on L2 writers’ individual writing scores, as well as student 
and teacher perceptions of these writing tasks. These data sources, along with observations of 
collaborative writing sessions, are used to develop a Teaching Cycle for Web-Based Collaborative 
Writing. This pedagogical cycle outlines key factors that should be considered within the stages of 
preparation, collaboration, and reflection.  
Second Language Writing and Computer Assisted Language Learning  
Computer-assisted language learning (CALL) has evolved through various stages in both technology as 
well as pedagogical use of those technologies (Warschauer & Healey, 1998). CALL trends with L2 
writing have provided us with technology and pedagogy that is more integrated and interactive as well as 
communication-centered. For decades, the benefits to L2 writing with the use of technology have been 
noted, as offering “a range of informational, communicative, and publishing tools, now potentially at the 
fingertips of every student,” along with “the imperative for such use” (Warschauer & Healey, 1998, p. 
58). As the potential for CALL expands with interactive social media and other tools, L2 speakers and 
writers can use interactive technologies as they form their identities and increase their ability to engage in 
self-directed learning (Blake, 2008). Yet, though collaborative writing within multimedia networked 
computing spaces has been available and advocated for more than a decade, many educators are reluctant 
to use class time for technology-facilitated collaborative writing, and little research has explored the 
potential benefits of these in-class activities on individual writing.  
Researchers have noted, however, the benefits that CALL can bring to L2 writing in general. These 
include enabling students to produce higher quality essays due to the less-threatening and student-
centered nature of computer classrooms (Braine, 1997), allowing students to receive multimodal practice 
with feedback, allowing for increased opportunities to engage in exploratory learning with large amounts 
of language data, and allowing students to engage in projects that meet the needs of a variety of learning 
styles (Warschauer & Healey, 1998). New technologies, as well as evolving pedagogies, also provide 
opportunities for students to engage in pair or small group collaborative writing (Warschauer & Healey, 
1998). The area of CALL and L2 collaborative writing is one that is gaining increasing attention in recent 
years, as online collaboration allows learners to focus on a variety of writing skills (Lund, 2008). 
BENEFITS OF COLLABORATIVE WRITING WITH TECHNOLOGY 
Collaborative writing for this study refers to “an activity where there is a shared and negotiated decision-
making process and a shared responsibility for the production of a single text” that results in collective 
cognition related to language learning (Storch, 2013, p. 3). Collaborative writing can be broken into the 
defining features of mutual interaction, negotiation, conflict, and shared expertise, as well as the 
facilitating features of affective factors, use of first language (L1), backtracking, and humor (Fung, 2010). 
Studies on how to group students have revealed a variety of options. The findings of Storch (2004) 
identify four different types of interaction between pairs: collaborative, dominant/dominant, 
dominant/passive, and expert/novice. Findings are inconclusive as to optimal grouping, with some noting 
the benefits of expert/novice students (Lee, 2004) and others concluding that scaffolding, and thus 
learning, can occur between peer equals via the contribution of complementary skills and knowledge 
(DiCamilla & Antón, 1997). In any case, a high level of mutual interaction (Dale, 1997) and negotiation 
(Fung, 2010) are crucial for successful collaborative writing, while the role of conflict between group 
members can be viewed as either positive or having a negative effect on the process (Storch, 2002). 
Collaborative learning is based on Vygotsky’s (1978) sociocultural theory, which suggests that learning 
moves from the sociocultural to individual level via collaboration. Given the support and interaction, 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
collaborative writing entails, as several researchers have pointed out, a variety of benefits (Storch, 2013). 
For example, writers are required to choose their language carefully as they discuss collaborative options 
(Storch, 2005), make meaning (Storch, 2013), and support or guide each other in the writing process 
(Hirvela, 1999). Collaborative writing, or pair writing, can lead to increased critical thinking (Kinsella & 
Sherak, 1998), understanding of audience (Leki, 1993), motivation (Kowal & Swain, 1994) and 
ownership (Storch, 2005) as students are able to better understand discourse structures, grammar, and 
vocabulary usage (Swain & Lapkin, 1998). Collaboration can also help students improve their writing in 
content, organization, and vocabulary over individual writing (Shehadeh, 2011). Collaborative writing 
can ultimately lead to higher quality writing (Storch, 2005). 
Through technology, collaborative writing has developed in recent years. Tools that have been found to 
facilitate collaboration include wikis (Aydin & Yildiz, 2014; Elola & Oskoz, 2010; Kessler, 2009; Kessler 
& Bikowski, 2010), blogs (Sun & Chang, 2012), chats (Elola & Oskoz, 2010), and web-based word 
processing (Kessler et al., 2012). They offer many options, including writing from anywhere at any time 
and viewing or reverting to previous versions of the text. Teachers and researchers benefit from the ability 
to track students’ collaborative processes using these tools as well (Elola & Oskoz, 2010). Offering tool 
options is beneficial, as different tools allow for different collaboration (Elola & Oskoz, 2010) while 
students develop their own distinct processes in web-based collaborative tasks (Kessler et al., 2012). 
Researchers have noted the importance of preparing learners to successfully engage in the collaborative 
writing process (Storch, 2005). Collaboration can be encouraged through modeling the discourse of the 
collaborators and training learners for collaboration (Fung, 2010). It is also important for teachers to 
consider their role in facilitating collaborative writing with the use of technology. Taking these factors 
into account, collaborative writing using technology can aid students in content development (Kessler, 
2009) and revision (Kost, 2011) and can lead to increased individual autonomy (Kessler & Bikowski, 
2010). 
Few studies have investigated the potential impact of web-based collaborative writing on individual 
writing gains. Elola and Oskoz (2010) conducted a study similar to the present one in four respects: the 
form of writing was collaborative versus individual; the technology used to facilitate writing was web-
based tools; one of the data collecting tools was a survey on perceptions of collaborative writing; and the 
aim of the research, which was a comparative study on individual writing and collaborative writing. Yet, 
their study included a small sample size (eight participants), focused on Spanish L2 writers, and did not 
include teachers’ perspectives. Also, their study had the limitation of focusing only on one task (the 
argumentative essay). The authors thus call for research that compares “how learners work collaboratively 
and individually on a variety of tasks” (p. 65). A theoretical framework providing perspective for 
exploring collaboration through the lens of technology for L2 writers was thus used for this study. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK  
Kessler et al. (2012) provide a theoretical framework to guide teachers in the development and analysis of 
collaborative writing projects. They note that as collaborative technology evolves, students’ use of 
technology for learning will change, and teachers’ use of technology (as they guide learning) will need to 
change as well. They note increased opportunities for flexibility and fluidity in the composing and writing 
process, opportunities for simultaneous many-to-many writing in varied locations and time, and increased 
attention to the collaborative process through collective scaffolding. All writers have access to revision 
histories and clear indications of which changes were made by whom. These new opportunities are in line 
with Storch’s (2005) comment that a “re-conceptualization of classroom teaching” may be necessary in 
order for L2 students to be prepared for collaborative writing (p. 169). Educators can now monitor 
students’ writing in real-time from a distance (e.g., through a wiki or web-based word processing), in 
addition to having increased opportunities for data-driven decision making in the classroom. Also, 
students and teachers alike increasingly find themselves becoming “co-constructers of content” in “co-
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
constructed participatory environments” as English language learners are surrounded by a large amount of 
information and language (Kessler, 2013, p. 307). Massive collaborative writing in Wikipedia, for 
example, not only includes the main encyclopedic entries for a topic, but often extensive talk-pages with 
meta-discussions (Kessler, 2013). 
At the center of the learning context is the collaborative autonomous language learner—a learner who is 
able and willing to use language and appropriate communication strategies to “contribute personal 
meanings as a collaborative member of a group” as he/she negotiates the inherent tension between 
personal and group goals, where members also have their own priorities (Kessler & Bikowski, 2010, p. 
53). Figure 1 displays the co-evolution of a collaborative autonomous pedagogy framework. 
 
Figure 1. A framework for the co-evolution of collaborative autonomous pedagogy (Kessler et al., 2012). 
This framework allows for the opportunity to explore learning within the context of evolving tools, 
collaborations, and pedagogical practice. While studies have been conducted in terms of exploring student 
behavior or perceptions in collaborative writing utilizing technology (Arnold, Ducate, & Kost, 2009; 
Elola & Oskoz, 2010; Kessler, 2009; Kessler & Bikowski, 2010; Kessler et al., 2012), on the role of task 
type in corrections (Aydin & Yildiz, 2014), and on the nature of collaborative writing (Kost, 2011; Li & 
Zhu, 2013), no studies have been found that investigate the potential impact of technology-facilitated 
collaborative writing on individual writing tasks for L2 English writers. As noted by Elola and Oskoz 
(2010), more research into the potential benefits of L2 collaborative writing is needed, particularly studies 
that “consider a diversity of writing tasks performed with the support of available social technologies” (p. 
65). The current research study will add to this body of research and has the following research questions. 
1. To what extent do in-class web-based collaborative writing tasks help second language English 
writers improve their overall performance in their individual writing? 
2. What are the perceptions of teachers and second language writers towards web-based 
collaborative writing compared to individual writing in terms of perceived writing development 
and the writing experience? 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
METHODS AND MATERIALS 
Participants and Course 
Fifty-nine fully-matriculated, non-native English speaking students in a Midwestern, 15-week 
undergraduate writing class participated in this study. Students are placed in this course based on either 
(a) their successful completion of the intensive program in English, or (b) a score of 71 on the overall 
TOEFL iBT test and a score less than 24 in the writing sub-score. All the students in the four sections of 
the course chose to participate. Two sections were given the experimental treatment of four ungraded in-
class web-based collaborative writing tasks in addition to their five out-of-class graded individual writing 
assignments and several in- and out-of-class individual writing tasks. This group consisted of 32 students 
ages 18-27, 19 males and 13 females, 31 Chinese L1 speakers and one Arabic L1 speaker. Academic 
majors included business (16), communication and media (2), education (1), engineering and computers 
(5), fine arts (1), nursing (1), and undecided (6). These participants had, on average, been learning English 
for 8.5 years (ranging from 2 to 16 years) and had been in the U.S. for 2 years (ranging from 1 to 3 years). 
Students reported their Google Documents experience at 3.48 out of 5.0 on a Likert scale and that they 
were fairly experienced with computers in general, with a mean score 3.81/5.0. 
Participants in the individual writing group engaged in the same five out-of-class graded writing 
assignments and several in- and out-of-class individual writing tasks as did the experimental group, but 
they participated in four ungraded in-class individual (instead of collaborative) web-based writing tasks. 
The individual writing group consisted of 27 students ages 18-24: 13 males and 14 females. First 
language backgrounds were Chinese (23), Nepali (1), Urdu (1), Portuguese (1), and Arabic (1). Their 
majors included art history (1), business (10), communications and media (5), engineering and computers 
(7), nutrition (2), psychology (1), and undecided (1). The average time the individual group participants 
had spent in the U.S. was 2 years (ranging from 6 months to 5 years) and the average time spent studying 
English was 6 years (ranging from 1 to 15 years). 
While the sampling for placement into either the collaborative writing group or individual writing group 
was not completely randomized, registration was open to all students at that placement level and 
participants registered themselves without being aware of the study. All sections of the course at this level 
during the semester were in the study. Last minute changes in the course schedule required three 
instructors (two for the collaborative groups and one instructor for both sections of the individual writing 
group). All teachers were experienced writing teachers, with the collaborative group teachers having 
master’s degrees, and the individual group teacher holding a doctorate. Throughout the semester, all 
teachers received equal and ongoing norming and training. The collaborative writing group teachers were 
trained on teaching collaborative writing with web-based tools, based on previously-published 
recommendations (Kessler et al., 2012; Storch, 2005), while the individual teacher was given training on 
individual in-class writing with web-based tools. The standardized syllabus, course materials, and rubrics 
for overall evaluation were used in all the classes. 
Data Collection and Analysis  
Both quantitative and qualitative data collection and analysis were used. A pre- and post-test research 
design with statistical analyses was used to measure individual learning. Testing-effect was minimized by 
assigning students different writing prompts for pre- and post-tests. The 30-minute pre-test asked students 
to write a paragraph comparing and/or contrasting their life now and five years ago, and the post-test topic 
was a persuasive paragraph on the writer’s favorite product and why it was the best of its type in the 
market. These topics were chosen based on course content and planned in-class writing tasks. The choice 
to include different genres for the pre- and post-tests, as well as for the in-class writing tasks, was made 
based on recommendations by Elola and Oskoz (2010) to structure studies that compare “how learners 
work collaboratively and individually on a variety of tasks” (p. 65). Also, all participants took the same 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
tests (which were based on classroom learning) and the overall tests were comparable in terms of 
difficulty.  
For both the pre- and post-tests, participants were not allowed to use online reference tools or discuss 
their writing with classmates while planning or writing. The highest score possible on the pre- and post-
tests was 100 using an analytic rubric that included content, organization, academic style, and grammar. 
Both tests were scored using the rubric by two raters trained by the researchers; both raters were 
instructors in the program and had experience teaching this course within the last year. Norming for this 
study followed the norming procedures used for the course. Following examples of benchmark student 
texts (identified by the course coordinator), the two raters and coordinator discussed appropriate ratings 
and then moved to sharing their independently rated texts. The raters scored the majority of the texts 
independently and submitted their coded results to the researchers. Inter-rater reliability, examined by 
using paired samples correlation for comparison of the results, was high (r = .972 for the pre-test and 
r = .946 for the post-test).  
A paired samples t-test was used to determine if there was a statistical difference between participants’ 
pre- and post-test scores for each group. In addition, an independent samples t-test was conducted with 
participants’ pre- and post-test score gains, to determine if there was a statistical difference between the 
collaborative and individual writing groups. Before the t-test was run, the data was checked to guarantee 
that it met the assumptions for the test (using the Shapiro-Wilk Test of Normality) and that there were no 
outliers. The effect size (Cohen’s d) was calculated as the difference between the means of the web-based 
collaborative writing group and the web-based individual writing group divided by the pooled standard 
deviation. 
Data also consisted of an anonymous online survey about participants’ perceptions of their writing 
experience. For both groups, questions asked them to rate how well they liked their in-class writing 
experiences (1-5 Likert scale) and why (open-ended), how much it helped them write better (1-5 Likert 
scale) and why (open-ended), and how much their teachers liked the in-class writing tasks (1-5 Likert 
scale) and why (open-ended). Participants in the collaborative writing group were also asked to rate how 
well they worked together (1-5 Likert scale) and why (open-ended), if they recommend that teachers do 
group in-class writing activities in their classes (yes/no), and if they wished they had done more 
individual in-class writing (yes/no). Participants in the individual writing group were also asked if they 
wished they had done more in-class group writing tasks (yes/no).  
An independent samples t-test was performed on the Likert ratings of the student perception survey to 
determine if there were statistically significant differences between the collaborative writing and 
individual writing participants’ perceptions. For the open-ended questions, coding consisted of identifying 
and arranging comments on themes that emerged. 
Qualitative data was collected and analyzed in order to add depth to the quantitative findings. Interviews 
and observations allowed for the triangulation of the data (Patton, 2002). Semi-structured interviews were 
chosen due to their increased flexibility over structured interviews (Patton, 2002) and so that we, as 
researchers, could come at “the same thing from a different angle” (Denscombe, 2002, p. 104). The 
interviews were conducted with teachers in the collaborative writing group, based on the call for research 
that explores “the role of language teachers during collaborative writing tasks” (Aydin & Yildiz, 2014, p. 
173). Each interview lasted approximately 30 minutes and included questions regarding if and how the 
teachers thought the web-based collaborative writing tasks affected their students’ writing; if their 
students were motivated when doing the web-based collaborative writing in class, and if not, if they had 
suggestions on improving student motivation for in-class web-based collaborative writing tasks; what 
their opinions were on the collaborative groups and if any students would have possibly performed better 
in a different group; what their thoughts were on how students were allowed to make their own choices on 
how they worked as a group with technology (e.g., work together at one computer, at separate computers, 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
etc.); if the web-based collaborative writing tasks affected their teaching; and if they had any general 
comments. The teachers’ responses were recorded, transcribed, and analyzed. A two-cycle coding system 
was followed for analysis (Miles, Huberman, & Saldaña, 2014). Provisional coding was used for the first 
cycle, with the preliminary codes identified by the researchers based on the classroom context, the 
research questions, the conceptual framework, and the interview questions. This first cycle allowed for an 
initial summary of the data. The second cycle involved pattern coding, which allowed the summaries to 
be grouped into themes (see Table 1). 
Table 1. Interview Themes and Definitions: Collaborative Writing Group Teachers. 
Theme Theme Definition 
Benefits of repeated in-class 
web-based collaborative writing 
Statements or examples about specific ways that collaborative 
writing with technology aided students in their writing 
Observations about students’ 
collaborative processes 
Statements or examples about student behavior as they worked on 
their web-based collaborative writing 
Teacher processes that 
contributed to student success 
Statements or examples about specific actions the teachers took that 
helped students as they engaged in web-based collaborative writing 
Suggestions for future web-
based collaborative writing tasks 
Statements, examples, or suggestions about how web-based 
collaborative writing might be structured in the future 
The final data collected included observations of the collaborative writing group participants during their 
in-class writing. While other studies have observed participants’ online behavior (Kessler, 2009; Kessler 
et al., 2012; Strobl, 2014), the focus of this study was to observe student interactions in order to gain 
insight into web-based writing behavior. Each collaborative writing session was systematically observed 
by one of the researchers (four total observations) and video and audio recorded. Observations focused on 
technology use, student behavior, and group dynamics, using an observational chart to tally frequencies 
and guide comments (see Table 4 for a list of the behaviors observed). While observations provide an 
authentic setting for data collection, it is important that researchers be aware of how their observations 
may be distorted by their perspectives or experiences (Check & Schutt, 2012) and how their presence can 
affect participants’ behavior (Becker, 2001). To minimize these concerns, the researcher sat in a separate 
observation room with a window, and the video was recorded via fairly inconspicuous wall-mounted 
cameras and microphones, though the participants consented to being observed and recorded. 
In-Class Writing Tasks  
The topics for the four in-class 45-minute writing tasks were based on the curriculum. The tasks for both 
groups were: (1) compare and/or contrast two attitudes towards money: those who spend freely and those 
who save, (2) compare and/or contrast how teaching is done in the U.S. and in another country, (3) 
discuss at least one cause of divorce, and (4) persuade a reader if the University should or should not 
require pre-academic English courses. Participants were given feedback on strengths and areas for 
improvement with their in-class writings. They were asked to apply the feedback on their future writing. 
Participants in both groups received identical writing directions, were told they could use online tools and 
could discuss ideas with classmates, and were asked to write using Google Docs. The teachers monitored 
the participants’ in-class writing during the tasks, watching for communication breakdowns or difficulties 
with the task. Participants could ask questions and the teachers were freely available. 
For the collaborative writing group, Google Docs offered the ability for a number of writers to write and 
edit simultaneously, offered teachers the ability to monitor the group writing process from a distant 
computer, allowed participants and teachers to monitor group members’ writing and editing, and allowed 
students to view or revert to previous versions of the document. For the individual writing group, Google 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
Docs allowed writers the ability to refer to or revert to a previous version of the document and allowed 
teachers to monitor student writing. 
Collaborative Writing Group 
The collaborative group participants worked in nine groups of three or four students, based on Dobao’s 
(2012) recommendations. There were four groups of three participants and five groups of four 
participants in total. Groups were formed by the teachers so that at least one student was strong in their 
writing organization skills (based on pre-test), grammar writing skills (based on pre-test), or comfort with 
technology (based on self-report). This choice was made based on the literature, which recommends that 
grouping students according to expertise allows them to experience increased confidence and greater 
contributions (Dale, 1997). Groups were trained on course material relating to the writing topics, on using 
Google Docs, and on collaborating in their writing. Their collaborative writing training included class 
discussions on setting group guidelines for working together, considering group members’ feelings when 
changes are made, negotiating politely and respectfully, managing time in a group, utilizing each group 
member’s strengths, using their L1, negotiating the writing process, and troubleshooting strategies for 
communication breakdowns.  
Collaborative group participants discussed possible forms of collaboration and were given the opportunity 
to choose a configuration option. These options included discussing their writing while working at 
separate computers, chatting online for idea discussions while working at separate computers, or writing 
collaboratively at one computer. 
Individual Writing Group 
Individual group participants engaged in the same in-class writing tasks, but did so individually instead of 
in groups. They were trained on the writing process, Google Docs, and course material relating to the 
writing topics, as were the collaborative group participants. 
RESULTS 
Effect of Collaborative Writing Tasks on Individual Writing Scores 
The first research question asked to what extent in-class web-based collaborative writing may help non-
native English speakers improve their performance in their individual overall writing. Table 2 shows the 
mean overall scores and standard deviations for the individual and collaborative pre- and post-tests. 
Table 2. Pre-test and Post-test Data for Overall Writing Test Scores: Collaborative and Individual 
Writing Groups. 
Group Pre-test score Post-test score 
 Mean SD Mean SD 
Collaborative Writing Group (N = 32) 71.21 10.11 84.09 9.28 
Individual Writing Group (N = 27) 79.95 11.99 86.51 11.84 
Note. Highest score possible = 100 
An independent samples t-test was conducted to determine whether collaborative writing resulted in 
greater individual writing gains. The difference in the means between the individual writing group pre-
test scores (M = 79.95, SD = 11.99) and post-test scores (M = 86.52, SD = 11.84) was just under seven 
points (6.57), while the difference between the mean pre-test score in the collaborative writing group 
(M = 71.21, SD = 10.11) and post-test score (M = 84.09, SD = 9.28) was over 12 points (12.88). This 
difference in means was statistically significant at the .05 level [t(26) = 2.3, p = .027] with a moderate 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
effect size (d = 0.58). Thus, collaborative web-based writing participants experienced higher gains than 
individual web-based writing participants, although both groups show statistically higher pre- to post-test 
scores [individual writing (p = 0.003) and collaborative writing (p = 0.000)]. An independent samples t-
test for the post-test scores between the two groups (individual writers M = 86.51, SD = 11.84 and 
collaborative writers M = 84.09, SD = 9.28) indicates that there is no statistically significant difference 
between these two groups of scores. In other words, the collaborative writing group started considerably 
lower than the individual writing group, but was able to reach the same relative scores by the end of the 
semester. 
Participant Perceptions of Collaborative and Individual Writing 
The second research question focused on the attitudes of students towards web-based collaborative 
writing in comparison with web-based individual writing in terms of perceived writing development and 
the writing experience. An anonymous survey, including Likert rating scales (0-5) and open-ended 
questions, was used (see Table 3). An independent samples t-test was performed on the Likert ratings 
between the two groups for questions one, two, and four, and none of them was statistically significant at 
the 0.05 level. 
Table 3. Perceptions of Collaborative Writing Group Participants and Individual Writing Group 
Participants of their In-Class Web-Based Writing Tasks. 
 Average survey ratings 
 
Questions 
Collaborative 
Group (N = 32) 
Individual 
Group (N = 27) 
 Mean     Stand. Dev. Mean     Stand. Dev. 
Questions with ratings 1.0 low/disagree to 
5.0 high/agree 
  
1. How well they liked their in-class 
writing tasks 
3.87             0.76 3.69            1.01 
2. How well they thought their in-class 
writing tasks helped their writing improve  
3.80             1.00 3.91            0.72 
3. How well they worked in groups  4.07            1.06 NA 
4. How well they thought their teacher 
liked their in-class writing tasks 
 4.50            0.67 4.25            0.79 
5. If they wish they had done more 
individual or group in-class writing 
2.9/5.0 wished had done 
more individual writing 
3.79/5.0 wished had done 
more group writing 
Question with ratings Yes/No   
6. If they would recommend in-class web-
based collaborative writing tasks for 
future classes 
87% Yes 
13% No 
NA 
Approximately two thirds of the collaborative writing group participants indicated that they liked or 
somewhat liked the in-class web-based group writing activities, with a mean rating of 3.87 out of 5.0. 
None of the participants gave ratings of not liking or somewhat not liking them. Positive comments 
included that the in-class web-based group writing helped them learn, that it helped them check their 
organization and grammar quickly, that Google Docs helped them plan, and that it helped them identify 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
grammar points to focus on. Comments reflecting concerns were that merging ideas is difficult and the 
group writing was “too much pressure and hustle.” For the individual writing group, the majority of the 
participants also liked in-class web-based writing activities (M = 3.69/5.0); however, three participants 
(9%) disliked them. Positive comments included that the web-based individual writing tasks helped their 
writing improve and that they liked the opportunity to write more. However, some participants expressed 
concern that they found the in-class individual writing tasks to be “boring,” that they needed more time, 
that they did not see the point in doing the individual in-class writing tasks or found them a “waste of 
time,” and that they do not like writing in general.  
Regarding writing improvement, the majority of the collaborative writing group students (67%) felt that 
the web-based collaborative writing helped their writing improve (M = 3.80/5.0). Participants noted that it 
helped with writing speed and fluency, organization, identifying areas for future writing development, and 
offering writing practice. One student commented, “I have learnt how to organize my essays and control 
my writing speed, and it also let me know that what’s the weak part of myself.” Three participants, 
however, rated the activity two out of five because of time limitations, preference for teacher feedback, 
preference for working individually, and concern with self-confidence. Stated one participant, “Writing is 
interesting, but my English is not good—make me feel bad.” A majority (M = 3.91/5.0) of the individual 
writing group participants felt that the in-class web-based individual writing tasks helped or really helped 
their writing improve, and just under a third took a neutral position. Positive comments were that the 
individual web-based writing tasks helped them improve their writing in grammar and organization, 
through writing fluency, through increased practice, through experimenting with different organization 
types, and through increased opportunities for teacher feedback. Negative comments included that the in-
class writing tasks were “boring” and “useless.” 
The majority of collaborative group participants indicated they worked well in their groups  
(M = 4.07/5.0). Seventy-one percent indicated that they worked well or very well together as groups, 
while 6% of them said they did not. Benefits that participants noted included learning from each other, 
experiencing less stress, having “great discussions and teamwork,” everyone working hard and being 
willing to share ideas and workload, feeling a sense of accomplishment, learning to like writing more, 
working through disagreements, working with Google Docs to help with proofreading and revising, and 
engaging in a “new way” of writing. Concerns about group writing included members not listening or not 
being open to others’ ideas, managing time constraints with merging different opinions, and feeling that it 
was difficult. One participant simply noted that he/she is “a loner.” Suggestions for future considerations 
included that the participants would like to choose their group members, that teachers should put students 
with similar personalities in groups, and that teachers should make suggestions as to how each member 
can contribute to the group work in order to build their confidence.  
Overall, participants in the collaborative group disagreed with the statement that they wished they had 
done more in-class web-based individual writing (M = 2.9/5.0), yet 40% strongly agreed or agreed with 
the statement. For the individual writing group, the preference was that they wished they had done in-
class web-based group writing (M = 3.79/5.0): over half (58%) wished they had, 4% did not want to, and 
just under 40% were neutral. 
Observations of Collaborative Writing Group Students 
The four in-class web-based writing tasks with the collaborative writing group were observed and video 
recorded. The teachers circled the room and checked student writing and group dynamics in Google Docs, 
providing writing support and answering questions. These observations revealed that the groups 
collaborated in different ways, which could have led members to perceive the collaborative writing 
process differently. Table 4 includes the types of group behaviors and how many times each behavior was 
observed in a group. The number of occurrences is marked using a code: behavior was never observed 
(0), behavior was observed once (1), and behavior was observed twice or more (2+). 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
Table 4. Behaviors Observed in the Nine Groups during the Four Collaborative Writing Tasks. 
 Group 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Behaviors observed          
Group members work on one 
computer together 
2+ 2+ 2+ 0 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 
Group members work on 
different computers 
2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 1 1 0 
Members switch between using 
1 and 3-4 computers 
2+ 2+ 2+ 0 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 0 
Group members get together to 
outline writing 
2+ 2+ 2+ 0 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 
Group members get together to 
proofread writing 
2+ 2+ 2+ 0 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 
Group members write different 
sections  
1 0 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 0 
Group members use their L1 0 2+ 2+ 2+ 1 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 
Group members avoid L1  2+ 0 0 0 2+ 0 0 0 0 
Many behavior types were observed more than twice during the four collaborative sessions by the same 
group, while some groups did not engage in certain behaviors. For example, groups 4 and 9 engaged in a 
limited number of behaviors; group 4 members tended to work more independently, while group 9 
worked together the majority of the time. These observations can provide insight into why and how web-
based collaborative writing may be successful, as well as providing areas for future research. Another 
behavior observed was groups using online resources (e.g., thesauri or dictionaries), usually with one 
group member taking responsibility for accessing resources while other members discussed, typed, and 
asked questions. 
Three types of collaboration emerged across all nine groups. Three of the nine groups could be described 
as Explicit Collaborators, in that they collaborated throughout the writing process, from brainstorming 
and planning for 10-15 minutes to writing and editing for organization and grammar, with periodic 
collaborative checks to ensure that the plan was being followed or revised as needed. Five groups could 
be described as Budding Collaborators, in that participants initially appeared to have more difficulties 
managing time and the collaborative process, but that they improved with each collaborative session. In 
the first sessions, they followed the stages of collaborative brainstorming and planning, but these stages 
lasted longer for them than for the Explicit Collaborator groups. After planning, they had a tendency to 
work more independently and then try to merge their writing before the class period was over. When 
participants in these groups first started collaborating, a couple of students looked uncomfortable and 
were sitting out of the group. However, as time progressed, the group started communicating more, with 
the quiet students being invited into and fully participating in the group. In the words of their teacher, 
everyone began “developing a system of their own.” Slight teacher intervention with these groups in-
person and inside their Google Docs appeared to help them communicate better and write together. 
One group did not appear to work together as well and could be termed Resistant Collaborators. Group 
members appeared to be unmotivated in the tasks and struggled to listen carefully and communicate 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
clearly. This led to apparent concerns regarding group trust. The teacher pointed out in the interview that 
maybe these students should not have been put together, as this group of students all had more reserved 
personalities and appeared to be less interested in writing. Teacher intervention had less of an impact with 
this group. 
Teacher Perceptions of In-Class Web-Based Collaborative Writing Tasks 
Comments from the semi-structured interviews with the collaborative writing group teachers were coded 
according to the themes that emerged and were categorized in the form of a table for ease of reference 
(see Table 5). Themes focused on teachers’ perceptions on how the in-class web-based collaborative 
writing tasks benefited students and on facilitation suggestions. Each teacher’s idea was marked in terms 
of the emerging themes as follows. 
Table 5. Interview Themes Expressed by the Teachers of the Collaborative Writing Group. 
Theme Comments 
Benefits of repeated in-
class web-based 
collaborative writing  
Web-based in-class collaborative writing helped students:  
• Improve their individual writing and notice it improving 
• Experience increased interest in and motivation for in-class writing  
• Form greater bonds with classmates  
• Stop, think, and plan before writing 
• Be more comfortable with and skilled at individual peer-review activities 
• Learn how to share their writing and solicit input 
• Establish their own systems and enjoy the writing process 
Observations about 
students’ collaborative 
processes 
The collaborative process: 
• Benefited from flexibility with technology: While some groups edited 
everything together, other groups edited each other’s writing 
individually. The technology allowed for flexibility and student 
experimentation. 
• Became easier and more effective with practice: Four sessions were an 
effective number. 
• Requires support: One group did not collaborate as well together, likely 
due to personality differences and a lack of mutual trust. 
Teacher processes that 
contributed to student 
success  
Processes that likely contributed to success: 
• Group training on collaboration and technology 
• Close monitoring of group behavior and students’ writing by circulating 
the room and by checking groups’ Google Docs, so that students felt a 
teacher presence, teachers could troubleshoot, and teachers could answer 
questions 
• Supporting quiet or less-participatory students and groups through the 
collaborative process 
• Keeping the same groups of students during whole term  
• Keeping the groups to no more than four students 
• Fully incorporating the collaborative writing tasks into the course in 
terms of helping students see the value, helping them take ownership of 
group writing, and helping them provide useful critiques for each other 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
Suggestions for future 
in-class web-based 
collaborative writing 
tasks 
Teachers should consider: 
• Providing students a clear rationale at the beginning of the course for 
their specific expertise they can offer to their group 
• Allowing students to choose a topic from a list, if time permits 
• Identifying the personality types of students and using that information 
for group placement 
• Having students reflect more on how they actually collaborated, for 
example via presentations or in writing, after each collaborative writing 
task and/or at the end of the course 
Table 5 emphasizes the importance of the teacher’s role in facilitating in-class web-based collaborative 
writing tasks. Teachers can more fully prepare themselves for this role by being aware of the advantages 
these tasks offer. For example, one teacher noted that the in-class web-based collaborative writing 
sessions “helped them [the students] stop and think about what they were going to write, and even in peer 
review they feel comfortable criticizing each other, because they have a bond.” This teacher noted how 
in-class collaborative writing supported students in other collaborative in-class activities as well as 
promoting increased critical thinking and class rapport. Teacher preparation can also include 
considerations regarding how to manage the in-class collaborative process. Another teacher discussed 
how students approached the in-class writing: “They were trying to figure it out the first time they did it. 
After they’d done it twice or three times they had their own system down, they did it because they had to, 
but they enjoyed the process more, and they may not have liked the process at the beginning, but later 
they started enjoying it.” This comment illustrates the importance of teachers supporting students through 
the process as well as helping them see the long-term goals and benefits. A third point raised by both 
teachers was the role of the web-based word-processing software in helping them support collaborative 
student writing. Google Docs allowed teachers to offer feedback from a distance, making the process less 
disruptive and less invasive. Observations revealed that teachers, in particular, facilitated self-reflection. 
Teachers stated that this was based on training discussions regarding the collaborative writing process and 
writing development. 
DISCUSSION 
This study investigated the possible impact of in-class web-based collaborative writing tasks on students’ 
individual overall writing scores, explored student perceptions of both tasks, and explored teacher 
perceptions of in-class collaborative writing. Both the collaborative writing group and the individual 
writing group experienced gains in their pre- to post-test writing scores. An independent samples t-test, 
however, revealed that the group which engaged in collaborative web-based writing showed statistically 
significant higher mean gains from their pre- to post-test scores than did the group that engaged in 
individual web-based writing, an increase that had a moderate effect size. In a meta-analysis, Zhao (2003) 
found that the use of technology in language learning courses, over courses with no technology, had a 
large effect size (d = .81). While learners in the present study did not experience an effect size as large as 
that found by Zhao, a moderate size is nevertheless indicative that in-class collaborative writing with 
technology is an activity that warrants class time as well as further research. Exploration into possible 
impacts of in-class web-based collaborative writing in other contexts in addition to university-level (e.g., 
high school contexts) is warranted, though it would be anticipated that the effect size may be smaller with 
younger populations. Research has found that the magnitude of effect sizes for quality in computer-based 
writing decreases as grade level decreases (Goldberg, Russell, & Cook, 2003).  
It should be noted that both groups received similar and fairly high scores on their post-test (collaborative 
group M = 84.09; individual group M = 86.51), indicating a possible ceiling for final scores that can be 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
achieved in one semester. The learning gains experienced by the collaborative writing group were due to 
their lower pre-test scores (M = 71.21) compared to the individual writing group (M = 79.95). This 
indicates that collaborative web-based writing may be particularly beneficial for students at lower 
proficiency levels. More research into which populations of students may benefit the most from in-class 
web-based collaborative writing and in what areas benefits are experienced is warranted. 
Survey results showed that participants in both the individual and collaborative writing groups overall 
liked the in-class web-based writing activities and thought they helped their writing improve; however, 
participants in the individual group indicated that they wished they had done group writing in class 
(average score 3.9/5.0) at a higher Likert scale rate than participants in the collaborative group indicated 
that they wished they had done more individual in-class writing (average score 2.9/5.0). The majority 
(87%) of collaborative group participants recommended in-class collaborative writing tasks for future 
classes. We concur with Elola and Oskoz (2010) that collaborative writing should not supplant individual 
writing in class, as is supported by the individual writing gains of both groups in this study. Rather, in-
class web-based collaborative writing allows students to further develop their own individual writing.  
Insight into the possible reasons for the success of the web-based collaborative writing can be gleaned 
from the framework by Kessler et al. (2012) on the co-evolution of collaborative autonomous pedagogy. 
Arnold and Ducate (2006) concur that the collaborative learning experience can be affected by context, 
tools, and participants. The framework by Kessler et al. posits that as technology evolves, both students’ 
and teachers’ use of technology should change as well. In this case, teachers monitored participant 
groups, but allowed them flexibility in their use of technology and language learning tasks. The learning 
context was chosen carefully, by using the Google Docs web-based word processing application to 
facilitate collaboration, provide multiple learners the opportunity to work on one document, and facilitate 
teacher monitoring and periodic input. In this case, the technological tools helped mediate communication 
(Thorne, 2003) in a way that paper-based writing or standard word processing software could not have 
done. If the behavior of the students had been determined by the tool, teachers, or task, the power of this 
environment and the collaborative experience would have been diminished and would have led to 
frustration as well as decreased collaboration. These web-based collaborative writing tasks, however, 
were motivating to most participants, particularly for students who likely would have been reluctant to 
write individually. Thus, in this context, the tool plays a crucial role in learning (Kessler & Bikowski, 
2010).  
Additionally, participant engagement in the collaborative process with others likely led to increased 
individual learning. Vygotsky (1978) emphasizes the importance of collaboration in learning. Learner 
grouping was done systematically so that each member had a skill to offer. The groups consisted of 
members who were each stronger in one of the following areas: grammar, organization, or technology. 
Accordingly, this collaboration allowed development to occur first between people at an 
interpsychological level, which then led to better development of individuals at an intrapsychological 
level (Vygotsky, 1978). Learning potential can be maximized by giving students opportunities to interact 
with peers who have different abilities and skills. 
Another benefit of the web-based collaboration was through increased involvement in the writing process. 
These in-class web-based collaborative writing tasks required students to brainstorm and plan and later 
jointly edit their writing—practices which could have been transferred to their individual writing. 
Research suggests that collaborative writing leads to learners experiencing increased critical thinking 
(Kinsella & Sherak, 1998) that allows them to reflect upon their writing in a different manner and 
understand areas of development (Hirvela, 1999). Collaborative writing also allows for opportunities to 
build confidence, as editing is done by the group for the group. Reflecting on writing as the product of the 
group instead of only an individual creation could help learners with their critical analysis while 
maintaining a sense of ownership (Spigelman, 2000). The use of web-based word processing allowed all 
learners to view, edit, and thus feel ownership over their texts in ways not possible with paper-based 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
collaborative writing tasks. 
The collaborative process also allows for more opportunities to self-reflect (Hirvela, 1999), which can 
lead to increased learning. In this study, reflection was facilitated via technology and assisted the learners 
in analyzing their writing as readers, allowing them to see how well they performed compared to fellow 
group members and identifying areas for improvement. This form of interaction can elicit a healthy sense 
of competition among group members as well, leading to better performance in individual writing. 
Hubbard (2004) notes the importance of learner training with new technologies. Due to their training, 
these participants were able to reflect on their writing without worrying about the technology. 
In class, web-based collaborative writing provided these second language writers with an opportunity to 
improve their individual writing; however, participants raised important concerns that provide insight for 
educators. Some collaborative group participants struggled with merging different ideas offered by group 
members. This could be because they preferred to work alone (Storch, 2005) or they could have been 
unsure in the collaborative process. This pressure could have led the participants to omit important 
aspects of writing in order to focus on idea-generation and merging. Ongoing learner training on time 
management and the steps of the writing process is thus crucial so that students understand that in 
technology-facilitated collaborative writing the process is at least as important as the product.  
Another area of concern raised by some collaborative group participants was that they preferred the 
instructor rather than their peers to correct their mistakes. These learners could have felt uncertain about 
their peers’ editing skills (Leki, 1990) or the groups could have missed opportunities to engage in 
effective communication. Fung (2010) identified the defining features of collaboration as mutual 
interaction, negotiation, conflict management, and shared expertise. Some participants in this study 
appeared to have experienced a lack of trust in their groups that led to decreased appreciation for the 
collaborative writing tasks. Ineffective group communication using web-based tasks could be minimized 
by adjusting the amount of teacher interference (Kessler, 2009) and increasing learner training in areas 
such as conflict management or negotiation, in addition to increasing teacher monitoring of collaborative 
groups (Storch, 2013). Communication in technology-enhanced environments can be more challenging 
for some learners and thus can require more training. This study highlights many practical implications 
that allow educators to utilize in-class web-based collaborative writing tasks in order to help students 
improve their individual writing, yet it does include some limitations. 
LIMITATIONS AND PEDAGOGICAL IMPLICATIONS 
Pedagogical implications for in-class web-based collaborative writing tasks should be considered along 
with the limitations of the current study. While different teachers conducted the classes, the course used 
the same textbook, a standardized syllabus, and standardized rubrics and norming sessions in order to 
mitigate possible teacher difference effects. The realities of classroom research led to the limitation of 
having three teachers involved in the study. This limitation was mitigated through consistent 
communication between all teachers and the standardization of the course content, assignments, materials, 
etc. As Dörnyei (2007) notes, practical considerations are a reality in classroom-based research. The 
lower pre-test scores of the collaborative writing compared to the individual writing group were another 
reality of classroom research and should be kept in mind while interpreting the results. However, keeping 
these factors in mind, these findings do emphasize the potential power of web-based collaborative writing 
with lower-proficiency students. The limited L1s in the collaborative group—compared to a slightly more 
diverse L1 pool in the individual writing group —as well as differences in average number of years 
studying English could also have influenced the pre- and post-test writing score results. However, in both 
groups, the overwhelming majority of learners shared the same L1 (Chinese) and many other similar 
characteristics regarding English language learning.  
The following pedagogical implications can thus be considered in light of the research situation. These 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
implications fall under three main stages: the preparation stage, the collaborative writing stage, and the 
reflective stage. Together, these stages can be combined into a Teaching Cycle for Web-Based 
Collaborative Writing. 
1. The Preparation Stage  
Prepare Yourself for the Technology 
Interactive software allows teachers to monitor students’ progress and contributions in collaborative 
writing only if teachers are familiar with the features of the technology (e.g., accessing group documents, 
leaving comments, viewing revision histories, etc.) to aid with troubleshooting as well as potentially 
guide student use. Teachers can also circulate the room periodically.  
Prepare Students for Technology 
With web-based word processing software, preparation includes students being able to use basic features 
as well as features that allow for more flexibility (e.g., simultaneous group writing and editing, revision 
history, group viewing, etc.). Students should be given an opportunity to use the tools before they start 
collaborative, graded assignments. They also should understand expectations and policies regarding social 
media use during class time.  
Group Students Carefully 
Teachers can consider creating groups based on skills and students’ language proficiency level, in 
addition to student characteristics such as motivation, extroversion/introversion, and comfort with 
technology. Teachers can inform students of their grouping rationale directly, including the strengths of 
each group member, or can ask students to self-assess with each member offering their potential 
individual contributions to the group. Alternatively, students can choose their own groups, based on 
guidelines provided by the teacher or collectively created (e.g., choosing group members based on 
expertise). 
Prepare Students for Collaborative Writing Tasks 
Teachers can lead discussions on options for ways to collaborate using technology, on how groups can 
choose a topic, on which online resources are available and when they might be useful, on how to manage 
group communication to maximize individual input, on listening to others’ ideas, and on polite language 
options (e.g., disagreeing, making a clear and direct point, etc.). Groups can be led to reflect on what type 
of group they would like to be, based on the findings of this study: Explicit Collaborators, Budding 
Collaborators, or Resistant Collaborators. Students can be asked to form individual goals on what 
collaborative skills they would like to personally develop during the writing tasks. Before groups start 
writing together, rapport-building and trust-building activities are recommended. 
2. The Collaboration Stage 
Promote Collaboration and Communication 
Students appreciate collaboration for many reasons, including that it helps them work on their writing as a 
group, it teaches them to write under time pressure and thus manage their time, it helps them focus on the 
writing process and their own writing, and it helps them produce a better written product. Groups can be 
reminded of the three types of groups—Explicit, Budding, and Resistant Collaborators—in order to assess 
their own collaboration progress in real time.  
Help Introverted or Independent-minded Individuals Succeed in Collaboration 
Teachers can help students who are more introverted, or who prefer to work independently, to collaborate 
successfully by giving them time to become comfortable with their teammates and the learning context 
and by leading class discussions on collaborating with individuals with varying learning styles. Being 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
patient and realizing that any personality type can fit into the collaborative situation will allow teachers to 
be creative in their teaching methods.  
Help Learners Reflect on their Writing as Readers 
Collaborative writing, particularly with web-based word processing, can help learners become aware of 
their writing needs as they consider their writing compared to that of their classmates. This ability for 
second language writers to analyze their own writing as a reader is an important skill to develop (Ferris & 
Hedgcock, 2014). Participants can also be encouraged to consider their own needs regarding grammar 
and/or content and organization. Individual e-journaling or blogging assignments can encourage students 
to reflect on their contribution to the collaborative effort and their own writing needs.  
Assist Learners with Planning and Time Constraints 
Teachers can help L2 writers merge different ideas in a limited amount of time by practicing group 
brainstorming sessions, allowing students extra time for initial collaborative sessions, and requiring 
groups to plan before writing. Many groups struggle with decisions as to which content to include vs. 
eliminate. Students can be led to understand that collaborative writing is worth the extra effort, that it can 
help them learn how to plan their individual writing, and that the process is at least as important as the 
final product.  
3. The Reflection Stage 
This final stage is added based on participant and teacher recommendations and on classroom 
observations, though it was not utilized in this study. Not all participants thought that their writing 
improved due to the in-class web-based collaborative writing tasks. This could be due to their lack of 
reflection on their development as writers and collaborators. Teachers can help L2 writers recognize their 
development through reflective activities such as discussing or presenting their collaborative experiences. 
Collaborative e-journals would give teachers an opportunity to identify internal conflicts in addition to 
providing students with a means of evaluating their group collaboration progress (Explicit, Budding, or 
Resistant Collaborators). Realizing these aspects earlier in a term would help the teacher suggest 
strategies to avoid conflict. Teachers can guide learners in noticing how editing and proofreading in 
collaborative writing can facilitate peer review activities as well, in terms of their overall writing and in 
building rapport. 
The following teaching cycle was created based on the three stages of pedagogical development 
suggested by the current study (see Figure 2).  
Figure 2. Teaching cycle for web-based collaborative writing. 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 96 
Figure 2 demonstrates the importance of both the teacher and the tools in supporting learners as they 
engage in web-based collaborative writing. It also explicitly points out the importance of web-based 
collaborative writing being a process. The overlap between the collaboration and reflection stages 
underlines the importance of continued reflection in the process. The dashed arrow from the reflection to 
the preparation stages emphasizes the cyclical nature of learning in collaborative projects. These three 
phases are important for teachers as well as learners during web-based collaborative writing tasks. 
Future research into how teachers can support the Teaching Cycle for Web-Based Collaborative Writing 
is needed, including identifying strategies and best practices that can guide all types of learners through 
full collaboration. Additionally, research comparing in-class collaborative writing with and without the 
use of technology can further inform educators regarding the benefits and challenges that various 
technologies offer the collaborative writing process. Studies that can explore which types of students most 
benefit from web-based collaborative writing are also needed, as are studies that examine in which areas 
students might experience the most benefits (e.g., grammar, organization, idea development, etc.), and 
under which conditions various technologies are most useful for students and educators. The framework 
of Kessler et al. (2012) for the co-evolution of collaborative autonomous pedagogy reminds us that as 
technologies evolve, students’ use of new tools and teachers’ implementation of new technologies in the 
classroom need to evolve as well. Future research will be needed into how new technologies (e.g., with 
automated writing evaluation or speech recognition) may impact L2 collaborative writing. 
CONCLUSION 
This study is the first of its kind investigating the potential effects of web-based collaborative writing on 
individual writing with English L2 writers. It focused on 59 undergraduate second language writers who 
were part of a U.S. university English writing class. Students in the collaborative writing group completed 
four in-class collaborative web-based writing tasks in addition to other class writing assignments, while 
the individual writing group participants completed four identical in-class individual web-based writing 
tasks. The web-based collaborative writing participants experienced statistically significant greater 
learning gains in their individual writing scores than did the individual writing group participants, though 
both groups experienced statistically significant gains from pre-test to post-test.  
The majority of collaborative writing group participants liked the in-class web-based collaborative writing 
tasks. They thought the tasks helped them improve their personal writing, and recommended the use of 
these tasks for future classes. Overall, participants in the individual group also liked the web-based 
writing tasks, but many wished they had been able to write collaboratively. Collaborative group 
participants worked in one of three ways: Explicit Collaborators, Budding Collaborators, and Resistant 
Collaborators. Concerns raised by participants focused on time pressure, the amount of teacher 
intervention, and affective group dynamics. In order to realize the potential of web-based collaborative 
writing tasks, a three-stage Teaching Cycle for Web-Based Collaborative Writing is thus offered: (1) 
preparation, (2) collaborative writing, and (3) reflection. As technologies continue to become more 
interactive and individualized, CALL-based collaboration among L2 writers has the potential to provide 
increased benefits and expanded creativity for both students and educators. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to thank the LLT Editors and anonymous reviewers for their suggestions and 
comments on improving this paper. We would also like to thank the students and faculty who agreed to 
participate in the research. 
 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 97 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Dawn Bikowski is the Director of the English Language Improvement Program in the Linguistics 
Department at Ohio University. Her research interests include technology and writing, technology and 
collaboration, student autonomy with CALL use, and second language writing. Her Ph.D. is in 
Instructional Technology and M.A. is in Applied Linguistics. 
E-mail: bikowski@ohio.edu 
Ramyadarshanie Vithanage is a Lecturer in the Ohio Program of Intensive English at Ohio University. 
She is interested in teaching and researching second language writing. Her M.A. is in Applied Linguistics. 
E-mail: vithanag@ohio.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Arnold, N., & Ducate, L. (2006). Future foreign language teachers’ social and cognitive collaboration in 
an online environment. Language Learning & Technology, 10(1), 42–66. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/arnoldducate 
Arnold, N., Ducate, L., & Kost, C. (2009). Collaborative writing in wikis: Insights from culture project in 
German class. In L. Lomicka & G. Lord (Eds.), The next generation: Social networking and online 
collaboration in foreign language learning (pp. 115–144). CALICO Monograph Series Volume 5. San 
Marcos, TX: Texas. 
Aydin, Z., & Yildiz, S. (2014). Using wikis to promote collaborative EFL writing. Language Learning & 
Technology, 18(1), 160–180. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/aydinyildiz.pdf 
Becker, H. S. (2001). The epistemology of qualitative research. In R. M. Emerson (Ed.), Contemporary 
field research (2nd ed.) (pp. 317–330). Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland. 
Blake, R. J. (2008). Brave new digital classroom: Technology and foreign language learning. 
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. 
Braine, B. (1997). Beyond word processing: Networked computers in ESL writing classes. Computers 
and Composition, 14(1), 45–58. 
Check, J., & Schutt, R. K. (2012). Research methods in education. Los Angeles, CA: Sage. 
Dale, H. (1997). Co-authoring in the classroom: Creating an environment for effective collaboration. 
Urbana, IL: The National Council of Teachers of English. 
Denscombe, M. (2002) Ground rules for good research: A 10 point guide for social researchers. 
Maidenhead, UK: Open University Press. 
DiCamilla, F. J., & Antón, M. (1997). Repetition in the collaborative discourse of L2 learners: A 
Vygotskian perspective. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 53(4), 609–633. 
Dobao, A. F. (2012). Collaborative writing tasks in the L2 classroom: Comparing group, pair, and 
individual work. Journal of Second Language Writing, 21(1), 40–58. 
Dörnyei, Z. (2007). Research methods in applied linguistics: Quantitative, qualitative and mixed 
methodologies. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Elola, I., & Oskoz, A. (2010). Collaborative writing: Fostering foreign language and writing conventions 
development. Language Learning & Technology, 14(3), 51–71. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2010/elolaoskoz.pdf 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 98 
Ferris, D. R., & Hedgcock, J. S. (2014). Teaching L2 composition: Purpose, process, and practice (3rd 
ed.). New York: Routledge. 
Fung, Y. M. (2010). Collaborative writing features. RELC Journal, 41(1), 18–30. 
Goldberg, A., Russell, M., & Cook, A. (2003). The effect of computers on student writing: A meta-
analysis of studies from 1992 to 2002. Journal of Technology, Learning, and Assessment, 2(1). Retrieved 
from http://ejournals.bc.edu/ojs/index.php/jtla/article/download/1661/1503 
Hirvela, A. (1999). Collaborative writing instruction and communities of readers and writers. TESOL 
Journal, 8(2), 7–12. 
Hubbard, P. (2004). Learner training for effective use of CALL. In S. Fotos & C. Browne (Eds.), New 
perspectives on CALL for second language classrooms (pp. 45–68). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Kessler, G. (2009). Student-initiated attention to form in wiki-based collaborative writing. Language 
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 79–95. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/kessler.pdf 
Kessler, G. (2013). Collaborative language learning in co-constructed participatory culture. CALICO 
Journal, 30(3), 307–322. 
Kessler, G., & Bikowski, D. (2010). Developing collaborative autonomous learning abilities in computer 
mediated language learning: Attention to meaning among students in wiki space. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 23(1), 41–58. 
Kessler, G., Bikowski, D., & Boggs, J. (2012). Collaborative writing among second language learners in 
academic web-based projects. Language Learning & Technology, 16(1), 91–109. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/kesslerbikowskiboggs.pdf 
Kinsella, K., & Sherak, K. (1998). Designing ESL classroom collaboration to accommodate diverse work 
styles. In J. M. Reid (Ed.), Understanding learning styles in the second language classroom (pp. 85–99). 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall Regents. 
Kost, C. (2011). Investigating writing strategies and revision behavior in collaborative wiki projects. 
CALICO Journal, 28(3), 606–620. 
Kowal, M., & Swain, M. (1994). Using collaborative language production tasks to promote students’ 
language awareness. Language Awareness, 3(2), 73–93. 
Lee, L. (2004). Learners’ perspectives on networked collaborative interaction with native speakers of 
Spanish in the US. Language Learning & Technology, 8(1), 83–100. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num1/pdf/lee.pdf 
Leki, I. (1990). Coaching from the margins: Issues in written response. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second 
language writing: Research insights for the classroom (pp. 57–68). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Leki, I. (1993). Reciprocal themes in reading and writing. In J. Carson & I. Leki (Eds.), Reading in the 
composition classroom: Second language perspectives (pp. 9–33). Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle. 
Li, M., & Zhu, W. (2013). Patterns of computer-mediated interaction in small writing groups using wikis. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 26(1), 61–82. 
Lund, A. (2008). Wikis: A collective approach to language production. ReCALL, 20(1), 35–54. 
Miles, M., Huberman, A. M., & Saldaña, J. (2014). Qualitative data analysis: A methods sourcebook (3rd 
ed.). Los Angeles: Sage. 
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation methods (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Dawn Bikowski and Ramyadarshanie Vithanage Web-Based Collaborative Writing and Individual Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 99 
Shehadeh, A. (2011). Effects and student perceptions of collaborative writing in L2. Journal of Second 
Language Writing, 20(4), 286–305. 
Spigelman, C. (2000). Across property lines: Textual ownership in writing groups. Carbondale: Southern 
Illinois University Press. 
Storch, N. (2002). Patterns of interaction in ESL pair work. Language Learning, 52(1), 119–158. 
Storch, N. (2004). Using activity theory to explain differences in patterns of dyadic interactions in an ESL 
class. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 60(4), 457–480. 
Storch, N. (2005). Collaborative writing: Product, process, and students’ reflections. Journal of Second 
Language Writing, 14(3), 153–173. 
Storch, N. (2013). Collaborative writing in L2 classrooms. Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Strobl, C. (2014). Affordances of web 2.0 technologies for collaborative advanced writing in a foreign 
language. CALICO Journal, 31(1), 1–18. 
Sun, Y-C., & Chang, Y-J. (2012). Blogging to learn: Becoming EFL academic writers through 
collaborative dialogues. Language Learning & Technology, 16(1), 43–61. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/sunchang.pdf 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1998). Interaction and second language learning: Two adolescent French 
immersion students working together. The Modern Language Journal, 82(3), 320–337. 
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38–67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/pdf/thorne.pdf 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
Warschauer, M., & Healey, D. (1998). Computers and language learning: An overview. Language 
Teaching, 31(2), 57–71. 
Wigglesworth, G., & Storch, N. (2012). What role for collaboration in writing and writing feedback? 
Journal of Second Language Writing, 21(4), 364–374. 
Zhao, Y. (2003). Recent developments in technology and language learning: A literature review and 
meta-analysis. CALICO Journal, 21(1), 7–27. 
