Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/messinadahlbergbagga-gupta.pdf 
October 2016, Volume 20, Number 3 
pp. 80–106 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 80 
MAPPING LANGUAGING IN DIGITAL SPACES: LITERACY 
PRACTICES AT BORDERLANDS 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg, University of Skövde 
Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta, Jönköping University 
The study presented in this article explores the ways in which discursive-technologies 
shape interaction in digitally-mediated educational settings in terms of affordances and 
constraints for the participants. Our multi-scale sociocultural-dialogical analysis of the 
interactional order in the online sessions of an Italian for Beginners language course 
provided by a university in Sweden is illustrated in terms of an Introduction phase, a 
Language and Grammar phase, a Discussion phase, and a Concluding phase. Dimensions 
of TimeSpace shape the organization of the lessons where a range of literacy practices can 
be identified. A second step in the analysis zooms into the Discussion phase. Taking the 
concepts of epistemic engine and epistemic domains as points of departure, we explain 
how the written word shapes the interactional order in online settings. 
This study highlights how different interactional orders allow for the opening up of new 
socialization spaces, in which students are more likely to be prevented from getting 
trapped in their own script of task-oriented activities. Here, participants’ cultural processes 
are complexly layered in digitally-mediated encounters, where their focused orientation 
towards a variety of offline and online oral and written resources is partly curtailed by the 
digital environment itself. 
Language(s) Learned in this study: Italian 
Keywords: Online Teaching and Learning, ICT Literacies, Technology-mediated 
Communication, Virtual Environments, Computer-assisted Language Learning 
APA Citation: Messina Dahlberg, G., & Bagga-Gupta, S. (2016). Mapping languaging in 
digital spaces: Literacy practices at borderlands. Language Learning & Technology, 20(3), 
80–106. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/messinadahlbergbagga-
gupta.pdf 
Received: January 16, 2015; Accepted: June 30, 2015; Published: October 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta 
LITERACIES IN AND THROUGH DIGITALLY-MEDIATED SETTINGS 
This paper deals with the study of synchronous online communication in the videoconferencing software 
Adobe Connect, where students regularly meet to practice Italian within the framework of an online 
course Italian for Beginners offered by a Swedish University. Our focus lies on the study of the students’ 
languaging across time and space to reach a deeper understanding of how the online encounters shape and 
are shaped in the moment-by-moment interaction participants are involved in. 
To be literate in the 21st century entails more than the ability to read and write; literacy today refers to the 
use of different communicative channels, including audio, video, or other semiotic systems (Bagga-
Gupta, 2014; Bagga-Gupta & Säljö, 2013; Bagga-Gupta, Evaldsson, Liberg, & Säljö, 2013). In this 
article, we understand the written word as a dimension of languaging and a social practice (Heath, 1983; 
Säljö, 1988). Languaging leaves behind a noun-centric view on language and refers to participants’ 
situated, moment-by-moment embodied ways-of-being-with-words (Bagga-Gupta, 2013). In particular, 
our take on languaging entails an understanding of language as embodied action, which includes both 
spatial and temporal processes or “linguistic actions and activities in actual communication and thinking” 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  81 
(Linell, 2009, p. 274, see also Garcia, 2009). Languaging helps forefront the dialogicality of 
communication in terms of the primacy given to actions or activities, rather than an understanding of 
language as discrete systems or purely cognitive objects that reside in the human brain. A focus on 
language as activity also opens up for alternative understandings of language learning—languaging is 
used here as an analytical lens in the study of situated interaction and not as a pedagogical tool that 
facilitates the learning of a so-called second language. The latter is a position taken by Second Language 
Acquisition (SLA) scholar, as in Swain (2006) and Swain, Lapkin, Knouzi, Suzuki, and Brooks (2009). 
Thus, in line with a conceptualization of language as situated activity, literacy practices “refer to the 
broader cultural conception of particular ways of thinking about and doing reading and writing in cultural 
contexts” (Street, 2003, p. 79, emphasis added) and imply semiotic work as succinctly outlined by Kress 
(2010). And indeed, literacy today has become “a synonym for knowledge, competence, and learning” 
(Säljö, 2012, p. 6). Referring to the use of inscriptions and other kinds of technologies as tools that 
mediate thinking, Säljö (1999) argues that “the mastery of mediational means is … an essential aspect in 
the process of learning” (p. 152), wherein a fundamental assumption is that “learning is always learning to 
do something with cultural tools” (p. 147, emphasis added). 
The study presented here is concerned with the performative and interactive nature of time as space, or 
TimeSpace (see also Edwards, 2012; Messina Dahlberg & Bagga-Gupta, 2014, 2015). This is displayed in 
a university course in terms of the organization of the lessons, how turns-at-talk are organized, and what 
participants do with the semiotic and technological resources they have at hand. The organization of time 
as space in online educational settings is an aspect on which we focus in our current research. We are, in 
this study, interested in mapping communication in online education and epistemic and literacy practices 
that are enabled or curtailed in digitally-mediated settings. 
Our overarching aim is to make visible the organization of time as space from a range of different 
perspectives or analytical scales (Scollon & Scollon, 2003) from the analytical description of how the 
interactional order of the encounters is organized in TimeSpace (see Goffman, 1983) to the analysis of 
micro interactional sequences. We argue that such a multi-scale interactional perspective is needed in the 
study of digitally-mediated learning and instruction in videoconferencing platforms (e.g., Adobe Connect) 
that afford a range of semiotic resources. More specifically, this study aims to account for two specific 
issues: 
 What are the ways in which the written word shapes the interactional order within the constraints 
and affordances of digitally-mediated settings where individuals participate across the boundaries 
of digital and physical spaces? Here, a specific interest relates to participants’ epistemic 
orientation in interaction. 
 How can the analysis through a range of representational techniques, including an expanded 
conversation analysis (CA) transcription, allow for revisiting dimensions of language learning 
inside and outside institutional settings? 
The next section situates our study against the backdrop of some relevant literature in the field of 
synchronous Technology Mediated Communication (TMC). The data used in the study (including the 
project of which it is a part) is introduced in the Data Sets and Methodological Considerations section. 
The empirical analysis is presented in the two subsequent sections, before bringing the salient findings 
together. A transcription key that presents an expanded CA notation system is presented before the 
Appendices. Original language representations (written and oral) of the micro-scale analysis are available 
in the appendices. 
LEARNING AND LANGUAGING IN DIGITAL SPACES: RELEVANT LITERATURE 
When dealing with the study of TMC, Hampel and Hauck (2006) introduce the notion of multimodal 
meaning making, where “it is the individuals’ needs and interest, with their personal, cognitive, affective , 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  82 
and social dimension, that together with task and institutional demands determine the direction of the 
remaking of the resources available to them” (p. 6). Furthermore, meaning making that occurs in 
multimodal digitally-mediated settings1 offers challenges for the participants (including the analysts) in a 
range of ways. However, Hampel and Hauck (2006) emphasize that new creative representational 
resources alone cannot enrich learning processes, without also promoting “the kind of literacy required to 
use the new democratic learning spaces to their best effect” (p. 13). They highlight that affordances (and 
constraints) for participants are related to the aspects of the use of the most appropriate tools amongst 
those offered in online spaces and those that are best suited to the communication situation participants 
have at hand. Social interaction, in such a line of thinking, takes place through the coordination of 
different kinds of “artificial technological resources for meaning making” (Säljö, 2012, p. 8). Mapping 
these, as well as the exploration of how (digital) technologies are deployed to (re)use, customize and 
appropriate the world-out-there constitute central interests in our study. Such processes have been 
conceptualized in terms of chaining (Bagga-Gupta, 2002; Bagga-Gupta & Säljö, 2013), that is, re-
semiotization and appropriation of semiotic resources including the oral and written word. This is in line 
with Boellstorff (2012) who maintains that “all semiosis involves movement across gaps [and that] 
extending the notion of the digital can help avoiding any assumption that the virtual and the actual are 
converging or blurring” (p. 42). However, while categories like digital, virtual, and actual can be 
heuristically used to make sense and navigate the processes of data analysis, they must also be empirically 
challenged and analyzed in their cultural and normative framings. 
The social and semiotized character of time and space as a single dimension, made relevant by individuals 
in everyday mundane talk, are frames that index specific interactional patterns (Bagga-Gupta, 2012b, 
2012a, 2014; Blommaert, 2010). As outlined earlier, these interactional orders (Goffman, 1983) need to 
be focused analytically in relation to different scales: from the specific to the general, from the personal to 
the collective, and from the local to the global or transnational (e.g., the opening of a turn-at-talk, an 
instructional meeting at a university, a semester of study at a university language department). We argue 
that space is an unexamined dimension of the discussion regarding how the internet shapes education. It is 
simply considered as “a different context or container for technologically mediated teaching and learning” 
(Edwards, 2012, p. 205). We concur with Edwards, who suggests that there exists a need to analytically 
consider “spacing and timing as actions, verbs rather than nouns, thus pointing to the ways in which they 
are performative rather than simply existing as properties of the world to be left unexamined” (p. 208; see 
also Bagga-Gupta, 2012b, 2014).  
The analytical approach of an expanded CA is used here to throw light upon and illustrate (a) the 
sequentiality of languaging in TMC, and (b) the chaining of modes and utterances in the data, that is, how 
participants (re)use and orient towards repertoires of semiotic resources available across modes. In other 
words, the concept of chaining as analytical aperture allows for highlighting the complexity of languaging 
in the practical activity which is constituted by a range of language varieties and modalities across sites 
(both online and offline; Bagga-Gupta & Säljö, 2013; Gynne & Bagga-Gupta, 2013). More specifically, 
we focus upon the role of epistemic domains and how their distribution pushes the interaction forward. 
Such a take on CA is used to investigate how participation develops from the assumption that what 
individuals do in their talk-in-interaction is a constant, ongoing attempt to (re)establish balance in their 
mutual epistemic status. Such an epistemic engine is indeed what drives “interactional sequence(s)” 
(Heritage, 2012a, p. 49) where meaning making is seen as a key element in communication. 
The issues of an alternative multimodality and parallel conversational floors (Örnberg Berglund, 2009; 
Simpson, 2005) in digital spaces (as compared to in-real-life interaction) have been addressed by scholars 
recently (see Hampel & Hauck, 2006; Jenks & Firth, 2013; Lamy, 2004, 2012; Tudini, 2012). The focus 
in these discussions concerns primarily methodological issues in the analysis of synchronous TMC. The 
analytical representation of TMC in relation to its sequentiality vis-à-vis simultaneity across modes is 
highlighted in our study. At an overarching level, a crucial aspect of TMC lies in its mediational 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  83 
component: by means of the digitalization of the processes at stake in the online interaction, the tools and 
the literacy practices afforded in the communication inside the virtual classroom become visible for the 
participants (and analysts) and can be accounted for. They have un-curtailed access to everything that 
occurs inside the digital environment and can, a posteriori, access the contributions in the environment in 
all the modes and thus map how these are (mutually) shaped in online interaction. In the next section, the 
data and the methodological underpinnings of the different analytical scales are described. 
DATA SETS AND METHODOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
This study draws upon the ongoing work in the project Everyday Communication and Identity Processes 
in Netbased Learning Environments2 (CINLE) in which two online courses are analyzed, Italian for 
Beginners I and Italian for Beginners III (Ita III). Both were offered with a synchronous mode of teaching 
by a Swedish university. In this study, we have focused upon the Ita III data set which comprises 
approximately 20 hours of naturally occurring empirical material, generated over a period of one 
semester, through screen recordings of 10 online sessions. The course instructors’ planning and materials 
are also included as are the materials that one student had access to and works with at her physical 
desktop during the online meeting sessions (see below). 
The first author has worked as a language teacher in similar online courses for several years prior to 
starting this research project. She is familiar with the field, and the teachers involved in the project were 
her colleagues and was not involved in any teaching in the Italian department at the university which 
offered the online courses focused in the present study, during the data creation. The students met once a 
week in the virtual classroom in online synchronous meetings. The plans for each course week and course 
materials, including weekly tasks, were available on the university web platform accessible to the 
students. The synchronous meetings scheduled in the virtual classroom were envisaged as institutional 
spaces that provided opportunities to practice Italian with other participants and meet teachers and other 
students. Figure 1 represents one of the course sheets used in preparation of the weekly meetings (see 
Appendix A for other examples). It constitutes an example of course material where the theme is “Market 
and Supermarket”. 
 
Figure 1. Example of course materials used in preparation for online meetings (for a clearer scan of this 
figure, including a translation in English, see Appendix B). 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  84 
The section of the materials that outline the content (A in Figure 1) presents the topic and vocabulary 
items as well as useful sentences related to the task (see also Appendix B). Word items in the course 
materials were used by participants during the online meetings when dealing with such task-related 
activities. An illustrative picture related to the theme is available in the pictorial space B with a 
representation of what could be a grocery shop space replete with customers and workers. The third 
space, C, presents open questions related to the theme (i.e., they encourage some degree of discussion 
instead of a yes or no answer; see Appendix B). The data focused upon in this study includes, as 
mentioned above, one student’s handwritten notes from her physical setting during a digital synchronous 
session with other participants (see Appendix C). This unique data set has allowed the analysis to focus 
upon the borderlands between the recordings of the naturalistic digitally-mediated sessions and 
languaging at one of the participants’ physical settings. This allows a focus on the complexity of everyday 
instructional interaction and enables an investigation of how the written word shapes the interactional 
order within the constraints and affordances of digitally-mediated institutional settings. 
Adobe Connect was the videoconferencing software used during the course sessions and constituted the 
online educational setting that has been focused upon in the present study (see Figure 2). Connect enabled 
synchronous communication and was situated in a specific timespace framework: while students were 
required to stick to a specific schedule and participate online at given temporal slots, there was no need 
for them to congregate at a given physical place. The online educational setting could be accessed from 
anywhere, as long as the participants had access to a mediating technical device (e.g., computer, tablet, 
smart phone) and an internet connection. 
 
Figure 2. Screenshot illustrating the mediating specific digital resources (potentially) available for 
participants in the videoconferencing program. 
Adobe Connect allowed participants to use oral and written communication as well as to share their 
individual webcams. Figure 2 illustrates this digital technology that enabled synchronous communication 
using different semiotic resources (to use the terminology of Kress, 2010) in the form of oral and written 
communication, gestures, as well as other symbols. 
While ethnographers like Hammersley (2006) and Scollon and Scollon (2003) have discussed the need for 
concentrating on the bigger picture and a holistic ethnography, including micro-scale interaction (i.e., the 
in-depth analysis of human action during specific events), or the relationship between analytical scales, 
our study attempts to go a step further and focuses on significant issues in current-day fieldwork where 
the field is not a static entity (Bagga-Gupta, Messina Dahlberg, & Gynne, 2014). In traditional data-
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  85 
related terminology, the analytical aperture in our educational netnography is directed towards an 
institutional virtual learning environment, its members, the range of semiotic resources available in that 
environment, and data from participants’ parallel physical, analogue and offline settings. Netnography, or 
internet-based research, offers challenges to the boundaries of what is micro or macro, what is online or 
offline (Bagga-Gupta, 2015; Bagga-Gupta, Messina Dahlberg, & Gynne, 2014; Horst & Miller, 2012). It 
was at times, for instance, not apparent whether participants in an encounter were physically “there” in 
our data, in front of the screen that gives them access to the virtual classroom. The students and the 
teachers commonly refrained from having their web cam-option on during the sessions, or if they do, it is 
only for a brief moment at the beginning of a session. 
MAPPING INTERACTIONAL ORDER IN AND ACROSS DIGITALLY-MEDIATED 
MULTIMODAL SETTINGS 
A unit of analysis can be articulated in relation to the aims and the power of magnification used during 
the inquiry process in a study. Here, this has been envisaged in terms of the organization of time as space 
in relation to three aspects in the data set: (a) how interactional turns are distributed, (b) who the 
interlocutors are, and (c) the business at hand during the instructional meetings. The analysis at the micro-
scale focuses on particular moments in time, where the unit is the oral-and-written-turn-at-talk with 
mediational means (or cultural tools) in digitally-mediated educational settings (see Vygotsky 1978, 
1981; Wertsch, 1998). 
Analysis of data is approached heuristically at different scales in terms of TimeSpace patterns. The 
analysis also focuses on the ways in which these TimeSpace patterns get played out in the digitally-
mediated setting. These patterns are illustrative of the range and ways in which languaging, including 
modalities, shape (and are shaped by) discursive technologies afforded in the online settings marked by 
different activity types and literacy practices. A meso-scale analysis of the data with a focus on the 
organization of the meetings in terms of different phases and typologies is presented first. After 
analytically describing each phase and typology, we focus on the discussion phase by zooming into 
micro-interactional sequences for a fine-grained turn-by-turn analysis of two specific encounters. 
Mapping the interactional order in the data set has given rise to five different types of global lesson 
patterns. The following thus constitute an overview of lesson patterns where the organization of lesson is 
time as space. 
 Plenary lessons: These are teacher-led. 
 Written-oral-based work lessons: Here the teacher is in plenary mode orally during a language 
and grammar lesson phase (see Figure 3) and some students communicate in the chat tool. 
 Oral-written-based work lessons: Here the students perform their contributions orally without oral 
feedback from the teacher. The teacher does not take the oral floor and instead communicates 
using the chat tool 
 Mixed cyclical lessons: Here plenary and individual or group work alternate 
 Group dispersed settings lessons: Here group work is the focus. Participants are located in 
different virtual sites. 
The analytical description of the data presented illustrates the complexity of everyday instructional 
interaction through a meso-scale analysis of the individual meeting sessions that usually last for 1 hr3 (see 
Figure 3). The phases and typologies illustrated in Figure 3 exemplify the interactional order during the 
digitally-mediated meeting sessions in the Ita III data set. The second and third typologies, where 
students’ languaging is forefronted, are focused on in Figure 3. The teacher is present (and visible in the 
attendee list in Adobe Connect) during all phases. 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  86 
 
Note. T = Teacher; Stud = Student; Mic = Microphone; CT = Chat Tool; WB = Whiteboard; NT = Notes Tool 
Figure 3. Overview of lesson phases and typologies in the Ita III data set. 
The online session is usually initiated when the teacher orally asks whether the students have any 
grammar-related queries, questions about the course schedule, or other practical issues of concern (Figure 
3). During the introduction phase, students usually take the floor to pose questions regarding grammatical 
issues in the written modality (see Figure 3 and Table 1). Taking the students’ written questions in the 
chat as a point of departure, or transitions-relevant place (Sahlström, 1999), the teacher devotes 15–30 
mins of the session to provide examples and explanations about the issues that have been raised. The 
interactional order here differs from that in the introduction phase and constitutes a language and 
grammar phase in the data set. The students are active almost solely in the chat tool and it is the teacher 
who initiates and keeps the floor in the oral mode throughout this phase, distributing turns-at-talk to the 
other participants (Sacks, Schegloff, & Jefferson, 1974; Schegloff, 2007). Here the teacher organizes the 
turn-taking and the students work at their desks in their dispersed physical settings, participating in the 
session in the written mode. This constitutes a phase of written-oral-based work lessons where languaging 
occurs in the written (students) and oral (teacher) modes. Literacy tools such as the whiteboard and the 
chat tool are commonly used by the participants during this phase. 
Table 1. Modes of Interaction, Mediating Tools, and Lesson Phases in the Digitally-mediated Platform 
 Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 Phase 4 
Visual CT, WB CT, WB CT, WB, NT CT, WB 
Auditory Mic Mic Mic Mic 
Note. Mic = Microphone; CT = Chat Tool; WB = Whiteboard; NT = Notes Tool 
A different interactional order emerges when the teacher asks if the explanations have been helpful and if 
there are any further questions about the specific topic in focus at the session. Students rarely have any 
further questions and the seminar moves towards the third discussion phase (see Figure 3) where the topic 
of the session is focused in the oral modality by the students who have previously prepared for this topic 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  87 
with the help of course material that includes word items, pictures, and questions about the theme of the 
week (see Figure 1). 
The interactional order moves once again to a plenary structure in the fourth and final conclusion phase 
(see Table 1), a few minutes before the end of the session. Here the teacher wraps up the seminar by 
asking if there are any questions or issues that the students would like to raise. Literacy tools like the chat 
tool and occasionally the whiteboard (WB) are used during this phase. The session comes to an end with 
explicit oral goodbyes from the participants. 
Thus, the discussion phase constitutes a timespace during the meetings where a shift in focus occurs, from 
the teachers and their oral instructions about language-focused issues where the students contributions are 
in the written mode (see Figure 3 and Table 1), to the students, and their oral contributions to the themes 
that have been allocated for each session (for examples, see Figure 1, Appendix A, and Appendix B). 
More specifically, this phase constitutes the transitional space from a teacher-centered to a student-
centered interactional order in terms of how students manage to navigate the task-oriented activities (with 
a specific interactional order) as well as the interruptions in such an order. This is analytically interesting 
and relates to the aim and the specific issues raised in this study. The analysis of the data from the 
discussion phases in the data set is presented at the micro-scale in the next section. This augments and 
illustrates the intricate chaining of the oral and written modes in languaging in digitally-mediated 
educational settings. 
LANGUAGING DURING THE DISCUSSION PHASE: LITERACY PRACTICES AT 
BORDERLANDS 
The representation of routine languaging at micro-scales of analysis highlights the interactional order: 
how time is co-constructed by participants and gets played out as space in the interaction. The analysis 
also illustrates the finely tuned and chained oral-written nature of languaging, including literacies at the 
boundaries of different online and offline settings. The excerpts in this section are drawn from different 
session meetings, although they are all representative of the meso-level interaction order we have 
presented above. 
Chaining of Oral and Written Modes  
Four sessions into the semester, the students in Ita III are focused upon a task where they are expected to 
talk about the theme that has been allocated for that week, “Presents and Money”. Excerpt 1 is a 
representation of what transpires between nine students and one teacher at the beginning of the discussion 
phase of a meeting session (see Figure 3). The teacher asks whether the students have access to the 
questions for the current meeting and then uploads the file with the questions on the WB (see Appendix 
A). After that, the instructor says orally in Italian, “Now I shut off my mic and I listen.” The arrows 
attempt to highlight the chaining of oral and written modes and illustrate the ways in which the students 
and the teacher orient towards both different online documents and other participants’ contributions in 
this interactional sequence (see also the Transcription Key).
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  88 
Excerpt 1. Use of forse and Epistemic Imbalance 
 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  89 
Among other issues, the turn-by-turn representation of this interactional sequence draws attention to how 
participants co-construct the micro-scale patterns that are typical of this data set: Maria4 clearly selects 
herself to orient towards the task at hand (Sahlström, 1999), in this case the fourth question on the WB 
(see Appendix A). Several students before her have chosen other questions available on the WB and have 
responded to some follow up questions posed by the teacher in the chat tool. In the interactional sequence 
represented in Excerpt 1, the teacher orients towards Maria’s contribution in Lines 01–05; the arrow 
linking Line 9 and Line 10 and the teacher’s contribution in the chat tool illustrates that the orientation 
occurs across different modes—here, oral and written. Maria seems to ignore or does not notice the 
teacher’s written contribution and after a 13-second silence, another student takes the floor. She, in 
similar fashion to Maria, orients towards an unanswered question—the fifth question on the WB—with a 
brief oral contribution. 
This analysis at the micro-scale suggests that functions of silence can be understood in a number of ways. 
Firstly, they can be seen to be a consequence of the absence of a leader who distributes the floor. 
Secondly, they illustrate students’ uncertainty since no explicit rule regarding the distribution of turn-
taking seems to exist in these digitally-mediated spaces. Thirdly, the relatively long moments of silence in 
the data set can also be understood as being shaped by the constraints of the online environment itself. 
Here the participants cannot rely upon visual clues, such as one another’s gaze and body orientation as 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  90 
“an invitation to the listeners to choose the successive speaker” (Ephratt, 2008, p.1919). The first two 
stretches of silence in Excerpt 1 appear to have two specific functions: (a) marking the end of the present 
speaker’s contribution and (b) enabling other participants to take the floor. Thus, these procedural silences 
work as discourse markers (Ephratt, 2008; Tannen, 1985) in the organization of the interaction in online 
settings. 
The task orientation of another student, Giovanna, is made visible in Line 07 by the utterance una busta 
con i soldi (an envelope with money) which appears to be a phrase that is taken from the fifth question in 
the document displayed on the WB (see Appendix A). The oral-written languaging represented in Excerpt 
1 thus shows how participants oriented towards different modes and constitutes a literacy practice in the 
virtual site: Maria appeared to orient towards the questions on the WB, the teacher in the chat tool aligned 
towards Maria’s contribution, and Anna appeared to be orienting towards the teacher’s contributions and 
those of a third student, Pamela (in Line 09). Anna uses the oral mode not for a contribution on a task-
oriented activity, but in order to draw attention to a question that the teacher has previously asked in the 
chat tool (in Line 05). The teacher’s query, originally a follow-up utterance for Maria, remains unnoticed 
or is ignored by the other participants until Anna asks the same question to another student, Pamela, using 
a vocative (Line 09). After another moment of silence, Pamela takes the floor to provide an answer (Lines 
11–15). In Line 11, Pamela expresses her uncertainty by using the word item forse (maybe) and by 
producing a long e:m. Anna orients to this in Line 12 with a statement followed by a questioning forse 
(maybe, with raising intonation). Pamela orients towards Anna’s question and she then ends the turn-
construction unit by laughing saying non so (I don’t know). The hesitant forse in Line 11, the questioning 
forse in Line 12, and the epistemic stance non so in Line 15 are understood by the participants as 
transition-relevant places (Sacks, et al., 1974). Anna takes the floor directly in Lines 12 and 16, in both 
occasions orienting towards Pamela’s uncertainty in Lines 11 and 15, respectively. Anna’s falling 
intonation in Line 16 can be understood as the end of the series of turn-constructional units initiated by 
Anna’s ventriloquizing the teacher’s written question in Line 09. Drawing from the work of Bakhtin 
(1986), Tannen (2007) refers to a ventriloquizing speaker as the participant in interaction who “animates 
another's voice in the presence of that other” (p. 22). We consider this type of ventriloquizing in terms of 
chaining, (here of written and oral modes), in that semiotic resources are (re)used and customized in order 
to, like in this specific case, give voice to the written word, uttered in the chat tool in this digitally-
mediated space. 
Pamela takes the floor again in Line 17. We could argue that during the relatively long silence between 
Line 16 and Line 17, Pamela recognizes an unknown word item, the meaning of which is requested for in 
Line 17: che significa tenere? (What does tenere mean?). This is related to what Heritage (2012a) calls 
the epistemic engine of a conversation or the role of territories or spaces of knowledge (or epistemic 
domains) in the motivation of interactional sequences. Anna and Pamela use information requests and 
position themselves in a lower epistemic status towards one another in Lines 09–10 and 17 (Heritage, 
2012b). The enquiring initiations—that is, utterances from an unknowing questioner (K-) to a knowing 
recipient (K+; see Heritage, 2012b)—in Lines 09–10 and 17 clearly differ from the kinds of contributions 
we can see in Lines 01–08. This is because Anna and Pamela use interrogative morphosyntax and because 
it is in those K- initiations that an epistemic seesaw motion takes place (in Lines 11–16). The angled 
arrows in the excerpts illustrate this, highlighting participants’ mutual orientation, which in turn tends to 
drive the interactional sequence forward (Heritage, 2012a). We argue that this “change of state”  from K- 
to K+ (Goodwin, 1979; Heritage, 2012b) is crucial in the organization and understanding of the utterances 
in digitally-mediated environments. 
The slice of interaction illustrated in Excerpt 1 shows that the students’ contributions can be understood 
as task-oriented (in that they repeatedly refer or orient to task-related literacy practices); they tend to 
convey information rather than request for it. This is furthermore shown by the long silence stretches 
between the turns and the lack of orientation towards one another’s contributions. Anna changes this 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  91 
pattern by posing a direct question to another student and the relative epistemic status that originates from 
this imbalance is decisive and drives the interactional sequence further. Another example of participants’ 
orientation to literacy practices and (or rather, as opposed to) one another’s contributions is illustrated in 
the next subsection. 
Online-offline Chaining and Affordances in Languaging 
Data generated in netnographic screen-based projects often do not provide information about participants’ 
languaging behaviors that may be termed offline or not recorded on the screen. As mentioned earlier, we 
have access to some unique local language data from one of the participants in project CINLE. The 
analysis of this offline data, together with the flow of languaging in the online educational activities, 
highlights interesting issues related to the aims of our study. The episode in focus here is about 20 
minutes into Lesson 8 in the Ita III group. Prior to the languaging illustrated in Excerpt 2, the teacher had 
started the session inquiring whether the students had any questions related to grammar issues. One 
student posted a question about verb tenses in the chat tool. The teacher responded orally with a lengthy 
elaboration on this subject and used the WB to display some examples. At this point, one student (Maria) 
used the raise-hand function on the platform and asked a question orally. After an oral response to 
Maria’s query, the teacher asks the students if they have looked at the questions for the day’s meeting. 
The teacher simultaneously uploaded the file with the questions on the WB. The theme for this session 
was “Markets and supermarkets” (see Figure 1, Appendix B). One student (Giovanna, Excerpt 2, Line 01) 
orally asked vado io? (Shall I?) and the discussion phase began, approximately 20 minutes after the start 
of the digitally-mediated session.
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  92 
Excerpt 2. Mercati e supermercati. Markets and supermarkets. 
 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  93 
 
The arrows in Excerpt 2 highlight that, in her contribution in Lines 01–14, Giovanna oriented towards 
both the task as it is displayed in the WB (see Appendix B) and to offline material in the form of her 
handwritten notes (see Appendix C). A close analysis of Giovanna’s offline notes allows us to follow and 
attend to the intricate chaining that is involved in languaging here (see Figure 3): different modes and 
communicative projects are at play offline and online. 
 
Figure 4. Literacy practices and chaining at the borderlands of virtual and physical or online and offline 
spaces. 
Figure 4 illustrates the re-semiotization or chaining between the literacy practices inside the virtual 
classroom (online) and at one student’s physical desk (offline). Figure 4 represents the notes that one 
student has access to offline during the online meeting. In these notes, she writes some of the sentences in 
Italian that the teacher writes in the chat tool inside the online environment: No, è che ci ho lavorato tanti 
anni fa. (No, it is that I have been working there for several years; see Figure 4 and Figure 5). 
Giovanna’s contribution in this micro-scale slice of interaction illustrates how she uses her notes as a 
script in order to perform her contribution in the global-local context (Hampton, 2010; Messina Dahlberg 
& Bagga-Gupta, 2013, 2014, 2015; Robertson, 1992) where she is a member (see also Bagga-Gupta, 
2002; Bagga-Gupta et al., 2013). During Giovanna’s turn, the teacher initiates a response by writing a 
question in the chat tool (this action is publically visible through an action symbol, a communicative 
affordance in Adobe Connect) and the outcome of this becomes visible first at 01.11 (Excerpt 2, see also 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  94 
Figure 5, Line 01). Here the teacher, who commonly poses epistemic K+ queries, takes a K- stance. 
Giovanna orients towards the teacher’s written question a couple of seconds after it becomes visible in the 
chat tool. The analysis of the offline notes highlights and suggests that Giovanna, at this point, stops 
orienting towards her written notes (in which she had prepared her contribution to be delivered in the oral 
mode). She instead attends to the teacher’s question posed in the written mode in Line 15, where she 
ventriloquizes using raising intonation, a part of the teacher’s written query. Giovanna and the teacher 
continue their transmodal chained conversation (where one participant takes the floor in the oral mode 
and the other in the written mode) in Line 16 and in the teacher’s two further contributions in the written 
modality: a Londra (in London) and ok!. Giovanna’s epistemic stance in Line 16, with falling intonation, 
appears to be understood by the teacher as conveying information rather than as a query (see also Figure 
5). The teacher’s ok! in the chat tool is used in third position in lieu of confirmation (for other similar 
empirical examples, see Messina Dahlberg & Bagga-Gupta, 2013, 2014), thus concluding the series of 
turn constructional units initiated by the teacher. Giovanna and the teacher continue this conversation 
solely in the chat tool from Line 04 onwards (see Figure 5), while another student takes the floor in the 
oral mode (not included in Excerpt 2). 
 
Figure 5. Screenshot of the chat tool in Connect during Giovanna’s transmodal conversation with the 
teacher in the chat tool and a translation of their written interaction. 
The last paragraph in Giovanna’s offline notes (see Figure 4) appears to have been directly taken from the 
teacher’s contribution in the chat tool in Line 05 (see Figure 5). Lines 01–03 in Figure 5 illustrate a 
transmodal interaction. Thus, reading the written contributions in Lines 01–03 (Figure 5) does not make 
sense without attending to the oral contributions illustrated in Lines 15–16 (in Excerpt 2). However, in 
Line 05 and Line 08 (Excerpt 2), Giovanna and the teacher both interact in the written mode in the chat 
tool. This analysis illustrates how such intrusions by the teacher in the chat tool (or by Anna in Excerpt 1) 
prevent the students from getting trapped in their own script or the questions on the WB. In addition, the 
interactional order represented in Excerpt 1 and Excerpt 2 (also Appendix A, Appendix B, Appendix C, 
and Figure 5) highlights how participants deploy different modes in a fluid chained manner and how the 
platform enables different parallel conversational floors. 
The interactional order at the meso-scale illustrated in Figure 3 and further analyzed in detail in Excerpt 1 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  95 
and Excerpt 2 appears to be the outcome of the established group culture where participants collaborate in 
the use of specific dimensions of TimeSpace. Here their oral contributions are usually performed entirely 
in the target language. However, participants use the chat tool to engage in parallel interactions which are 
related to what is being said in the oral mode. Furthermore, access to one student’s offline notes offers 
insights into how offline and online languaging are chained: the student uses her notes (both prepared 
before the session and during the meeting) as a back-up to support her oral talk, (see Excerpt 2, Appendix 
B, and Appendix C). 
The analysis presented in the previous sections have focused upon different scales: (a) global lesson 
patterns that attend to the overarching interactional order across entire online instructional meetings and 
explicated in terms of different phases and (b) the chaining of the situated interaction inside and outside 
the virtual classroom. Our attempt at a multi-scale empirical analysis allows for a more holistic 
understanding of the processes of socialization in digitally-mediated settings. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: IMPLICATION OF THE STUDY OF LANGUAGE 
LEARNING AND INSTRUCTION 
The analysis presented in this paper highlights how lesson patterns in the two types of desk work lessons 
identified (written-oral-based and oral-written-based) are framed by what is glossed as the multimodality 
of virtual environments that enable the existence of several conversational floors simultaneously. In 
addition, the interactional spaces enabled by the oral and written modes are publically available for all the 
participants here. A multi-scale analysis has been used to illustrate the complexity of everyday 
instructional interaction in digitally-mediated instructional settings. A key issue here has been the 
analytical and methodological handling of scale-jumps, that is, moving from the general to the specific or 
from the collective to the individual in the analysis of languaging, including literacy practices at the 
global-local scales. Drawing on the notion of scales, we argue that literacy, in the online spaces focused in 
this study, implies gaining access to (a) global-local environments, (b) the institutionally relevant variant 
of the target language, (c) the appropriate variant of the target language during each phase broadly, and 
(d) different variants of the target language according to a specific interactional order during each phase. 
Drawing on the understating of literacy as social practice, rather than an autonomous cognitive skill 
(Lankshear & Knobel, 2011; Street, 1984, 2003), the interactional order that has been mapped in the 
present study is conceived of in terms of a set of practices at both the local situated levels (at every 
participant’s desk) and at the global level inside the virtual classrooms (i.e., the online public spaces of 
the meeting sessions). 
In this study, we have used a representational system at the micro-scale of analysis that highlights a 
crucial aspect in TMC, namely the ways in which different modes are finely tuned with one another, or 
chained (see for instance Bagga-Gupta 2002; Bagga-Gupta et al., 2013). These modes constantly shape 
participants meaning making in interaction. The analysis has been illustrated through micro-scale extracts 
that represent the interactional order in the different language varieties and modes that are afforded in the 
digitally-mediated setting where students and teachers attend to several oral and written practices 
simultaneously co-creating the social structure of the situated-distributed, digitally-mediated practice. 
Furthermore, the micro-analytical focus on the discussion phase highlights the ways in which participants 
orient to one another as well as to the oral and written languaging online and offline. In this respect, the 
analysis shows how issues of normative validity (Blommaert, 2010), of what counts as knowledge or so-
called good competence in the target language is at stake in the teacher-led instructional meetings, where 
students focus on performing the task at hand rather than using the target language to converse with one 
another. 
The analysis shows that when a question regarding students’ contribution is elicited, the interactional 
order gets disrupted together with a shift in the participants’ relative epistemic status (see Excerpt 1). We 
argue that the epistemic engine of the conversation (Heritage, 2012b) gets initiated in such moments of 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  96 
imbalance, and this in turn creates room for turn-relevant places to emerge without the long segments of 
silence, which arise when participants’ relative epistemic status is in balance. Furthermore, a clear 
epistemic imbalance results in a dynamic and fluid interactional order, where students are more likely to 
be prevented from being trapped in their own scripts. Here, as we have seen in Excerpt 2, an alternative 
interactional order allows for the opening up of new socialization spaces (including room for 
misunderstandings and disruptions that mark the interactional flow). We have, in our previous literacy 
studies of classroom interactional order, referred to such alternative ways-of-being-with-words as 
dialogical languaging, where “students unwittingly receive opportunities to participate in literacy 
activities […] which (potentially) extend the students possibilities to appropriate and become competent 
in their secondary language” (Bagga-Gupta, 2002, p. 582). In a similar vein, Pennycook (2012) addresses 
the potential of such spaces in terms of “transformation” or “critical moments,” which opens up for 
alternative unexpected trajectories in what he calls the “classroom pantomime” (p. 132). We argue that, 
while the culture or patterned ways-of-being-with-words of an institutional setting and participants’ 
distributed practices are constantly being (co)shaped, this process becomes complexly layered in 
digitally-mediated encounters, where participants’ focused orientation to a variety of offline and online 
oral and written resources is partly curtailed by the environment itself. Such findings are relevant in the 
learning sciences generally, and the domain of language learning and instruction in digitally-mediated 
spaces particularly. 
 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  97 
TRANSCRIPTION KEY 
 
 
 
 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  98 
APPENDIX A. Screenshot of WB in Excerpt 1 
 
 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  99 
APPENDIX B. Document on the WB (Excerpt 2) 
 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  100 
 
 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  101 
APPENDIX C. Giovanna’s Notes 
The translation is the same as in Giovanna’s turns in Excerpt 2 (Line 01-14) 
 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  102 
 
 
 
 
 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  103 
NOTES 
1. We maintain that multimodality is an important dimension of communication in-real-life too. 
2. See the Project CINLE webpage. 
3. This means that the time spent during a particular phase shapes the length of the other phases of the 
session. 
4. All participants’ names in our analytical account are fictitious. 
 
REFERENCES 
Bagga-Gupta, S. (2002). Explorations in bilingual instructional interaction: A sociocultural perspective on 
literacy. Learning and Instruction, 12(5), 557–587. 
Bagga-Gupta, S. (2012a). Privileging identity positions and multimodal communication in textual 
practices. Intersectionality and the (re)negotiation of boundaries. In A. Pitkänen-Huhta & L. Holm (Eds.), 
Literacy practices in transition: Perspectives from the Nordic countries (pp. 75–100). Cleveland, OH: 
Multilingual Matters. 
Bagga-Gupta, S. (2012b). Scaffolding social developmental trajectories in an Asian megacity: NGO’s as 
sites for sustainable change. Paper presented at the Conference on Anthropology and Sustainability in 
Asia, Bangkok, Thailand. 
Bagga-Gupta, S. (2013). Literacies som handling. Den språkande människan och praktikgemenskaper. In 
S. Bagga-Gupta, A.-C. Evaldsson, C. Liberg, & R. Säljö (Eds.), Literacypraktiker i och utanför skola (pp. 
19–40). Malmö, Sweden: Gleerups. 
Bagga-Gupta, S. (2014). Språk, språkande och tankar från ett tredje perspektiv. Nya China, Sweden: 
WESIGN Teckenspråk & Kultur. 
Bagga-Gupta, S. (2015). Performing and accounting language and identity: Agency AS actors-in-
(inter)action-with-tools. In P. Deters, X. Gao, E. Miller, & G. Vitanova-Haralampiev (Eds.), 
Interdisciplinary approaches to theorizing and analyzing agency and second language learning (pp. 113–
134). Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Bagga-Gupta, S., & Säljö, R. (2013). Inledning. Literacypraktiker i och utanför skola. In S. Bagga-Gupta, 
A.-C. Evaldsson, C. Liberg, & R. Säljö (Eds.), Literacypraktiker i och utanför skola (pp. 9–17). Malmö, 
Sweden: Gleerups. 
Bagga-Gupta, S., Evaldsson, A.-C., Liberg, C., & Säljö, R. (Eds.). (2013). Literacypraktiker i och utanför 
skola. Mälmö, Sweden: Gleerups. 
Bagga-Gupta, S., Messina Dahlberg, G. & Gynne, A. (2014, March). Communicative hybridity and 
technology in use: socialization across the boundaries of time and space. Paper presented at the 
Multi-disciplinary International Conference CuLT, Cultural Practices, Literacies, and Technological 
Mediations. Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden. 
Bakhtin, M. (1986). Speech Genres & Other Late Essays. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. 
Blommaert, J. (2010). The sociolinguistics of globalization. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Boellstorff, T. (2012). Rethinking digital anthropology. In A. H. Horst & D. Miller (Eds.), Digital 
anthropology (pp. 39–60). London, UK: Berg. 
 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  104 
Edwards, R. (2012). (Im)mobilities and (dis)locating practices in cyber-education. In R. Brooks, A. 
Fuller, & J. Waters (Eds.), Changing spaces of education: New perspectives on the nature of learning (pp. 
205–218). London, UK: Routledge. 
Ephratt, M. (2008). The functions of silence. Journal of Pragmatics, 40(11), 1909–1938. 
Garcia, O. (2009). Bilingual education in the 21st Century. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Goffman, E. (1983). The interaction order. American Sociological Review, 48(1), 1–17. 
Goodwin, C. (1979). The interactive construction of a sentence in natural conversation. In G. Psathas 
(Ed.), Everyday language: Studies in ethnomethodology (pp. 97–121). New York, NY: Irvington 
Publishers. 
Gynne, A., & Bagga-Gupta, S. (2013). Young people’s language usage and identity positioning. Chaining 
in “bilingual” educational settings in Sweden. Linguistics and Education, 24(4), 479–496. 
Hammersley, M. (2006). Ethnography: Problems and prospects. Ethnography and Education, 1(1), 3–14. 
Hampel, R., & Hauck, M. (2006). Computer-mediated language learning: Making meaning in multimodal 
virtual learning spaces. The JALT CALL Journal, 2(2), 3–18. 
Hampton, K. (2010). Internet use and the concentration of disadvantage: Glocalization and the urban 
underclass. American Behavioral Scientist, 53(8), 1111–1132. 
Heath, S. B. (1983). What no bedtime story means: Narrative skills at home and school. Language in 
Society, 11(2), 49–76. 
Heritage, J. (2012a). Epistemics in action: Action formation and territories of knowledge. Research on 
Language and Social Interaction, 45(1), 1–29. 
Heritage, J. (2012b). The epistemic engine: Sequence organization and territories of knowledge. Research 
on Language and Social Interaction, 45(1), 30–52. 
Horst, H., & Miller, D. (2012). Digital anthropology. London, UK: Bloomsbury. 
Jenks, C., & Firth, A. (2013). Synchronous voice-based computer-mediated communication. In S. C. 
Herring, D. Stein, & T. Virtanen (Eds.), Pragmatics of computer-mediated communication (pp. 245–268). 
Berlin, Germany: De Gruyter Mouton. 
Kress, G. (2010). Multimodality: A social semiotic approach to contemporary communication. London, 
UK: Routledge. 
Lamy, M.-N. (2004). Oral conversation online: Redefining oral competence in synchronous 
environments. ReCALL, 16(2), 520–538. 
Lamy, M.-N. (2012). Click if you want to speak: Reframing CA for research into multimodal 
conversations in online learning. International Journal of Virtual and Personal Learning Environments, 
3(1), 1–18. 
Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (2011). New literacies: Everyday practices and social learning. New York, 
NY: Open University Press. 
Linell, P. (2009). Rethinking language, mind, and world dialogically: Interactional and contextual 
theories of human sense-making. Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing. 
Messina Dahlberg, G., & Bagga-Gupta, S. (2013). Communication in the virtual classroom in higher 
education: Languaging beyond the boundaries of time and space. Learning, Culture, and Social 
Interaction, 2(3), 127–142. 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  105 
Messina Dahlberg, G., & Bagga-Gupta, S. (2014). Understanding glocal learning spaces: An empirical 
study of languaging and transmigrant positions in the virtual classroom. Learning, Media, and 
Technology, 39(4), 468–487. 
Messina Dahlberg, G., & Bagga-Gupta, S. (2015). Learning on-the-go in institutional telecollaboration: 
Anthropological perspectives on the boundaries of digital spaces. In E. Dixon & M. Thomas (Eds.), 
Researching language learning interaction online: From social media to MOOCs (pp. 259–281). San 
Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Örnberg Berglund, T. (2009). Making sense digitally: Conversational coherence in online and mixed-
mode contexts (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden. 
Pennycook, A. (2012). Language and mobility: Unexpected places. Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Robertson, R. (1992). Globalization: Social theory and global culture. London, UK: Sage. 
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-
taking for conversation. Language, 50(1), 696–735. 
Sahlström F. (1999). Up the hill backwards: On interactional constraints and affordances for equality-
construction in the classrooms of the Swedish comprehensive school. Uppsala, Sweden: Acta 
Universitatis Upsaliensis. 
Schegloff, E. A. (2007). Sequence organization in interaction: A primer in conversation analysis. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. (2003). Discourses in place: Language in the material world. London, UK: 
Routledge. 
Simpson, J. (2005). Conversational floors in synchronous text-based CMC discourse. Discourse Studies, 
7(3), 337–361. 
Street, B. (1984). Literacy in theory and practice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Street, B. (2003). What’s “new” in New Literacy Studies? Critical approaches to literacy in theory and 
practice. Current Issues in Comparative Education, 5(2), 77–90. 
Swain, M. (2006). Languaging, agency and collaboration in advanced second language proficiency. In H. 
Byrnes (Ed.), Advanced language learning: The contribution of Halliday and Vigotsky (pp. 95–108). 
London, UK: Continuum. 
Swain, M., Lapkin, S., Knouzi. I., Suzuki, W., & Brooks, L. (2009). Languaging: University students 
learn the grammatical concept of voice in French. Modern Language Journal, 3(1), 5–29. 
Säljö, R. (1988). Learning in educational settings: Methods of inquiry. In P. Ramsden (Ed.), Improving 
learning: New perspectives (pp. 32–48). New York, NY: Nichols Publishing. 
Säljö, R. (1999). Learning as the use of tools. A sociocultural perspective on the human-technology link. 
In P. Light & K. Littleton (Eds.), Learning with computers: Analyzing productive interactions (pp. 144–
161). London, UK: Routledge. 
Säljö, R. (2012). Literacy, digital literacy, and epistemic practices: The co-evolution of hybrid minds and 
external memory system. Nordic Journal of Digital Literacy, 7(1), 5–19. 
Tannen, D. (1985). Silence: Anything but. In D. Tannen & M. Saville-Troike (Eds.), Perspectives on 
Silence (pp. 93–111). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Tannen, D. (2007). Talking voices: Repetition, dialogue, and imaginery in conversational discourse . 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Giulia Messina Dahlberg & Sangeeta Bagga-Gupta Mapping Languaging in Digital Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology  106 
Tudini, V. (2012). Form-focused social repertoires in an online language learning partnership. Journal of 
Pragmatics, 50(1), 187–202. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
UK: Harvard University Press. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1981). The instrumental method in psychology. In J. V. Wertsch (Ed.), The concept of 
activity in Soviet psychology (pp. 134–144). Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe. 
Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind as action. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
