Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2016/chapellevoss.pdf 
June 2016, Volume 20, Number 2 
pp. 116–128 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 116 
20 YEARS OF TECHNOLOGY AND LANGUAGE ASSESSMENT IN 
LANGUAGE LEARNING & TECHNOLOGY 
Carol A. Chapelle, Iowa State University 
Erik Voss, Northeastern University 
This review article provides an analysis of the research from the last two decades on the 
theme of technology and second language assessment. Based on an examination of the 
assessment scholarship published in Language Learning & Technology since its launch in 
1997, we analyzed the review articles, research articles, book reviews, and commentaries 
as developing one of two primary thrusts of research on technology and language 
assessment: technology for efficiency and technology for innovation. 
Keywords: Testing 
APA Citation: Chapelle, C. A., & Voss, E. (2016). 20 years of technology and language 
assessment in Language Learning & Technology. Language Learning & Technology, 
20(2), 116–128. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2016/chapellevoss.pdf 
Received: June 2, 2015; Accepted: August 17, 2015; Published: June 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Carol A. Chapelle & Erik Voss 
INTRODUCTION 
Assessment of learners’ language ability is an important part of language education, which has been 
affected by computer technology at least as significantly as language learning has. Because of the 
significance of language assessment for language teachers, software developers, applied linguists, and 
learners, articles in Language Learning & Technology (LLT) have contributed to chronicling the 
developments in language assessment technologies. Throughout these papers, the terms language testing 
and language assessment are used to denote the process of systematically gathering data from learners to 
make interpretations about their language abilities and decisions about their future. These processes of 
making interpretations and using those interpretations for decision-making have been taking place in 
language education for a long time, predating the arrival of computer technology. However, the new 
technologies appearing in the second half of the 20th century have been applied to these processes in 
hopes of improving them. In some cases, such improvements appear in the form of efficiencies in existing 
practices, but another important thrust of research in this area is the innovation afforded by technology for 
language testing. In this paper we provide an overview of the ways in which language assessment has 
been presented over 20 years of LLT and how this presentation reflects the broader academic scholarship 
on the use of technology in language testing. This review shows that the main themes in this area have 
been developed in a manner that reflects the larger field, beginning with the excitement offered by the 
psychometric advances that gave birth to computer-adaptive testing, and developing into a range of 
innovative assessments and uses that draw on many areas of applied linguistics. We begin with a brief 
description of our approach to looking back at LLT. We then summarize the key threads that have 
appeared in LLT and connect them to the larger fabric of language testing research. 
LOOKING BACK AT LLT 
LLT has published many articles on language assessment throughout its 20 years. We therefore 
approached our review by looking back at all of the issues from the perspective of language testers. 
Specifically, we searched articles published in LLT for the terms test, testing, assessment, evaluation, 
validity, validation, validating, usefulness, and argument using the search field on the journal’s website, 
which returned papers published from 1997 to 2015. All results were listed in a Word document omitting 
Carol Chapelle and Erik Voss 20 Years of Technology and Language Assessment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 117 
any duplicates, announcements, news, reference lists, and brief introductions from editors. The 198 
documents included papers on learning, instruction, and research, all of which contained sections on 
assessment. The papers were examined manually to assess whether or not the primary focus of each paper 
was assessment, and if it was not, it was not included in the sample that we examined for this review 
article. A total of 25 documents met our inclusion criteria. The final list contained 8 articles reporting 
empirical research in addition to 9 other review or theoretical articles, for a total of 17 articles. We also 
included 4 book reviews, 3 software reviews, and a commentary, creating a set of 25 papers representing 
all of the genres that have been published in LLT. 
Based on our analysis of each document, we categorized its contribution to a particular aspect of the 
overall theme of technology and second language assessment. The categorization was done based on our 
knowledge of the work in the area of second language assessment, which includes research encompassing 
a range of assessments and assessment uses. The topics we identified appear in a roughly chronological 
progression from issues of efficiency including automation of existing practices in place to more recent 
innovations in language assessment. 
TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFICIENCY 
Technology in language testing, like in language teaching, was introduced in the 1960s with the 
motivation of making the testing process more efficient. García Laborda stated the efficiency case clearly 
in his 2007 review article in which he concluded, “the benefits of online testing should overcome any of 
its drawbacks, as it can be faster, more efficient, and less costly than traditional paper-and-pencil testing. 
Additionally, multimedia prompts can help make the test feel more ‘real.’ Adaptive tests can facilitate the 
difficult task of rapid diagnosis, and self-correcting tests can accelerate the process of correction, 
feedback, and reporting” (García Laborda, 2007, p. 8). 
The excitement for the efficiency movement expressed in García Laborda’s (2007) paper began primarily 
with language testers working with high-stakes testing. In large-scale, high-stakes testing, new 
efficiencies could have significant financial benefits for testing organizations that were prepared to build 
the hardware and software infrastructure as well as the knowledge base to take advantage of the potential. 
Chronologically, the first big development was computer-adaptive testing, which provided a means of 
tailoring a test to each student interactively during test taking. Efficiency was also evident from the first 
uses of automated writing evaluation (AWE), whose promise was, and in part remains, the use of 
technology to perform at least some of the time intensive work of evaluating students’ essays. Computer-
adaptive testing and AWE are two themes developed in the papers in LLT. A third general theme is one 
that motivates efficiency-oriented research on all computer-assisted language tests, that is the concern for 
comparison of score meaning for computer-assisted tests and those delivered through other mechanisms. 
Adaptive Testing 
Computer-adaptive language testing refers to the research and practice that goes into development and 
validation of tests that use technology to interactively monitor test takers’ performance and branch, or 
adapt, based on an algorithm specified by the test developer. As professionals in language learning and 
technology know, branching can be developed to accomplish many different purposes, and the same is 
true in language testing. But early computer-adaptive language testing referred to a particular type of 
algorithm that relies on a psychometric method called item response theory (IRT) to control the adaptivity 
based on test takers’ performance on each item on the test. This type of computer adaptive language 
testing was the primary focus of the papers in LLT. 
Between the years 1997 to 2001, articles about L2 adaptive testing in LLT included two review articles, 
two book reviews, and one commentary on another LLT article. In the first issue of LLT, Brown’s (1997) 
review article described multiple issues of efficiency such as test production and delivery (e.g., item 
banking), but primary attention is given to the efficiencies to be gained by computer-adaptive language 
Carol Chapelle and Erik Voss 20 Years of Technology and Language Assessment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 118 
testing. Dunkel (1999) expanded on many of the issues Brown’s paper introduced in her review article 
which provided an introduction to computer-adaptive testing aimed at prospective test developers. She 
reviewed the advantages of computer-adaptive testing including some of the same advantages that have 
been identified for computer-assisted language learning: each student can work at his or her own pace, the 
adaptivity results in each student being presented with tasks appropriate to his or her level, students can 
receive immediate feedback on the correctness of responses, and multimedia presentation can depict 
authentic situations of language use. 
The affordances of computer-assisted language learning have additional meaning in a testing context. The 
monitoring of students’ work that allows for adaptivity also creates the opportunity to gather an additional 
type of data that can be relevant to assessing students’ abilities: the amount of time they spend on each 
item can be recorded and used as an indicator of the automaticity or fluency of test takers’ performance. 
Adaptivity also means that testing time is used wisely by not having students respond to test items that are 
too easy or too difficult. Time spent on items poorly suited to the test takers’ ability level typically 
provide no measurement information. The provision of feedback to students also means that taking the 
test may provide an opportunity for students’ learning. The adaptive generation of a test tailored to each 
student means that test security is strengthened: each student takes a different version of the test, making 
traditional cheating ineffective. The use of multimedia in testing allows language testers to assess 
language skills that may be different than those assessed by audio alone. To realize these potentials for 
language testing, Dunkel (1999) laid out the numerous technical issues that need to be considered in the 
design and development of a computer-adaptive test, some of which are the same as one would recognize 
for any language test design. However, computer-adaptive testing presents some new demands for 
language testing, as well. 
Dunkel’s (1999) article is a good entry point to the topic for readers of two books on computer-adaptive 
testing that were reviewed in LLT. Computerized adaptive testing: A primer (2nd ed.) edited by Wainer 
(2000) was reviewed by Norris (2001a). As Norris pointed out, this book presents and discusses 
foundational issues for the development, use, and evaluation of all computer-adaptive testing, not limited 
to language testing. The review of the book also positions computer adaptive tests as one type of 
computer-based test and highlights the need to “evaluate the extent to which CATs are appropriate for the 
kinds of inferences and purposes we need to address in language assessment” (Norris, 2001a, p. 26). The 
other book on computer-adaptive testing was Issues in computer-adaptive testing of reading proficiency, 
edited by Chalhoub-Deville (1999). Reviewer Fernández-García (2001) introduces the volume as a 
collection of papers, many of which come from an invitational conference focused on the range of issues 
from the technical to conceptual in the assessment of construct of L2 reading. The volume is notable for 
its inclusion of disparate voices describing the perspectives from various disciplines that pertain to 
computer-adaptive language testing design and development. The contributions reveal the complexity and 
range of the issues involved in computer adaptive testing of L2 reading and raise significant challenges. 
Identifying challenges was also the goal of a commentary by Norris (2001b) on the article “Comparing 
Examinee Attitudes Toward Computer-Assisted and Other Oral Proficiency Assessments” by Kenyon and 
Malabonga (2001). Their article described an alternative to the IRT-driven, item-based adaptivity that is 
highlighted in the other articles. Because an oral proficiency assessment is a speaking test, computational 
scoring of students’ responses was seen as impossible, and therefore the use of the computer program to 
control adaptive decision-making was not plausible. Instead, the algorithm used a combination of 
students’ judgments about the difficulty of items as they completed them and a rule for intermittently 
selecting more difficult ones than the students’ choices would suggest. The test actually began by asking 
students to judge their own levels. The commentary by Norris (2001b) pointed out this different 
interpretation of the meaning of adaptivity and raised an array of questions about assessing productive 
language performance such as speaking ability with contemporary adaptive testing technology. Both the 
original article and the commentary were predictive of the types of discussions that have been taking 
Carol Chapelle and Erik Voss 20 Years of Technology and Language Assessment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 119 
place over the past years, as adaptivity is understood more broadly than it once was (e.g., Mislevy, 
Chapelle, Chung, & Xu, 2007). 
Automated Writing Evaluation  
Automated writing evaluation (AWE), also known as automated essay evaluation, was introduced in the 
1960s with the promise of possibly improving efficiency in language teaching and testing by automating 
the time-consuming work of evaluating students’ writing in English. The initial excitement for this 
prospect did not materialize into useable technologies right away, however. The development of systems 
to achieve high quality automated essay evaluation has become a complex cross-disciplinary research 
issue for the field of language assessment. The past and current research on the problem of automating the 
evaluation process for students’ writing is covered in the Handbook of Automated Essay Evaluation: 
Current Applications and New Directions edited by Shermis and Burstein (2013). Their book, reviewed 
by Zhang (2014), highlights major issues related to writing instruction using AWE, existing AWE 
systems, constructs that AWE systems assess, as well as issues of reliability and validity. 
Assessing Comparability of the Old and New 
A central concern for language testers attempting to increase efficiencies in testing is the comparability of 
the new version of a test with an existing test. The assumption behind this way of thinking is that existing 
practices serve as a gold standard, or at least a known standard, against which new test versions can be 
measured. In the case of traditional IRT-based adaptivity, test developers can point to test characteristics 
such as shorter testing time, fewer items, and higher reliability—or at least, a more accurate estimate of 
reliability—for each test score obtained from the computer-adaptive test than from its paper-and-pencil 
counterpart. Comparisons are also drawn between the effects of each test version on test taker affect. All 
of the specific comparisons seek to demonstrate the extent to which the scores on one version of the test 
can be considered to be equivalent to scores on the other version. In 2001, one review article and two 
research articles addressed the issue of comparability between conventional tests, technology-mediated 
tests, and computer-based tests in reading and speaking assessments (Kenyon & Malabonga, 2001; 
Norris, 2001b, Sawaki, 2001), and then, in 2004, another research article looked at comparability on a 
writing test (Wolfe & Manalo, 2004). 
The issue of comparability between computerized and conventional L2 reading was addressed in the 
review article “Comparability of conventional and computerized tests of reading in a second language” 
(Sawaki, 2001). Sawaki reviewed the existing knowledge base pertaining to the question of whether or 
not test scores from computer-assisted reading tests and their paper-and-pencil counterparts should be 
expected to be equivalent. The domain of her review included research in measurement about 
comparability of computer-assisted tests and paper-and-pencil tests across a number of different content 
areas. The conclusion was that “the empirical findings as to comparability of conventional and 
computerized tests are rather mixed” (p. 44). But exactly what is mixed? How does one compare the two 
modes of testing? Sawaki’s review answers this question by describing the various comparisons that need 
to be made including the comparability of task content and administration conditions across modes of 
presentation, the psychometric criterion of stability of item parameter estimates, the plausibility of linking 
tests across modes, the potential interaction of examinee characteristics and testing conditions, the 
comparability of decisions, and the impact of the introduction of computerized tests to examinees. These 
are all aspects of the test and testing process that come into play when developing a validity argument for 
test score interpretation and use. Sawaki also probed the nature of the construct of reading ability and how 
it may be affected by the mode of text a person reads by examining the research in ergonomics, education, 
psychology, and L1 reading. She concluded, “the general trends found in these studies indicate that 
comprehension of computer-presented texts is, at best, as good as that of printed texts, and that reading 
speed may or may not be affected by mode of presentation” (p. 49). She included in her interpretation of 
these findings a pertinent sociological factor: that the issue of computer familiarity that seemed central to 
Carol Chapelle and Erik Voss 20 Years of Technology and Language Assessment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 120 
comparability questions in the past was, in 2001, no longer so important. In 2001, it would have been 
unusual to find readers unfamiliar with reading on a screen, and today, one might even ask if some test 
takers would be more familiar with reading on a screen than they would be reading text on paper. 
Even if people are accustomed to reading a computer screen, they may be less comfortable talking to a 
computer screen. In a research article, Kenyon and Malabonga (2001) evaluated attitudes and perceptions 
from test takers after completing a speaking assessment with two technology-mediated tests, a Simulated 
Oral Proficiency Interview, which is administered using a tape recorder, and a new Computerized Oral 
Proficiency Instrument, which has features of an adaptive test as described above. The students in the 
Spanish group of the participants also completed a face-to-face Oral Proficiency Interview. The 
computerized version allowed some measure of adaptivity with students’ judgments playing a role in task 
selection. The authors explained that the goal of the adaptivity was to help students to do their best on the 
test. This goal would be undermined if students were uncomfortable using the technology. With this as 
the primary concern about the adaptivity, the research focused on the potential "interaction of examinee 
characteristics and testing conditions” (Sawaki, 2001, p. 42), one of the areas of comparison Sawaki 
outlined in her review. As Norris (2001b) pointed out in his commentary of this study, other areas of 
comparison remained to be done, some of which extend beyond comparison studies. However, the 
manner in which Kenyon and Malabonga (2001) conceptualized their study—focusing on the area of 
greatest concern—is a typical strategy in validation research and demonstrates the reason that validation 
research is an ongoing process. 
Another empirical study compared the use of the computer for administering a writing test relative to use 
of the more traditional paper-based writing test. The paper by Wolfe and Manalo (2004) compared 
handwritten essays and essays written using a word processor for the written section of the Test of 
English as a Foreign Language. Test takers were given a choice of medium. Results indicated differences 
among proficiency level as well as geographic region, native language, gender, and age. 
Throughout the efficiency-oriented papers, it is evident that the primary concern for language testers is to 
improve the testing process by making it faster, more reliable, and more efficient. In her commentary, 
Chalhoub-Deville (2001) discusses computer-adaptive testing highlighting its advantages, but at the same 
time, being critical of efficiency as a sole direction for the developments in technology and language 
assessment. Instead, she suggests, “advances in technology should encourage test developers to move 
beyond the thinking that has long dominated paper-and-pencil testing and inspire the use of ‘disruptive’ 
applications, by which assessments are conceptualized and implemented in innovatively different ways” 
(p. 97). In other words, traditional computer-adaptive testing with item-level adaptivity can be considered 
a constraining force in view of the possibilities. We could add that a research program dominated by 
concerns about the comparability of the old with the new is missing opportunities for innovation. 
TECHNOLGOY FOR INNOVATION 
An innovative agenda for language assessment extends beyond the goal of making more efficient tests to 
expanding the uses of assessment and their usefulness. Roever’s (2001) review article in LLT connected 
the potential for innovation with the introduction of language testing on the web, pointing out that the 
affordances of the web—particularly its accessibility for prospective authors, teachers, and students—
increase the opportunities for assessment to be integrated into student learning. The access to the material 
capacity for using technology is clearly essential for innovation to emerge, but it also requires innovators 
with sufficient understanding and motivation to think beyond efficiency. Innovation is a way of thinking 
about language assessment that emerges when language testers, teachers, and students consider 
technology as a resource for improving methods and increasing uses (Chapelle & Douglas, 2006). 
Successful innovation can also result in new knowledge about the intersection of technology with 
assessment. A number of issues in innovation have been raised in LLT over the past years including the 
use of assessment to increase and improve opportunities for learning, the importance of rethinking the 
Carol Chapelle and Erik Voss 20 Years of Technology and Language Assessment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 121 
language constructs to be measured, the need to investigate potential impacts of innovations, and the 
engagement of the profession in new language assessments through access to authoring tools for 
assessment. 
Opportunities for Learning 
A central idea in the work on innovation in language assessment is that test takers should actually be 
given opportunities to learn from both the process and the results of test taking. The unique capabilities of 
technology are ideally suited to play a role in this vision because of their capacity for individual treatment 
of test takers as learners, their natural place in distance learning programs, and their potential for 
expanding learning processes. 
LLT has published several papers showing examples of some of the capacities technology provides for 
individualized analysis of learners’ language, feedback, and reporting. These characteristics of assessment 
in support of learning are evident in the descriptions of AWE systems. In 2008, Godwin-Jones reviewed 
web-based resources for online writing including informal and formal online writing assessment. The 
review provided an introduction to products that evaluate surface features, such as spelling and grammar 
in addition to those that perform automated scoring and offer students individualized feedback on their 
writing. One challenge, however, is to develop proofing tools that are sophisticated enough to provide 
useful feedback to different levels of English language learners. A second challenge that Godwin-Jones 
highlighted is that many products focus on specific sentence level grammar and vocabulary usage without 
addressing more general issues of global composition. A closer look at one system appeared four years 
later in review of Criterion, the AWE system developed initially for high-stakes testing (Lim & Kahng, 
2012). The underlying software architecture of linguistic feature detection is put to work to identify errors 
in written text. The results of the error identification are used by the system to generate feedback to 
writers. As Lim and Kahng explained, this detailed information about students’ performance can also be 
summarized in reports for the teacher. Their review of Criterion, which encompasses its use as a tool for 
both testing and learning, demonstrates how software development plays a central role in pivoting 
attention to learning. 
LLT’s focus on software in the reviews was complemented by an article reporting the results of a study 
investigating the use of an AWE system. Chen and Cheng (2008) evaluated the use of MyAccess! 
software in three EFL college writing classrooms for 6–16 weeks. Each course implemented the software 
in a different way. The authors were interested in how students and instructors adapted to a pedagogical 
tool that provides immediate computer-generated scores along with diagnostic feedback. The “diagnostic 
feedback function [seemed] pedagogically appealing for formative learning” (p. 97). They found, 
however, that the effectiveness of the software depended on students’ familiarity with it and their ability 
to use it. For example, a course that used only AWE for feedback was frustrating to students and limited 
their perception of the writing development process. Students preferred a combination of automated 
scoring on early drafts followed by human feedback later in the writing process. This combination of 
scores and diagnostic feedback from the system along with human guidance and feedback based on a 
sound pedagogical foundation shows the most promise to support the assessment of and for learning. 
Technology can also be integral to learning when it is used in distance learning programs delivered via 
the web. LLT published an article describing research evaluating the effectiveness of content delivered 
through “CD-ROM/DVD programs, online content-based web pages, and synchronous bimodal chat that 
includes sound and text” in hybrid and distance-learning (DL) college Spanish language courses (Blake et 
al., 2008). Selecting appropriate language assessments for online instruction is just as important as for 
face-to-face courses. Blake et al. (2008) elected to use a phone delivered automated speaking assessment 
to measure oral proficiency at the end of the course as evidence of learning in an online context. Based on 
the results of the speaking assessment, the authors claim that oral proficiency of students in DL formats 
was similar to that of classroom learners and that the online speaking assessment was “capable of 
Carol Chapelle and Erik Voss 20 Years of Technology and Language Assessment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 122 
distinguishing different levels of oral proficiency that roughly correspond to first-year, second-year, and 
heritage students” (p. 123). 
A third area of important innovation focuses on the use of technology to construct assessments that 
expand the possibilities for student learning beyond what is possible in a traditional classroom. The 
bounds for innovation and language assessment in this area are unknown, but LLT has some examples of 
ideas with the potential to change learning. An article by Teo (2012) described computer-assisted 
dynamic assessment to promote metacognitive reading strategies in a Freshman English class in Taiwan. 
Teo’s (2012) article explained that assessment can be difficult in large language classes, particularly those 
providing human-to-human mediation for dynamic assessment. The computer attempted to fill the role of 
a human mediator as students interacted and responded to mediated feedback in a web-based 
computerized dynamic assessment (C-DA). “The C-DA program consisted of mediation that was 
designed to improve the learners’ metacognitive strategies, especially with the intention of training them 
to be strategic and reflective readers” (Teo, 2012, p. 12). Data about students’ performance were captured 
by the computer for the instructor to review. Teo’s action research project explained how software could 
create opportunities for interaction and an optimal amount of feedback as constructive mediation in 
formative assessment supporting the learning process of inferential reading skills. 
Readers see a glimpse of future possibilities for innovative assessments in Zourou’s (2014) review, which 
attempted “to bridge game-based learning and game-based assessment, particularly in assessing complex 
problem-solving processes and outcomes in a digital game-based learning environment” (pp. 47–48). 
Zourou applied a computer-assisted language learning (CALL) perspective to the research presented in 
this book, which did not focus on language learning. The measuring progress, formative feedback, and 
social aspects of game-based learning are directly applicable to task-based language learning. The 
relationship between assessment and learning has implications for assessment of game-based learning in 
non-game and network-based learning contexts. Two useful concepts are the transfer of knowledge to 
real-world environments and the encouragement of foreign or second language interaction. 
Language Constructs in Technology-Mediated Environments 
Language teachers and testers working with new technologies in innovative ways inevitably encounter 
questions about how the abilities they teach and assess differ when language use is mediated through 
technology, and how to interpret the performance data gathered by the computer. García Laborda (2007) 
suggested in his review paper the need to “design new types of items for computers, especially for 
Internet-based tests” (p. 8). What kind of items should be created, on what basis should they be designed, 
and how should their success be evaluated? These are all questions that are typically addressed in large 
part on the basis of the construct that the assessment is intended to measure. LLT has published several 
papers that grapple with issues of construct definition because of the affordances that technology provides 
for designing assessment tasks and for analyzing test takers’ language. 
With respect to task design, LLT published a paper reporting research investigating the use of multimedia 
on a test of listening comprehension. Wagner (2007) investigated questions that have been raised by 
developers of listening tasks who are now working with computer-assisted test delivery, which makes the 
use of visuals including video an option for listening tasks. Such questions include the nature of the 
construct that is measured in a video listening test versus an audio-only listening test, the individual 
differences in the use of video materials across users, and the utility of the video in comprehending the 
meaning of the audio. By carefully examining the viewing the behavior of 36 students enrolled in a 
community English program, Wagner investigated the extent to which the students watched the video 
while they were completing listening comprehension tasks. He found that across task types, and 
throughout the test, learners tended to watch 69% of the time, suggesting that the videos were actually 
used. This descriptive research on test takers’ behavior sheds light on the construct of listening as it 
operationalized during test taking. Test developers then need to consider the meaning of the test scores, 
Carol Chapelle and Erik Voss 20 Years of Technology and Language Assessment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 123 
which should be treated as indicators of listening with visual support. 
Another issue in task design was presented by Kol and Schcolnik (2008), who described research 
investigating the use asynchronous online discussion forum tasks as one form of assessment in a course 
for English for academic purposes. Participation in an asynchronous online discussion forum is a common 
activity found in many course management systems. Teachers can simply count instances of participation 
as a form of record keeping for students’ participation, but Kol and Schcolnik (2008) showed how such 
record keeping might be transformed into a more meaningful and informative assessment through the 
development of evaluation criteria to assess the quality of the contributions rather than simply counting 
their presence and absence. The authors demonstrated that the process of developing meaningful criteria 
and scoring rubrics requires the teachers to specify what they are hoping to see in the students’ 
contributions. In their study, this process resulted in the need to define the constructs of interaction, 
reflection, language complexity, and task purpose. Doing so increased teachers’ understanding of their 
own goals in having students participate in online discussion. 
With respect to response analysis, Crossley and McNamara (2013) used automated text analysis tools on 
transcribed spoken responses to tasks on a test of English for academic purposes. Their goal was to 
identify linguistic variables other than phonological ones that should be considered as part of the speaking 
construct measured by the test. The methodology used the ratings from the human raters as the dependent 
variable and the linguistic features of the spoken responses as independent variables. The linguistic 
features such as vocabulary size, causality, and word frequency predicted over half of the variance in test 
scores even without any phonological features such as phonological accuracy, intonation, and stress. Such 
findings help to provide evidence about the nature of the speaking construct as it is measured by human 
ratings and to provide baseline data for development of computer-assisted responses analysis as well. 
Impacts of Innovation 
One of the important areas of research on language assessment is the impact or consequences of language 
assessment on all stakeholders in the testing process and beyond. Accordingly, the review paper by 
García Laborda (2007) identified the study of the impacts of computer-assisted testing as one of the areas 
in need of future research. Many language testing researchers would argue that such research should be 
included in a program of validation required for justifying the interpretations and uses of test scores. 
García Laborda pointed out, however, that as of 2007, there were still very few washback studies 
investigating the “effect of computer-based tests on how teachers change their instruction style according 
to the computer interfaces in standardized tests, and the results obtained in this type of exams” (p. 8). 
A second area of language test impact that language testers see as important is the effect of tests on 
learners’ test preparation behaviors. The language learners’ test preparation behavior is of interest because 
the test and the information provided to test takers should ideally encourage preparation behavior that 
improves the students’ language skills. García Laborda (2007) imports this traditional concern from 
language testing to the reality of Internet communities where “test takers [can] communicate test 
strategies and information among themselves. These communities, if culturally based, could help many 
test takers overcome a lack of knowledge of the Anglo-European culture that underlies most of these 
tests” (p. 8). The study of test preparation on the Internet raises many important and interesting concerns 
for language testers—all of which come into play in language testing research. 
A third type of impact that García Laborda (2007) suggested investigating is the extent to which test 
takers enjoy test taking. He introduced this as a new and unexplored issue, even though language testers 
have long been concerned about making test takers feel comfortable (e.g., Kenyon & Malabonga, 2001; 
Chen & Cheng, 2008) and placing them in a situation where they have the potential to demonstrate their 
best ability. The idea of enjoyment, however, may be an important dimension of an innovative technology 
agenda, where the use of feedback, individualization, and some ideas from online games might all play a 
role in creating enjoyable assessments for learners. 
Carol Chapelle and Erik Voss 20 Years of Technology and Language Assessment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 124 
Authoring Tools 
An innovative agenda requires that many professionals be able to contribute to developing innovations. 
This need, in turn, creates a demand for authoring software that allows applied linguists to participate 
without requiring them to become computer programmers. Authoring tools are software applications 
designed to allow language teachers, materials developers, and language program administrators to create 
a variety of interactive computer-based assessments with embedded media, automated scoring, feedback, 
and database archival storage of performance (Kessler, 2013). Kessler pointed out that “authoring tools 
used in professional test development require technical expertise and have a steep learning curve” (p. 1). 
Tools for classroom use, however, often provide templates for non-programmers so that content can be 
easily added to traditional item types such as multiple-choice, matching, and fill-in-the-blank. Page layout 
and formatting are customizable in some programs while others require some coding to change 
appearance. In short, the term authoring tool encompasses a range of software designed for different 
purposes, but which can be used for developing language assessments. 
Authoring tools for language assessment first gained attention in LLT in 2001 with a review article and 
two software reviews. The review article by Godwin-Jones (2001) presented fundamental technical issues 
of authoring tools at that time such as maintaining security, platform compatibility issues, standardizing 
questions, and test formatting. The author’s prediction that authoring tools would become more flexible in 
their customization of specific feedback to meet the needs of individual classes or students was integral to 
increased usefulness. A decade later, Kessler (2013) praised customization options in more recent 
sophisticated authoring systems. Although the article by Godwin-Jones (2001) was a review of authoring 
tools and the technology needed for computer-assisted language assessment, most tools were initially 
developed to support language learning rather than to assess language ability. 
In 2001, authoring systems dedicated specifically to the development of language assessments were 
scarce (Polio, 2001). The two reviews of authoring software in LLT presented practical issues regarding 
the adaptation of language learning software to the needs of language assessment. Benefits of adapting 
such software were presented in the review of Hot Potatoes software by Winke & MacGregor (2001). Hot 
Potatoes is a free online authoring suite with templates for six types of quizzes, which can be 
administered online, integrated into a content management system, or offered as a stand-alone program. 
No programming knowledge is required to add multimedia, edit scoring criteria, or customize feedback 
for correct or incorrect responses. The main challenge with this system, however, is test item security. 
Because of the likelihood of cheating, the authors advised against using this system for high-stakes 
testing. 
An alternate commercial authoring tool, Test Pilot, was also reviewed by Polio (2001). Test Pilot has 
many of the same benefits as Hot Potatoes as well as item banking and the capacity to create computer-
adaptive assessments. Both software tools provide customizable assessments and feedback in different 
ways, laying the foundation for Godwin-Jones’ (2001) outlook on customizable individualized feedback. 
As an alternative to Hot Potatoes, the high cost was seen as the most prohibitive feature of this software 
for individual language instructors. These three reviews highlighted practical and technological benefits 
as well as features that need to be considered to improve authoring tools for language testing. 
CONCLUSION 
This review should demonstrate how interwoven technology and language assessment are with language 
learning. Many of the same basic technologies that play a role in language teaching are also put to work in 
language testing; but in language testing, they can take on new meaning. Grasping their meaning requires 
knowledge of basic concepts in language assessment, which to date have not become common currency 
among language teachers and other professionals in applied linguistics. Professionals in language 
assessment are keen to expand knowledge of testing concepts to allow more engagement in language 
Carol Chapelle and Erik Voss 20 Years of Technology and Language Assessment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 125 
assessment across the profession, and technology exacerbates this need. In the “On the net” column in 
LLT, LeLoup and Ponterio (2001) described an online resource intended for professional development. 
The website, maintained by Glenn Fulcher, contains a composite of video clips on topics in language 
testing, reviews of websites related to language testing, a bibliography of language testing articles, 
working papers, research reports, and a database of current research projects. This website has been 
redesigned and updated since the 2001 review and continues to offer relevant information for the 
language testing community. 
Professional development and teacher education are key areas of interest for those wanting to develop 
best pedagogical practices on how to integrate useful assessments in a CALL environment. As the 
capability of computers evolves and language learners enter the classroom with computer skills, teachers 
need to reconsider how computers can be used effectively in a second language classroom (Chapelle & 
Jamieson, 2008). Articles in LLT have demonstrated some of the benefits and challenges of using 
technology for language learning and assessment. For example, the range of attitudes and performance 
results varied based on the different ways of integrating MyAccess! into a language course (Chen & 
Cheng, 2008). It was noted that, “writing teachers need to be fully aware of the limitations of AWE 
technology as well as students’ learning needs and contexts in making decisions about how to maximize 
effective AWE use and to minimize undesirable outcomes” (p. 110). Technology training courses in 
teacher education programs, however, are frequently taken as electives outside the department or too late 
in the program to benefit the student (Hegelheimer, 2006). We hope to see increased attention in teacher 
education programs on the role that technology plays not only in language learning but also in second 
language assessment. 
Another area where there is room for progress is in speech recognition. We have seen that measuring oral 
proficiency using computer technology is an area of research interest in LLT (Blake, Wilson, Cetto, & 
Pardo-Ballester, 2008; Kenyon & Malabonga, 2001). The ability to automatically score oral performance 
begins with recognition of speech. Yet, due to the developmental nature of learner speech, recognition 
engines are not yet sophisticated enough to accommodate all levels of learner language. Automatic speech 
recognition has thus far been limited to short answers and constrained responses. Some degree of success 
has been achieved in generating scores for longer speech samples (Zechner, Higgins, Xi, & Williamson, 
2009), and we look forward to incorporating more accurate and reliable speech recognition in second 
language learning and assessment in the future. 
However, as Brown (1997) predicted in his review of technology and language assessment in the first 
issue of LLT, the technology-related issues of language assessment will continue to increase in their detail 
and complexity, and the need will continue to grow for professionals capable of negotiating the many 
considerations that come into play in the design of computer-assisted language tests. With so little written 
about technology use in language assessment, much more is needed at this intersection. It is an area where 
LLT has filled some of the gap in the past, and undoubtedly will continue to contribute in the future. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Carol Chapelle is a Distinguished Professor in the Program of Applied Linguistics and Technology at 
Iowa State University where she teaches courses in second language acquisition, language testing, and 
computers in applied linguistics. She has published extensively in the areas of computer-assisted language 
learning and language assessment. 
E-mail: carolc@iastate.edu 
 
 
Carol Chapelle and Erik Voss 20 Years of Technology and Language Assessment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 126 
Erik Voss is an Associate Teaching Professor at Northeastern University. His research focuses on 
validation research, corpus linguistics, and language assessment and technology. He has presented on 
technology use in the language classroom and language assessment research at domestic and international 
conferences. 
E-mail: e.voss@neu.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Blake, R., Wilson, N. L., Cetto, M., & Pardo-Ballester, C. (2008). Measuring oral proficiency in distance, 
face-to-face, and blended classrooms. Language Learning & Technology, 12(3), 114–127. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/blakeetal.pdf 
Brown, J. D. (1997). Computers in language testing: Present research and some future directions. 
Language Learning & Technology, 1(1), 44–59. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/brown/ 
Chalhoub-Deville, M. (Ed.). (1999). Issues in computer-adaptive testing of reading proficiency. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Chalhoub-Deville, M. (2001). Language testing and technology: Past and future. Language Learning & 
Technology, 5(2), 95–98. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num2/deville/ 
Chapelle, C. A., & Douglas, D. (2006). Assessing language through computer technology. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Chapelle, C. A., & Jamieson, J. (2008). Tips for teaching with CALL: Practical approaches to computer-
assisted language learning. New York, NY: Pearson Education. 
Chen, C.-F. E., & Cheng, W.-Y. E. (2008). Beyond the design of automated writing evaluation: 
Pedagogical practices and perceived learning effectiveness in EFL writing classes. Language Learning & 
Technology, 12(2), 94–112. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num2/chencheng.pdf 
Crossley, S., & McNamara, D. (2013). Applications of text analysis tools for spoken response grading. 
Language Learning & Technology, 17(2), 171–192. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/crossleymcnamara.pdf 
Dunkel, P. A. (1999). Considerations in developing or using second/foreign language proficiency 
computer-adaptive tests. Language Learning & Technology, 2(2), 77–93. 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num2/article4/ 
Fernández-García, M. (2001). [Review of the book Issues in computer-adaptive testing of reading 
proficiency by M. Chalhoub-Deville (Ed.)]. Language Learning & Technology, 5(2), 19–22. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num2/review1/ 
García Laborda, J. (2007). On the net: Introducing standardized EFL/ESL exams. Language Learning & 
Technology, 11(2), 3–9. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num2/net/ 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2001). Language testing tools and technologies. Language Learning & Technology, 
5(2), 8–12. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num2/emerging/ 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2008). Web-writing 2.0: Enabling, documenting, and assessing writing online. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(2), 7–13. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num2/emerging.pdf 
Hegelheimer, V. (2006). When the technology course is required. In P. Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), 
Teacher education in CALL (pp. 117–33). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Carol Chapelle and Erik Voss 20 Years of Technology and Language Assessment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 127 
Kessler, G. (2013). Authoring tools for language assessment. In C. A. Chapelle (Ed.), The Encyclopedia 
of Applied Linguistics. Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Kenyon, D. M., & Malabonga, V. (2001). Comparing examinee attitudes toward computer-assisted and 
other oral proficiency assessments. Language Learning & Technology, 5(2), 60–83. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num2/kenyon/ 
Kol, S, & Schcolnik, M. (2008). Asynchronous forums in EAP: Assessment issues. Language Learning & 
Technology, 12(2), 49–70. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num2/kolschcolnik.pdf 
LeLoup, J. W., & Ponterio, R. (2001). On the net: Language testing resources. Language Learning & 
Technology, 5(2), 4–7. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num2/onthenet/default.html 
Lim, H., & Kahng, J. (2012). [Review of the software CRITERION]. Language Learning & Technology, 
16(2), 38–45. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2012/review4.pdf 
Mislevy, R., Chapelle, C. A., Chung, Y.-R., & Xu, J. (2008). Options for adaptivity in computer-assisted 
language learning and assessment. In C. A. Chapelle, Y.-R. Chung, & J. Xu (Eds.), Towards adaptive 
CALL: Natural language processing for diagnostic language assessment (pp. 9–24). Ames, IA: Iowa 
State University. 
Norris, J. M. (2001a). [Review of the book Computerized adaptive testing: A primer (2nd ed.) by H. 
Wainer (Ed.)]. Language Learning & Technology, 5(2), 23–27. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num2/review2/ 
Norris, J. M. (2001b). Concerns with computerized adaptive oral proficiency assessment [Peer 
commentary on the article “Comparing examinee attitudes toward computer-assisted and other oral 
proficiency assessments” by D. Kenyon & V. Malabonga]. Language Learning & Technology, 5(2), 
99–105. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num2/pdf/norris.pdf 
Polio, C. (2001). [Review of the software TEST PILOT]. Language Learning & Technology, 5(2), 34–37. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num2/review4/ 
Roever, C. (2001). Web-based language testing. Language Learning & Technology, 5(2), 84–94. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num2/roever/ 
Sawaki, Y. (2001). Comparability of conventional and computerized tests of reading in a second 
language. Language Learning & Technology, 5(2), pp. 38–59. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num2/sawaki/ 
Shermis, M. D., & Burstein, J. (Eds.). (2013). Handbook of automated essay evaluation: Current 
applications and new directions. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Teo, A. (2012). Promoting EFL students’ inferential reading skills through computerized dynamic 
assessment. Language Learning & Technology, 16(3), 10–20. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2012/action.pdf 
Wagner, E. (2007). Are they watching? Test-taker viewing behavior during an L2 video listening test. 
Language Learning & Technology, 11(1), 67–86. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num1/wagner/ 
Wainer, H. (Ed.). (2000). Computerized adaptive testing: A primer (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum. 
Winke, P., & MacGregor, D. (2001). [Review of the software Hot Potatoes]. Language Learning & 
Technology, 5(2), 28–33. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num2/review3/default.html 
 
 
Carol Chapelle and Erik Voss 20 Years of Technology and Language Assessment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 128 
Wolfe, E. W., & Manalo, J. R. (2004). Composition medium comparability in a direct writing assessment 
of non-native English speakers. Language Learning & Technology, 8(1), 53–65. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num1/wolfe/ 
Zechner, K., Higgins, D., Xi, X., & Williamson, D. M. (2009). Automatic scoring of non-native 
spontaneous speech in tests of spoken English. Speech Communication, 51(10), 883–895. 
Zhang, L. (2014). [Review of Handbook of Automated Essay Evaluation: Current Applications and New 
Directions by M. D. Shermis & J. Burstein (Eds.)]. Language Learning & Technology, 18(2), 65–69. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/review2.pdf 
Zourou, K. (2014). [Review of Assessment in Game-Based Learning: Foundations, Innovations, and 
Perspectives by D. Ifenthaler, D. Eseryel, & X. Ge (Eds.)]. Language Learning & Technology, 18(3), 
47–51. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/review3.pdf 
