Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/yang.pdf 
February 2016, Volume 20, Number 1 
pp. 191–208 
 
Copyright © 2015, ISSN 1094-3501 191 
LEARNING TO EXPRESS GRATITUDE IN MANDARIN CHINESE 
THROUGH WEB-BASED INSTRUCTION 
Li Yang, Kansas State University  
This study explored the effectiveness of a self-access website as a tool to teach 
expressions of gratitude to learners of Mandarin Chinese. The web-based instruction 
included explicit instruction on how to express gratitude appropriately in Mandarin and 
various consciousness-raising exercises/activities. Two groups of learners who differed in 
their proficiency in Chinese received instruction for five weeks. The findings indicated 
that the instruction positively affected the metapragmatic assessment and pragmatic 
awareness of the learners at two different proficiency levels. In their reflective e-journals, 
learners also reported the benefits the website provided for their pragmatics learning. 
Based on the findings, this study proposed implications for the teaching of pragmatics.  
Language(s) Learned in this Study: Mandarin Chinese 
Keywords: Web-Based Instruction, Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Second 
Language Acquisition 
APA Citation: Yang, L. (2016). Learning to express gratitude in Mandarin Chinese 
through web-based instruction. Language Learning & Technology, 20(1), 191–208. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/yang.pdf 
Received: January 2, 2014; Accepted: December 10, 2014; Published: February 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Li Yang 
INTRODUCTION 
The past 14 years have witnessed a growing body of research that investigates the effects of instruction on 
the development of interlanguage pragmatic (ILP) competence of learners since Bardovi-Harlig (2001) 
underscored the need for direct teaching in pragmatics. These instructional studies report not only the 
teachability of a majority of pragmatic features, but also the overall effectiveness of instruction over no 
instruction inside the classroom (for reviews, see Kasper & Roever, 2005; Kasper & Rose, 2002; Rose, 
2005; for a meta-analysis, see Jeon & Kaya, 2006). In view of the various resources that technology can 
provide, recent efforts have been directed toward exploring the role of technology in the instruction of 
ILP competence. 
Previous studies have employed different technologies to enhance instruction in pragmatics and have 
reported their overall usefulness and benefits (e.g., Belz, 2007; Ishihara & Cohen, 2010; Taguchi & 
Sykes, 2013). For example, Liu (2007) compared the relative effectiveness of instruction delivered 
through two methods—classroom instruction versus web-based instruction via email and WebCT 
discussion—and reported positive effects for both methods on the acquisition of English requests. Sykes 
(2005) explored the effects of three types of group discussion (computer-based written, oral chats, and 
traditional face-to-face discussion) on learner performances of Spanish refusals, and concluded that 
synchronous computer-mediated communication was promising in pragmatics instruction. In addition, 
Sykes (2008) created synthetic immersive environments (SIEs) not only to help teach students pragmatics 
in Spanish but also to assess their pragmatic performances after they had used a pragmatics website on 
Spanish speech acts. The results showed that student pragmatic awareness was promoted after studying 
pragmatics in the virtual space. 
In addition to these technologies, self-access websites (i.e., websites designed for self-learning of 
students) have been reported to have great potential to promote ILP instruction in foreign language 
Li Yang Learning to Express Gratitude in Mandarin Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 192 
settings (Cohen, 2008; Ishihara & Cohen, 2010), but the number of studies that have explored the role of 
websites in the teaching of pragmatics is still limited. Responding to this need, I developed an 
instructional website to further explore the effectiveness of web-based instruction in pragmatics. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
Schmidt’s noticing hypothesis (1990, 1993) provided the rationale for the explicit instruction of ILP 
competence. He identified different levels of awareness or consciousness, and referred to the level of 
“conscious registration of the occurrence of some event” as “noticing” (Schmidt, 1993, p. 26). Because of 
the limited storage and processing capacities of working memory (e.g., Baddeley, 1974; Raaijmakers & 
Shiffrin, 1982), Schmidt hypothesized that in order for the target features in the input to be available for 
further processing, learners need to be aware of relevant linguistic devices and contextual factors for 
pragmatics learning. Therefore, he advocated explicit instruction in linguistic strategies and contextual 
factors to promote learner noticing and facilitate their acquisition of pragmatics. 
In addition to explicit instruction, another way to attract attention of learners and make them notice the 
target features is the pragmatic consciousness-raising (PCR) approach. PCR is “an inductive approach to 
developing awareness of how language forms are used appropriately in context” (Rose, 1999, p. 171). 
The aim of this approach is to sensitize learners to contextual uses of language and to offer them analytic 
tools to conduct their own analysis and form their own generalization (Rose, 1994, 1997, 1999). Rose 
(1997) discussed a three-step PCR activity to help promote pragmatic awareness of learners: (a) 
familiarizing learners with theory and relevant information in pragmatics, (b) guiding learners to conduct 
pragmatic analyses of their first language (L1) data, and (c) asking learners to carry out a similar analysis 
of the data in their second language (L2). Based on this activity, a variety of PCR techniques have been 
proposed and applied in ILP instruction. For example, given language examples or authentic speech 
samples, learners are asked to find the differences in the use of target pragmatic features between their L1 
and L2 after they are familiarized with relevant information (e.g., realization strategies and contextual 
factors) in pragmatics (e.g., Narita, 2012; Safont, 2003; Tateyama, 2009). Alternatively, instead of 
providing learners with language examples, researchers asked learners to find and record realistic 
scenarios involving the use of target pragmatic features in everyday communication, and then to describe 
the scenario, answer questions about relevant pragmatic information, and keep a record of the strategies 
they noticed in scenarios (e.g., Ishihara, 2007; Vellenga, 2008). These studies have also reported overall 
effectiveness of the PCR techniques in promoting pragmatic awareness of learners. 
Website-Delivered Pragmatics Instruction 
Despite the need for direct teaching of pragmatics, it is still given insufficient attention in many foreign 
language classrooms due to, for example, limited time and resources. Self-access websites seem to have 
the potential to compensate for these limitations (Cohen & Ishihara, 2010). For example, websites can 
provide learners with varied resources, such as access to authentic target input and interactive 
opportunities with different speakers, to facilitate their pragmatics learning. More importantly, websites 
can meet different needs of individual learners (Cohen & Ishihara, 2005; Ishihara, 2007) by serving as 
self-directed learning tools that allow learners to study pragmatics at their own pace and on their own 
time outside the classroom. Learners are also given freedom to choose as many or as few online resources 
as they need. 
In view of these advantages that websites can provide for L2 learners, researchers have developed self-
access websites to deliver instruction in ILP. For example, the Spanish website Dancing with Words 
(Cohen & Sykes, 2006) was structured with eight modules that covered a wide range of speech acts in 
Spanish, such as making requests, extending invitations, and giving compliments. Each module provided 
learners with explicit instruction in contextual factors that affect how to perform speech acts in everyday 
communication as well as a repertoire of realization strategies. Another website, designed for 
Li Yang Learning to Express Gratitude in Mandarin Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 193 
intermediate- to advanced-level learners of Japanese (Cohen & Ishihara, 2005), introduced five speech 
acts: apologies, compliments, refusals, requests, and thanks. Both websites offered learners authentic 
materials through audio or video as well as different varieties of online exercises and output practice. In 
addition, websites provided learners with linguistic assistance and explicit feedback to facilitate their 
learning. Researchers have piloted the two websites on a small scale, finding that learners responded 
positively to the web-based curriculum. Their pragmatic awareness was promoted to some degree after 
they used the websites (Cohen, 2008; Ishihara, 2007). However, results about speech act performances of 
learners also showed that not all of their use of speech acts benefited from the web teaching. After using 
the website designed for learners of Japanese, for example, students seemed to make the highest gains in 
terms of requests but little improvement in the case of compliments (Cohen & Ishihara, 2005). In view of 
the mixed findings and the small number of studies available, it remains unclear if websites can work as 
effective tools to teach L2 pragmatics. Therefore, there is a need to conduct more studies to further 
explore the effectiveness of website-delivered instruction in pragmatics. 
L2 Proficiency and Pragmatics Instruction 
L2 proficiency has been reported to be a factor that might influence the effectiveness of instruction in 
pragmatics (Narita, 2012; Takahashi, 2010), but very few studies have explored the possible effects of 
instruction across proficiency levels. This might be the case for the following reasons. First, previous 
research has reported inconclusive findings about how proficiency correlates with pragmatic development 
of learners (Kasper & Rose, 1999), which proves problematic for instructional research and teaching 
practices. Second, the majority of prior instructional studies have focused on learners at the intermediate 
or advanced level (Kasper & Roever, 2005; Rose, 2005), and examined whether the instruction 
contributes to the ILP competence of learners who have achieved a certain level of linguistic competence. 
By contrast, they have paid less attention to beginning learners, possibly with the underlying assumption 
that pragmatics acquisition requires a linguistic threshold. Lastly, the small number of studies that have 
explored the effects of instruction across levels, such as Codina-Espurz (2008) and Rueda (2004), have 
yielded inconsistent findings. Therefore, more studies that examine the effects of instruction across 
proficiency levels are needed. 
Chinese Expressions of Gratitude 
Expressions of gratitude have received less attention in ILP in relation to requests and apologies, though it 
is an important social function in all languages and cultures (Eisenstein & Bodman, 1993). Previous 
cross-cultural studies have reported noticeable differences between how gratitude is expressed in 
American English and in Mandarin Chinese (e.g., Bi, 1996; Li, 2004). For example, Chinese speakers use 
more indirect thanking strategies than their American counterparts, who seem to prefer to explicitly 
verbalize gratitude to everyone who offers help (e.g., Cheng, 2005; Li, 2004; Yang, 2009). Some of these 
indirect strategies, such as expressing gratitude by apologizing and by showing care, have no equivalents 
in English (e.g., Bi, 1996; Li, 2004). In spite of these differences, few ILP studies have examined how 
students learn Chinese expressions of gratitude nor have they explored the effects of instruction on 
appropriate expressions of gratitude in Chinese (with Yang, 2009, 2014 as exceptions). 
In an attempt to fill gaps in prior research mentioned above, I developed a self-access website that 
instructs learners how to express gratitude appropriately in Chinese and investigated the effects of the 
online instruction on Chinese L2 learners at different proficiency levels. Particular attention is paid to 
whether the effects of such online instruction vary across levels, and whether the instructional website 
works as an effective teaching tool for Chinese L2 learners. 
METHDOLOGY 
This study adopted a pretest–posttest design to investigate the effects of web-based instruction. It 
included two treatment groups who differed in their proficiency in Mandarin, but received the same type 
Li Yang Learning to Express Gratitude in Mandarin Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 194 
of pragmatics instruction delivered via a self-access website. 
Participants 
Thirty-six students, who spoke English as their first or dominant language and were studying Chinese as a 
foreign language in the Chinese program at a Midwestern university in the United States, volunteered to 
take part in this study. Prior to receiving the instruction, all of the participants were asked to complete a 
background questionnaire and a local standardized Chinese proficiency test (CPT). The background 
questionnaire elicited the background information of participants such as gender, age, educational 
background, years of studying Chinese, and time spent studying abroad (i.e., in a Chinese-speaking 
environment). The CPT was used to assess Mandarin Chinese proficiency in listening, grammar, and 
reading on a 0–100 scale. Before taking part in this study, all the participants reported that they had not 
received any systematic instruction in Chinese expressions of gratitude. 
Based on their background information as well as their CPT scores, participants were either assigned to a 
lower-level or a higher-level group.1 The lower-level group included 18 participants who were all 
undergraduate students. These participants, ranging in age from 18 to 23, had studied Chinese for no more 
than one and a half years prior to participating in this study. Their CPT scores were between 13 and 30 
points (M = 23), and none of them had previously studied abroad, though four students did report that 
they had traveled to China for pleasure. The other 18 participants in the higher-level group had studied 
Chinese for more than two years before receiving the online instruction. All of them, ranging from 18 to 
45 years old, were undergraduate students except four who were graduate students Their CPT scores 
ranged from 45 to 84 points (M = 63), and most of them had studied abroad before. 
Instruments 
This study employed metapragmatic assessment tasks (MAT) to measure participant assessment of the 
appropriateness of expressions of gratitude. Reflective e-journals were used to track their self-access 
study progress and ongoing perceptions of the web-based instruction. 
Metapragmatic Assessment Tasks (MAT) 
The MAT included eight scenarios and their corresponding thanking responses. Participants were asked to 
evaluate the appropriateness of the given thanking responses according to specific situations and 
interlocutors. Although gratitude can be expressed in response to different situations, such as receiving a 
favor, service, or gift, the scenarios in this study were all about receiving a favor, and they were situated 
in study-abroad contexts; that is, the scenarios were common situations that take place in Beijing, China. 
In addition, all the given thanking responses were selected from the data collected from previous studies 
(Yang, 2009, 2014), but were somewhat modified to correspond with the instructional materials on the 
website. In particular, two of these responses were appropriate for the specified situations, but the other 
six were inappropriate, either violating social norms or involving pragmalinguistic errors. 
Participants were asked to evaluate the appropriateness of each given response on a six-point rating scale, 
from 0 (extremely poor/not comprehensible) to 5 (excellent/native) (see Appendix A). It was adapted 
from the Acceptability Scale in Eisenstein and Bodman (1993). One sample item is given below: 
Situation: After completing the assignment, Chris prints something at the library. But suddenly 
the printer malfunctions. Chris asks a stranger for help. After the person helps Chris fix the small 
problem, Chris says: 你真是太厉害了! (“You are really awesome!”) 
Your rating of this response: 
0----------------1-----------------2-----------------3-----------------4----------------5 
Li Yang Learning to Express Gratitude in Mandarin Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 195 
In light of possible difficulty that the lower-level learners could have in recognizing Chinese characters, 
this study provided participants with an aural Chinese version of the scenario in addition to a written 
Chinese version and its English translation. Participants could choose to listen to the aural version as 
many times as they needed, and all versions of the MAT scenarios were delivered via computer. In 
addition, to ensure participants were familiar with the rating scale, this study trained each participant with 
a worksheet that included a detailed description and example for each point of the scale before completing 
the assessment task. 
Reflective E-Journals (E-journals) 
Participants were asked to write weekly reflective e-journals during the instruction period. These were 
intended to help the researcher understand what participants had learned from the instructional website, 
what they thought of the design and the use of the website as a teaching tool, whether and to what extent 
the instruction sensitized them to the use of expressions of gratitude in the foreign language environment, 
and whether and how the knowledge they gained from the website influenced their expressions of 
gratitude in everyday communication. The reflective e-journals were structured; participants were given 
elicitation questions that corresponded to what they studied on the website every week. In writing their 
journals, participants were required to include their answers to the questions provided, but were not 
limited to these questions. In addition, participants were given the freedom to choose the language they 
wanted, such as English, Chinese, or a mixed use of the two. They were given a minimum length limit 
and were encouraged to write more than the limit. The minimum length was 150 words in English or 250 
characters in Chinese, based on results of a small-scale pilot of this study. Though given the freedom of 
language choice, most participants still chose to write the e-journals in English. 
Overview of the Instructional Website 
The self-access website was developed to raise learner noticing of expressions of gratitude that emerge in 
the foreign language environment and to promote their pragmatic awareness. Pragmatic awareness in this 
study refers to learner perception, understanding, knowledge, and reflection about different aspects of 
expressions of gratitude, involving both realization strategies and contextual factors that affected the 
choice of strategies. In addition, learner sensitivity to the contextual use of gratitude in everyday 
communication was included. 
Grounded in the noticing hypothesis (Schmidt, 1990, 1993), the website offered learners explicit 
instruction on how to appropriately express gratitude in Chinese and various PCR activities/exercises for 
practice. The website was structured into eight instructional units and two review sessions (see Appendix 
B). Each unit consisted of explicit descriptions and explanations about different aspects of Chinese 
expressions of gratitude, including the repertoire of thanking strategies available in Chinese, contextual 
factors that affect the choice of strategies, and underlying pragmatic principles associated with how 
gratitude is expressed in Chinese. In addition, the pragmatics website contained a home page that 
explicitly explained the primary goal of the online instruction and gave a brief introduction to important 
concepts related to the learning of expressions of gratitude. For learners to fully understand the materials, 
all of the metapragmatic information on the website was written in English, with the occasional use of 
Chinese to help with the expressions of gratitude. 
To further promote pragmatic awareness of learners, the website featured some PCR activities that have 
been widely used and reported useful in ILP instruction (e.g., Narita, 2012; Safont, 2003; Vellenga, 
2008). For example, participants were given two scenarios with the corresponding thanking expressions 
in Chinese and in English. Some of the key words in the expressions were bold-typed, underlined, or 
highlighted in different colors to help promote their noticing. Participants were asked to compare and 
analyze the differences between the two responses as well as to give their observations and reflections 
about the differences (see Figure 1). The website also contained PCR activities that asked learners to 
perform their own data collection and analyses. For example, learners were asked to find and record an 
Li Yang Learning to Express Gratitude in Mandarin Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 196 
authentic situation where someone expressed gratitude in Chinese. They were then provided a series of 
questions that prompted them to analyze the situation and to write their own findings. 
In addition to the explicit instruction and PCR activities, this website made use of additional 
technological resources to facilitate pragmatics learning of learners. For example, the website provided 
learners with access to authentic pragmatic input through videos and offered them opportunities to engage 
in metapragmatic discussion through asynchronous chat forums. 
 
Figure 1. One example of the PCR activities that ask participants to make comparisons 
Procedure 
Participants received pragmatics instruction via the self-access website for five weeks. Two weeks before 
the instruction, all participants completed the background questionnaire, the Chinese proficiency test, and 
the MAT. During the five-week instruction period when no teaching of Chinese expressions of gratitude 
was involved in classroom instruction, participants studied two units at their own pace on their own time 
outside the classroom every week, and wrote their weekly reflective e-journals in response to prompt 
questions provided by the researcher. A reminder email was sent to each participant every week to ensure 
they followed strict procedures and emailed their completed journal entries to the researcher by the due 
date. One week after the instruction period was over, participants were asked to complete the same 
version of the MAT. 
Data Analysis 
According to politeness principles in Chinese as well as the target assessment of L1 speakers, each 
thanking response in the MAT was assigned a correct rating number on a six-point Likert scale. If 
participants rated the response correctly, their rating was given 10 points; otherwise, fewer points were 
Li Yang Learning to Express Gratitude in Mandarin Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 197 
assigned, based on how participants rated the response. For example, if the thanking response provided by 
the MAT was pragmatically appropriate, participants were given 10 points when they rated the response 5 
(excellent/native) on the scale. If, however, participants rated the response 4 (good/near-native), their 
rating was given 8 points because they were correct in evaluating this response as appropriate for the 
specified situation, even though their assessment was not exactly target-like. On the contrary, participants 
were given 0 points if they rated the response 1 (very poor/not acceptable). This scoring rubric was 
designed in such a way as to track the possible improvement participants may have displayed after 
receiving the instruction. The rating scores were then analyzed by the Statistical Package for the Social 
Sciences (SPSS) 19.0. 
Content analyses were conducted for the reflective e-journals. The parts that reflected different aspects of 
pragmatic awareness and feedback on the website were identified and the corresponding percentages were 
also calculated. Particular attention was given to how participants expressed their opinions on such topics 
as (a) what they learned from the web-based instruction, (b) whether and how the instructional materials 
sensitized them to Chinese expressions of gratitude in the foreign language setting, (c) to what extent the 
instruction affected their expressions of gratitude in everyday communication, and (d) how they regarded 
the use of the website as a teaching tool. 
The researcher and another L1 speaker of Chinese, who was familiar with ILP research, analyzed the 
data. First, the L1 speaker of Mandarin Chinese was trained by the researcher in terms of the six-point 
Likert scale. Second, a subset of the data was chosen and analyzed independently by the two raters, and 
the interrater correlation (.92) was obtained. Third, all of the data were re-analyzed by the two raters 
independently. Finally, the two raters discussed and eliminated any differences in their analyses of the 
data to ensure unified scoring and analysis. 
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
Results of MAT Data 
After the metapragmatic assessment task (MAT) ratings were assigned scores, a two-way repeated 
measures ANOVA was conducted on the analyzed data. Two variables were taken into account in the 
statistical analysis: Group (proficiency level of participants) and Time (between pre- and post-tests). 
Table 1 displays the results of the statistical analysis, the mean score, the standard deviation for each 
group, as well as the F values indicating statistical differences for Time, Group, and the interaction of 
Time and Group. 
Table 1. ANOVA Results of MAT Data 
 Pre-test  Post-test 
Group M SD  M SD 
Lower-Level 15.9 7.1  24.1 11.3 
Higher-Level 24.6 13.1  32.3 13.9 
Notes. Time: F (1, 34) = 10.14, p = .003, ηp2 = .230; Group: F (1, 34) = 8.01, p = .008, ηp2 = .191; Time * Group: F (1, 34) = 
.01, p = .921 
The results show that the main effect for Time is statistically significant (p = .003); participants in both 
groups made more target-like assessments of Chinese expressions of gratitude after the instruction: the 
lower-level group gained 8.2 in their mean ratings, while the higher-level group gained 7.7 in their 
assessments. In addition, the main effect for Group is significant (p = .008); participants in the higher-
level group assessed expressions of gratitude in a more target-like manner than those in the lower-level 
Li Yang Learning to Express Gratitude in Mandarin Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 198 
group. The standard deviation for the higher-level group in the pre-test is high (SD = 13.1), suggesting 
great variation among learners in this group; while the standard deviation for the lower-level group 
increased substantially from the pre-test to the post-test, which suggests that gains for this group varied 
greatly after the five-week online instruction. 
However, there is no interaction between Time and Group (p = .921). That is, the effects of instruction do 
not seem to vary across the two groups. Table 2 shows the mean score for each group as well as the gains 
each group made after the instruction. 
Table 2. Descriptive Statistics of MAT Data 
 Pre-test  Post-test  Gains 
Group M  M  Post-test-Pre-test 
Lower-Level 15.9  24.1  8.2 
Higher-Level 24.6  32.3  7.7 
The table shows that the two groups both made gains after the instruction, but the difference between the 
gains of the two groups was not statistically significant: the effects of instruction did not have differential 
effects on learner metapragmatic assessment of Chinese expressions of gratitude. Learners in the lower-
level group, however, did make slightly higher gains than those in the higher-level group. 
Results of Reflective E-Journals 
Each participant wrote five reflective e-journals during his/her online instruction: a total of 180 entries 
were obtained. The researcher performed content analyses of the journal entries and identified the parts 
that reflected the pragmatic awareness of the learners and their opinions of the website. The qualitative 
analysis shows that, overall, pragmatic awareness of learners was promoted after the instruction, 
regardless of their proficiency in Chinese. Their enhanced pragmatic awareness was reflected in many 
aspects, such as (a) their improved understanding of Chinese expressions of gratitude, (b) increased 
knowledge of realization strategies and contextual factors that affect the choice of thanking strategies, (c) 
increased discussion of Chinese expressions of gratitude, and (d) more attention to the use of Chinese 
expressions of gratitude in everyday communication. Table 3 presents quotes from the journal entries of 
learners to illustrate their enhanced pragmatic awareness. 
A majority of learners (83%) also explicitly reported an improved ability to evaluate the appropriateness 
of Chinese expressions of gratitude as well as enhanced confidence in expressing gratitude in everyday 
communication after the instruction, as seen in these two examples from their journal entries: “I feel that 
my ability to evaluate the appropriateness of other people’s Chinese expressions has greatly improved. 
Most of the time, I do not have much difficulty” and “I am pretty confident! I feel like in daily situations, 
I will be much better than I was before I started taking these online lessons.” 
In writing their weekly journals, many learners (56%) directly expressed their readiness to apply what 
they had learned from the website to everyday communication and described how they used the newly 
acquired thanking strategies by giving specific examples: 
I have often used these strategies in chats with my girlfriend via QQ. Last night, for example, she 
said she wanted to do something for my birthday. I told her that it would be too much work and 
she didn’t have to do anything. 
Tonight I went to a bonfire with friends. When we got back to campus, I needed a ride back to my 
apartment. A Chinese guy gave me a ride back, and when we arrived at my place, I thanked him, 
apologizing for causing him inconvenience and said if I hadn’t had him to give me a ride back, I 
Li Yang Learning to Express Gratitude in Mandarin Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 199 
would have had a long, cold walk back home. 
Table 3. Enhanced Pragmatic Awareness in Reflective Journaling 
 
In addition, learners discussed their opinions of the design and use of the instructional website. All 
learners, regardless of their proficiency in Chinese, responded positively to the materials and reported that 
they would highly recommend this website to their friends who wanted to learn about how to express 
gratitude in Chinese. In particular, they discussed the usefulness of having online resources (e.g., videos 
and discussion forums) on the website, and the benefits of having the freedom to easily access the online 
materials, as shown in the journal quotes below: 
I really like the videos; they really bring the content to life. When sometimes the passage might 
be confusing, the videos make it clearer what it looks like when these behaviors are acted out and 
how to make these interactions look natural. 
The discussion board is nice because it allows all of us who are not fluent or experienced in the 
Chinese language to express our feelings and thoughts in a professional manner. As for the 
videos, I feel that having a visual to reflect upon is a very helpful thing and helped me to gain an 
understanding of the content much faster. 
You can use this website whenever and wherever there is internet, and it works well on my smart 
Group 
Enhanced awareness  
Lower-Level Group Higher-Level Group 
Improved understanding of 
Chinese expressions of 
gratitude 
It’s easier to understand what native 
speakers mean when they use these 
thanking phrases now, and it sounds 
more natural when these expressions 
of gratitude are adopted in 
communication with native 
speakers. 
Now I understand why people say 
“Mafan ni le.” I hear that 
frequently from my Chinese 
friends, and now I understand it’s 
sort of a mixture of an apology 
and a thank you. 
Increased knowledge of 
realization strategies and 
contextual factors  
This week, I did not have many 
opportunities to try out the new 
thanking strategies. But I think I 
have a much more extensive 
vocabulary that I can now use when 
expressing gratitude in Chinese. 
I learned about the concept of 
politeness in Chinese and how 
contextual factors possibly affect 
the choice of thanking strategies 
in everyday communication. 
Increased discussion of 
Chinese expressions of 
gratitude 
Several times, I discussed the 
thanking strategies in units 3 and 4 
with our instructors. 
I did engage in discussion with 
acquaintances on the topic and 
sought their opinions on the 
matter. 
More attention to the use 
of Chinese expressions of 
gratitude in everyday 
communication 
1. I was keenly aware of my 
classmates’ ability to demonstrate 
these strategies. 
2. I now pay attention to the context 
of my thanks. If around friends, my 
thanking is less formal than it was 
previously. 
1. I tried to pay more attention to 
when other Chinese people used 
these forms, so I would know 
what contexts to use them in. 
 2. I have noticed a lot of these 
strategies used in television 
dramas. 
Li Yang Learning to Express Gratitude in Mandarin Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 200 
phone. 
I really think the site is very user-friendly and intuitive, and I could do it on my own time and 
study the materials at my own pace. Also, if I didn't understand something completely, I could 
always go back and look at it again. 
However, learners also discussed their individual learning needs and made suggestions for the website to 
meet their own requirements. For example, a certain number of learners (25%) in the higher-level group 
thought the instruction was too easy and suggested incorporating more extensive and challenging 
materials. 
An area of improvement could be expanding the dialogues by making them longer and more 
detailed. Another idea is to include more optional exercises to further reinforce the material 
studied. 
I think the exercises are good; however, I think for my level, it could be more extensive and 
challenging. 
Finally, learners raised several important issues about the ILP instruction in their reflective e-journals. 
First, all learners in both groups emphasized the need for the direct teaching of Chinese expressions of 
gratitude. For example, 
I think that it is rather important to learn how to express gratitude in any language. I suppose that 
in Chinese it is even more important as I have always thought of Chinese culture being more 
traditional then American culture. 
We’ve only been introduced to very basic expressions of thanks in class (xiexie), but I don’t 
believe it’s a topic we’ve delved deeply into. It’s obviously a crucial skill and probably requires 
special attention, as its role in connecting speaker and listener is so key. I am glad that this 
website focuses on this. 
In particular, the higher-level learners discussed this necessity based on their prior Chinese learning 
experiences. For example, 
I say xiexie (“thanks”) for everything, and Chinese people think it’s always too much, but if I 
don’t say xiexie (“thanks”), then I feel rude. I really want to understand how to adequately 
express gratitude without sounding too ridiculous or making others uncomfortable. 
As a native English speaker, my habit is to say xiexie (“thanks”) a lot, even among family and 
close friends, but when interacting with my Chinese friends, they expressed to me that they do not 
like it when I say xiexie (“thanks”) too much, as it is a sign of not having a close relationship. 
Learning how to appropriately express Chinese in various situations can help learners of the 
language avoid these types of problems. 
Second, learners suggested providing this online instruction for students at an early stage of their Chinese 
learning: “Having access to this material at an earlier stage would have helped me recognize the 
importance of the differences in thanking strategies employed by English and Chinese speakers” and 
“This material would be very helpful for first year Chinese students. As a first-year student, I was not 
aware of the complexity of thanking strategies involved in learning Chinese.” 
In addition, the higher-level learners not only discussed the possibility of integrating this online website 
Li Yang Learning to Express Gratitude in Mandarin Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 201 
into the language curriculum in foreign language settings, but also helped to figure out a feasible way, 
that is, to fit the materials into a study abroad curriculum. 
Adapting this material into a curriculum, however, might prove to be difficult because a lot of this 
material necessitates discussions about culture that competes with class time that can be used for 
grammar and vocabulary and reading and writing. Fitting this material into credit hours earned 
during a study abroad program could be an alternative when the classroom can guide people 
living in China, which would target those students who could most benefit from understanding 
these social interactions. 
DISCUSSION 
This study developed a self-access website on Chinese expressions of gratitude and investigated the 
effects of the online instruction to further explore the effectiveness of using websites as teaching tools in 
ILP. This section discusses the findings and proposes implications regarding the instruction of 
pragmatics. 
Effects of Web-Based Instruction 
The analysis showed that all learners, regardless of their proficiency in Chinese, made significantly more 
target-like assessments of Chinese expressions of gratitude after the five-week instruction period, and 
their pragmatic awareness was also enhanced overall. In addition, learners reported in their reflective e-
journals that they were more capable of evaluating the appropriateness of Chinese expressions of 
gratitude and more ready to apply what they had learned from the website to their everyday 
communication after using the website. All of these findings suggest that the web-based instruction was 
effective in promoting pragmatic awareness and metapragmatic assessment of learners. In other words, 
the explicit consciousness-raising approach (i.e., explicit instruction supplemented by PCR activities) 
adopted by this study seemed to have facilitated pragmatics learning of learners. This lends empirical 
support to Schmidt’s noticing hypothesis (1993). Schmidt hypothesized that noticing is a necessary 
condition for the learning of pragmatics and further emphasized that global noticing of pragmatic features 
is not enough, but noticing of relevant linguistic forms and contextual factors is required. In the current 
study, explicit instruction and PCR exercises/activities delivered via the website directed attention of 
learners to different varieties of thanking strategies available in Chinese and made them conscious of how 
contextual factors constrain Chinese expressions of gratitude. As a result, learner pragmatic awareness of 
assessing Chinese expressions of gratitude was promoted overall. Nevertheless, we should be cautious in 
discussing the effectiveness of this web-based instruction due to the lack of a control group and to the 
small sample size. 
The results correspond with prior studies that have examined the effects of explicit instruction and/or the 
PCR approach on pragmatic development of learners. For example, Narita (2012) integrated PCR 
activities into the instruction, found that students who participated in the PCR activities outperformed 
those who did not, in both their knowledge and production of Japanese hearsay evidential markers. 
Similarly, Tateyama (2009) instructed L2 Japanese learners with two different methods and compared the 
relative effectiveness. One approach provided learners with explicit instruction in Japanese requests, 
while the other combined explicit instruction with PCR activities. The results revealed positive effects for 
both methods, but no difference was observed between the two. 
Previous instructional ILP studies situated in computer-mediated learning environments also yielded 
similar findings to this study. Cohen and Ishihara (2005) and Ishihara (2007) designed a web-based 
pragmatics curriculum that adopted an explicit pragmatics-focused consciousness-raising approach for 
learners of Japanese as a foreign language, finding that the curriculum helped promote pragmatic 
awareness of learners. Cohen and Sykes (2006) developed an instructional website that included eight 
Li Yang Learning to Express Gratitude in Mandarin Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 202 
modules on a variety of speech acts in Spanish. Their small-scale trial studies reported overall 
effectiveness of using the website as a teaching tool in terms of heightened pragmatic awareness and 
increased target-like pragmatic behaviors by learners (Cohen, 2008). 
Effects of Instruction across Levels 
The five-week online instruction facilitated target-like assessment of the appropriateness of Chinese 
expressions of gratitude by promoting their noticing of realization strategies and relevant contextual 
factors, but the statistical analysis revealed no significant difference between the lower-level and higher-
level groups in terms of the effects of instruction on learner assessment of learners. In other words, both 
groups seemed to have equally benefited from the instruction, and the effects did not vary across levels. 
The lack of varying effects of instruction in this study might be attributed to the following two reasons. 
First, this study divided participants into two groups—lower-level and higher-level—which is not a 
standard way of dividing learner language proficiency (i.e., novice, intermediate, and advanced). In 
addition, the difference between the mean of the higher-level group’s CPT scores (M = 63) and that of the 
lower-level group’s (M = 23) might not be adequate to make the effects of instruction significant in 
statistical analysis. Second, it might have something to do with the speech act under investigation in this 
study. Expressions of gratitude, involving a great number of formulaic expressions, are a relatively less 
challenging speech act compared to others (e.g., requests) in Chinese. Therefore, the proficiency level of 
learners might not interfere much in their learning of expressions of gratitude. 
It should be noted, however, that the standard deviation for the lower-level group increased substantially 
from the pre-test (SD = 7.1) to the post-test (SD = 11.3), which suggests that gains for this group varied 
quite significantly after the online instruction. We may thus conclude that unlike higher-level learners, 
lower-level learners might still not have been able to reach automaticity when they processed the noticed 
information after only five weeks of online learning. In addition, the analysis of e-journals revealed 
differences in how the two groups perceived the online instruction. Unlike the lower-level participants, 
learners in the higher-level group not only asked for more challenging instructional materials on the 
website, but also discussed the importance of overt teaching of pragmatics and the possibility of 
integrating the web-based pragmatics instruction into study abroad curriculum. This difference might be 
explained by prior study abroad experiences of higher-level learners. Most of the participants in the 
higher-level group had previously studied abroad, which provided them with rich exposure to Chinese 
expressions of gratitude. The higher-level learners might therefore have been able to easily integrate 
newly learned strategies into their ILP systems, and thus could direct more attention to deeper 
understanding and perceptions of their pragmatics learning. 
The majority of instructional ILP studies have focused their attention on examining the effects of 
instruction on learners at a single level of proficiency; that is, very few studies exploring the effects of 
instruction across levels have been conducted (Takahashi, 2010). When compared with the small number 
of studies available, the conclusions are not consistent. Rueda (2004) obtained results similar to this 
study. She provided pragmatics-focused instruction on the realization strategies of three speech acts for 
low-level and intermediate-level learners of English as foreign language. Her analysis reported on the 
overall effectiveness of the instruction on speech act performance of learners, but no differential effects of 
instruction on learners across levels. Codina-Espurz (2008), however, yielded quite different findings. In 
her study, two treatment groups that differed in their proficiency in English received the same type of 
explicit instruction on request mitigation devices. She found that only the high-proficiency learners 
benefited from the pedagogical intervention and thus concluded differential effects of the instruction on 
learners in the low-proficiency and high-proficiency groups, but because a pre-test was lacking in this 
study, the findings were rather tentative. 
It proves difficult to interpret these inconsistent findings among the three studies due to many differences 
in the research methodology, such as differential measurements of target language proficiency, varying 
Li Yang Learning to Express Gratitude in Mandarin Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 203 
lengths of the pedagogical intervention, and different instruments used to measure the effects of 
instruction. To further explore the possible influence of learner linguistic competence on their pragmatic 
development, there is a strong need to conduct more studies to investigate the effects of L2 proficiency on 
instructional effectiveness. 
Pedagogical Implications 
Participant feedback and reflections on the instructional materials provided useful insights into several 
issues in ILP instruction, such as the importance of pragmatics instruction, means of addressing different 
needs of learners across levels when teaching pragmatics, the prospects of using websites to teach 
pragmatics, and methods for integrating pragmatics instruction into curriculum. In the reflective e-
journals, learners emphasized the necessity and importance of the instruction of pragmatics from their 
own perspectives. Previous studies (e.g., Bardovi-Harlig, 2001; Bardovi-Harlig & Mahan-Taylor, 2003) 
have underscored the need to teach pragmatics for a variety of reasons, such as the insaliency of certain 
pragmatic features and the distinct differences in pragmatic performances between L1 speakers and 
learners, even those with advanced linguistic competence, but little of the discussion has captured the 
perspective of learners themselves. None of the participants in this study received systematic instruction 
on Chinese expressions of gratitude prior to taking part in this study, but they all deemed the instruction 
important, based on their own perceptions and their own learning experiences. For example, higher-level 
learners in the reflective e-journals expressed their strong desire to learn how to express gratitude 
appropriately in Chinese because their prior overuses of direct thanking expressions (e.g., xiexie, 
“thanks”) had caused misunderstandings when they communicated with Chinese friends. These findings 
provide support for direct teaching of pragmatics in classroom practice. 
The results showed that all learners, including lower-level participants, seemed to have achieved more 
target-like assessment of Chinese expressions of gratitude after the five-week instruction period. In 
addition, they reported their enhanced pragmatic awareness in the weekly reflective e-journals. These 
findings suggest that pragmatic features, and Chinese expressions of gratitude in particular, are teachable 
to low-proficiency learners, which corresponds with the results of Martínez-Flor (2008) and Tateyama, 
Kasper, Lara, Tay, & Thananart (1997). In their reflective journaling, learners also advocated for starting 
the instruction of pragmatics early. We may therefore conclude that pragmatics can be taught to learners 
at an early stage of their language learning. 
Learners at different proficiency levels received the same type of instruction in Chinese pragmatics, and 
the effects of instruction seemed not to vary across levels. This suggests that it may be applicable to 
provide the same instructional materials for learners across levels in teaching practices. However, learners 
also expressed their specific learning needs in the reflective e-journals, so the instruction should be 
tailored to meet the individual needs of learners. For example, some higher-level learners reported their 
dissatisfaction with the difficulty level of the instructional materials and asked for more challenging 
materials to be incorporated. Accordingly, instructors can focus their teaching more on helping these 
higher-level learners establish mappings between realization strategies and relevant contextual factors, 
and may design more communicative exercises for them to practice or include more culture-related 
materials to encourage students to reflect deeply on the underlying politeness principles and cultural 
values. 
Finally, all of the participants in the reflective e-journals expressed their positive views of the 
instructional materials, and discussed the usefulness of the online resources on the website and the 
benefits of having the freedom to study the materials at their own pace and on their own time. The results 
correspond with previous studies that have reported the effectiveness of websites in ILP instruction (e.g., 
Cohen, 2008; Cohen & Ishihara, 2005; Ishihara, 2007). In view of the limited time and resources in 
foreign language classrooms, we may conclude that websites hold considerable promise as a fine 
supplement or substitute for classroom instruction in terms of pragmatics teaching. In other words, web-
Li Yang Learning to Express Gratitude in Mandarin Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 204 
based instruction might be integrated as a supplementary part of a language course, or be used as a tool 
for student self-learning outside the classroom. Web-based learning outside the classroom can not only 
provide learners freedom to study pragmatics at their own pace, but also free up more class time to be 
used for other aspects of language learning. 
Learners who had study abroad experiences proposed another alternative in addition to integrating this 
online instruction into language curriculum in foreign language settings: incorporating the online 
instruction into study abroad curriculum. According to them, study abroad students may best benefit from 
the instruction because they are immersed in rich pragmatic input and are motivated to learn by urgent 
communicative needs; thus they would be strongly motivated to apply the web-based instruction 
consciously as they observe how Chinese speakers express gratitude. In short, studying abroad provides 
ample and immediate opportunities for learners to apply their knowledge to their communicative 
practices. It corresponds with the position of Shively (2010), who proposed a model for pragmatics 
instruction in study abroad settings and argued for the need to take advantage of the various resources that 
technology can offer. 
CONCLUSION 
This study found that learner assessment of Chinese expressions of gratitude became more target-like 
after receiving the web-based instruction, and their pragmatic awareness was also promoted to some 
degree. These findings suggest that the explicit consciousness-raising approach adopted by the web-based 
instruction was effective in facilitating pragmatics learning of learners, and all learners benefited from it, 
regardless of their proficiency in Chinese. 
We should, however, be cautious in interpreting the effectiveness of the instruction and proposing 
pedagogical implications because there are several limitations to this study. First, the sample size is small 
(each group in this study included only 18 participants). A larger sample size might be able to achieve 
more power in inferential statistics and thus provide more generalizable results. Second, a control group is 
lacking. Without a control group, it is difficult to attribute the gains completely to the effects of the 
instruction. Third, the reflective e-journal writing might also help promote pragmatic awareness of 
learners during the five-week instruction period, and thus might have an effect on the results, though the 
prompt questions in the e-journals were primarily used to help elicit learner opinions of the instructional 
materials and feedback on the website. In addition, the great variation was observed among learners in the 
higher-level group in the pre-test. The results show that the standard deviation for pre-test scores of 
higher-level participants was high in MAT assessment, suggesting that this was not a homogeneous 
group. To have a smaller standard deviation, we might break this group down into two groups based on 
the Chinese proficiency test scores. 
Future studies can expand the investigation from expressions of gratitude to other pragmatic features in 
Chinese. Researchers can design and develop online materials that provide explicit instruction and PCR 
activities for students to study other speech acts in Chinese, such as making requests and giving 
compliments, and pilot these web-based materials to investigate whether they benefit the pragmatic 
development of students. If such web-based instruction proves equally effective in facilitating student 
learning, it is promising to combine all these online materials to build a large-scale pragmatics website in 
Chinese. Both learners and instructors can refer to, use, select, or modify the materials and exercises on 
the website whenever they need. 
In addition, possible future research can expand the investigation from foreign language contexts to study 
abroad settings. This study provided web-based pragmatics instruction for learners who study Chinese as 
a foreign language. However, it remains unclear whether the beneficial effects of such instruction in 
foreign language settings can be transferred to learners who study Chinese as a second language. 
 
Li Yang Learning to Express Gratitude in Mandarin Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 205 
APPENDIX A. Acceptability Scale  
 
APPENDIX B. Instructional Units on the Website 
The website includes a total of 10 units (including the two review sessions). A brief introduction to these 
units is presented below. 
Unit 1: Introduction 
This unit states the primary goal of this online instruction and gives a brief introduction to expressions of 
gratitude and why it is necessary to teach Chinese expressions of gratitude to L2 learners. 
Unit 2: Direct thanking strategies 
This unit explicitly teaches participants the repertoire of direct thanking strategies in Chinese, and 
provides them with exercises and activities to practice. 
Units 3–5: Indirect thanking strategies 
The three units explicitly teach seven types of indirect thanking strategies that are commonly used in 
Chinese, and provide associated exercises and activities for participants. 
Unit 6 and Mid-Review—Combinations of thanking strategies 
The two units review all of the thanking strategies that have been taught in previous units and provide 
participants with associated exercises and activities. 
Units 7–8: Politeness in Chinese 
The two units introduce politeness principles in Chinese as well as the explicit rules regarding how to 
choose and vary thanking strategies in response to contextual factors. 
Final Review 
0 Extremely Poor/Not comprehensible  
  Failure to respond to the task, or to respond with utterances that are extremely hard to comprehend 
1 Very Poor/Not acceptable 
  Comprehensible, but a violation of social norms, utterances that may potentially offend the hearer, 
often instances of sociopragmatic failure. Very poor completion of the task 
2 Poor/Problematic 
  Errors that might cause misunderstandings, but of a less serious nature. Often instances of 
pragmalinguistic failure 
3 OK/Acceptable 
  Appropriate utterances for the specified context, but may contain some small grammatical errors 
that do not interfere seriously with the understanding of native speakers 
4 Good/Near-native 
  Grammatically accurate and pragmatically appropriate utterances, but still sound a little awkward 
compared to native speakers, e.g., its length, choice of vocabulary, or register 
5 Excellent/Native 
  Clear and appropriate utterances, close to native responses in content, syntax and lexicon, etc. 
Li Yang Learning to Express Gratitude in Mandarin Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 206 
This unit reviews the impacts of contextual factors on how to express gratitude in Chinese and provides 
exercises and activities for participants to practice. 
 
NOTES 
1. Participants were divided into the two groups mainly based on their CPT scores and prior Chinese 
learning experiences such as time spent studying abroad. It is hard to strictly equalize the scores on 
the CPT with the ACTFL proficiency levels. However, it might be possible to make a rough 
comparison: the overall proficiency of the lower-level group (CPT score range is between 13 and 30 
points) is similar to the Novice level according to the ACTFL guidelines, while that of the higher-
level group (CPT score range is between 45 and 84 points) is similar to the Intermediate level. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The author would like to thank the anonymous reviewers and LLT editors for their valuable feedback and 
insightful suggestions. My thanks also go to the students who volunteered to participate in this study.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Li Yang is an assistant professor in the Department of Modern Languages at Kansas State University. She 
holds a PhD in second language acquisition and her recent research interests are interlanguage 
pragmatics, computer-assisted language learning/teaching, and L2 writing development. 
E-mail: lyang1@k-state.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory. In G. A. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of 
learning and motivation (Vol.8, pp. 47–89). New York: Academic Press. 
Bardovi-Harlig, K. (2001). Empirical evidence of the need for instruction in pragmatics. In K. Rose & G. 
Kasper (Eds.), Pragmatics in language teaching (pp. 13–32). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Mahan-Taylor, R. (2003). Introduction to teaching pragmatics. English Teaching 
Forum, 41(3). Retrieved from http://americanenglish.state.gov/english-teaching-forum 
Belz, J. A. (2007). The role of computer mediation in the instruction and development of L2 pragmatic 
competence. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 27(1), 45–75. 
Bi, J.-W. (1996). The difference between Chinese and English in expressing gratitude. Chinese Planning, 
7(1), 38–40. 
Cheng, S. (2005). An exploratory cross-sectional study of interlanguage pragmatic development of 
expressions of gratitude by Chinese learners of English. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University 
of Iowa, Iowa City, IA. 
Codina-Espurz, V. (2008). The immediate vs. delayed effect of instruction on mitigators in relation to the 
learners’ language proficiency in English. In E. Alcón-Solar (Ed.), Learning how to request in an 
instructed language learning context (pp. 227–256). Berlin: Peter Lang. 
Li Yang Learning to Express Gratitude in Mandarin Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 207 
Cohen, A. D. (2008). Teaching and assessing L2 pragmatics: What can we expect from learners? 
Language Teaching, 41(2), 213–235. 
Cohen, A. D., & Ishihara, N. (2005) A Web-based approach to strategic learning of speech acts. 
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition 
(CARLA). Retrieved from 
http://www.carla.umn.edu/speechacts/Japanese%20Speech%20Act%20Report%20Rev.%20June05.pdf 
Cohen, A. D., & Sykes, J. M. (2006). Dancing with words: Strategies for learning pragmatics in Spanish. 
Regents of the University of Minnesota. Retrieved from 
http://www.carla.umn.edu/speechacts/sp_pragmatics/home.html 
Eisenstein, M., & Bodman, J. (1993). Expressing gratitude in American English. In G. Kasper & S. Blum-
Kulka (Eds.), Interlanguage pragmatics (pp. 64–81). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Ishihara, N. (2007). Web-based curriculum for pragmatics instruction in Japanese as a foreign language: 
An explicit awareness-raising approach. Language Awareness, 16(1), 21–40. 
Ishihara, N., & Cohen, A. D. (2010). Teaching and learning pragmatics: Where language and culture 
meet. New York: Pearson Education. 
Jeon, E. H., & Kaya, T. (2006). Effects of L2 instruction on interlanguage pragmatic development. In J. 
M. Norris & L. Ortega (Eds.), Synthesizing research on language learning and teaching (pp. 165–211). 
Amsterdam: Benjamins. 
Kasper, G., & Roever, C. (2005). Pragmatics in second language learning. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Handbook 
of research in second language teaching and learning (pp. 317–334). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Kasper, G., & Rose, K. (1999). Pragmatics and SLA. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 19(1), 81–
104. 
Kasper, G., & Rose, K. (2002). Pragmatic development in a second language. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
Li, L.-N. (2004). Study on the speech act of Chinese gratitude and its teaching discussion. (Unpublished 
master’s thesis). Jinan University, Guangzhou, China. 
Liu, C. (2007). Pragmatics in foreign language instruction: The effects of pedagogical intervention and 
technology on the development of EFL learners’ realization of request. (Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation). Texas A&M University, College Station, TX. 
Martínez-Flor, A. (2008). The effect of an inductive-deductive teaching approach to develop learners’ use 
of request modifiers in the EFL classroom. In E. Alcón (Ed.), Learning how to request in an instructed 
language learning context (pp. 191–226). Berlin: Peter Lang. 
Narita, R. (2012). The effects of pragmatic consciousness-raising activity on the development of 
pragmatic awareness and use of hearsay evidential markers for learners of Japanese as a foreign language. 
Journal of Pragmatics, 44(1), 1–29. 
Raaijmakers, J. G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1982). Search of associative memory. Psychological Review, 88(2), 
93–134. 
Rose, K. (1994). Pragmatic consciousness-raising in an EFL context. In L. F. Bouton & Y. Kachru (Eds.), 
Pragmatics and language learning monograph series (Vol. 5, pp. 52–63). Champaign, IL: University of 
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. 
Rose, K. (1997). Pragmatics in teacher education for nonnative-speaking teachers: A Consciousness-
raising approach. Language, Culture and Curriculum, 10(2), 125–138. 
 
Li Yang Learning to Express Gratitude in Mandarin Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 208 
Rose, K. (1999). Teachers and students learning about requests in Hong Kong. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Culture 
in second language teaching and learning (pp. 167–180). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Rose, K. (2005). On the effects of instruction in second language pragmatics. System, 33(3), 385–399. 
Rueda, L. (2004). Effects of pedagogical intervention on the development of pragmatic competence in 
adult learners of English as a foreign language. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of 
Arizona, Tucson, AZ. 
Safont, M. P. (2003). Instructional effects on the use of request acts modification devices by EFL 
learners. In A. Martínez-Flor, E. Uso-Juan, & A. Guerra (Eds.), Pragmatic competence and foreign 
language teaching (pp. 211–232). Castellon, Spain: Publicacions de la Universitat Jaume I. 
Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 11(2), 129–158. 
Schmidt, R. (1993). Consciousness, learning and interlanguage pragmatics. In G. Kasper & S. Blum-
Kulka (Eds.), Interlanguage pragmatics (pp. 21–42). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Shively, R. (2010). From the virtual world to the real world: A model of pragmatics instruction for study 
abroad. Foreign Language Annals, 43(1), 105–137. 
Sykes, J. M. (2005). Synchronous CMC and pragmatic development: Effects of oral and written chat. 
CALICO Journal, 22(3), 399–431. 
Sykes, J. M. (2008). A dynamic approach to social interaction: SCMC, synthetic immersive environments 
and Spanish pragmatics. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN. 
Taguchi, N., & Sykes, J. (2013). Technology in Interlanguage Pragmatics Research and Teaching. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Takahashi, S. (2010). The effect of pragmatic instruction on speech act performance. In A. Martínez-Flor 
& E. Usó-Juan (Eds.), Speech act performance: Theoretical, empirical and methodological issues (pp. 
126–142). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Tateyama, Y. (2009). Requesting in Japanese: The effect of instruction on JFL learners’ pragmatic 
competence. In N. Taguchi (Ed.), Pragmatic competence (pp. 129–166). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Tateyama, Y., Kasper, G., Lara, P. M., Tay, H.-M., & Thananart, O.-o. (1997). Explicit and implicit 
teaching of pragmatic routines. In L. Bouton (Ed.), Pragmatics and language learning (Vol. 8, pp. 163–
177). Champaign, IL: University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. 
Vellenga, H. (2008). Instructional effectiveness and interlanguage pragmatics. (Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation). Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ. 
Yang, L. (2009). A study of interlanguage development of expressing gratitude by American learners of 
Chinese. (Unpublished master’s thesis). Beijing Language and Culture University, Beijing, China. 
Yang, L. (2014). The effects of pragmatics instruction on L2 learners’ acquisition of Chinese expressions 
of gratitude: A pilot study. Journal of the Chinese Language Teachers Association, 49(1), 95–115. 
