Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2016/thorne.pdf 
June 2016, Volume 20, Number 2 
pp. 185–191 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 185 
CULTURES-OF-USE AND MORPHOLOGIES OF 
COMMUNICATIVE ACTION 
Steven L. Thorne, Portland State University and University of Groningen 
In this article I revisit the cultures-of-use conceptual framework—that technologies, as 
forms and processes comprising human culture, mediate and assume variable meanings, 
values, and conventionalized functions for different communities (Thorne, 2003). I trace 
the antecedent arc of investigation and serendipitous encounters that led to the 2003 
publication and conclude by proposing that digital environments and the human 
experience of activity form unified ecologies with agency distributed through the system. 
Keywords: Communication Theory, Social Context, Sociocultural Theory, Technology-
mediated Communication 
APA Citation: Thorne, S. L. (2016). Cultures-of-use and morphologies of communicative 
action. Language Learning & Technology, 20(2), 185–191. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june 2016/thorne.pdf 
Copyright: © Steven L. Thorne 
INTRODUCTION 
Digital communication technologies have amplified possibilities for communication in the areas of 
audience, impact, and speed while also facilitating the emergence of distinctive linguistic, multimodal, 
cultural, interactional, and cognitive practices. As initially outlined in “Artifacts and cultures-of-use in 
intercultural communication” (Thorne, 2003), these practices emerge within distinctive cultures-of-use—
that is, in the articulation between the immediate contextual aspects of the communicative event at hand 
and the historically sedimented associations, purposes, and values that accrue to a digital communication 
tool1 from its everyday use (Thorne, 2003; see also Thorne, 2006, 2009, 2015; Thorne & Black, 2007, 
2011). 
It is now an obvious point more than twenty-five years into the digital era, but it is one worth 
reemphasizing: digital communication tools are not neutral media. Rather, like all human creations, 
communication tools are cultural tools that carry interactional and relational associations, preferred uses 
(and correspondingly dispreferred uses), and expectations of genre- and register-specific communicative 
activity, all of which are learned through processes of language and tool socialization via participation in 
particular online speech communities. The broader argument, rooted in the cultural-historical tradition 
(e.g., Bakhurst, 1990; Cole, 1996; Engeström, 1987; Vygotsky, 1978; Wertsch, 1985), is that technologies 
are constitutive forms of human culture that mediate and shape cognition, communication, and material 
action. As people interact with tools across contexts and time, the tools are inscribed with variable 
meanings, values, and conventionalized functions for different communities. This observation became 
especially salient in the analysis of intercultural communication in online partnerships, where cultural and 
linguistic differences were typically presented as the source of pragmatic failures and communication 
breakdowns (Kramsch & Thorne, 2002), but these explanations turned out to be only part of the story. 
EXTENDED BACKSTORY: THE EVOLUTION OF AN IDEA 
None of the above mentioned insights were clear to me when I first began carrying out doctoral research 
in the mid-1990s. I had been dutifully reading the rapidly growing body of research on computer-
mediated communication (CMC)—a descriptor that now is somewhat anachronistic as devices and 
modalities proliferate. Early research suggested that CMC was a lean medium that was inadequate for 
many task-related needs (e.g., Daft & Lengel, 1984) or that the scant social information available in 
Steven L. Thorne Cultures-of-use and Morphologies of Communicative Action 
 
Language Learning & Technology 186 
synchronous and asynchronous CMC made it inefficient as a medium for significant interpersonal 
exchange (Dubrovsky, Kiesler, & Sethna, 1991). As quoted in my 2003 article, one of the leading 
communication researchers at the time, Joseph Walther, quipped in reference to these studies, “if it’s not 
good for tasks and not good for socializing, then just what is CMC good for and why would anyone use it 
at all?” (1994, p. 4). Of course, as many of us well knew from our use of CMC in foreign language 
instruction, levels of communicative engagement were high and students were often deeply invested in 
specifically synchronous online discussions that would often run long (we frequently had to kick students 
out of the lab to make room for the next class). As has been reported by some of the pioneers in CALL 
research, in contrast to face-to-face classroom discussion, synchronous online settings increased 
participation, students produced more total language across more conversational turns, and the language 
they used included a wider array of morphosyntactic and discourse features (e.g., Chun, 1994; Kern, 
1995). These research findings were compelling and raised an additional question: Were these findings 
caused purely by the meditational qualities of the tool or was something else also going on? 
In my own nascent research, intact classes of French language students were using synchronous chat 
within a multi-user domain object oriented (MOO) text-based virtual environment in an on-campus 
computer lab with the instructor co-present. In this setting, they were exhibiting linguistic creativity, word 
play, and at times, definitively non-academic and (bitingly) sarcastic forms of communication that 
exceeded what I was seeing in face-to-face classroom settings. In ethnographic interviews, students told 
me things like “there is less supervision, seemingly, even though the teacher might be online also” and “I 
talk more on the MOO. There’s less culpability there. I can tell jokes and don’t see their faces” (Thorne, 
2000, p. 9; see also Thorne, 1999). Further, and in direct contradiction to the utopian view prevalent at the 
time that the Internet flattens hierarchies and removes or mitigates social biases, some students were 
reporting that the online environment was less egalitarian and more judgmental than was face-to-face 
classroom discussion. This presented a conundrum without explanation in the research literature. I 
became obsessed with curiosity and a sense of impending discovery. 
During this period I was fortunate to have had frequent conversations with the social anthropologist Jean 
Lave (see Lave & Wenger, 1991). Lave found my work on the interactional features and social ontology 
of synchronous CMC environments interesting, but she urged me to develop a more robustly theorized 
account of mediation (in the Vygotskian sense). Concurrent with these conversations was the publication 
of Nardi’s outstanding 1996 book, Context and consciousness: Activity Theory and human-computer 
interaction. Kaptelinin, one of the authors in this volume, argued the following: 
Culturally developed ways of using tools shape the external activity of individuals and through 
the process of internalization influence the nature of mental processes. . . . The role of tools is not 
limited to transmission of operational aspects of human interaction with the world. . . . Tools also 
shape the goals of the people who use them. (p. 53) 
Kaptelinin (1996) continued to state that the goals of tool developers (e.g., software engineers) are 
implicit in the nature of the tools they create, but importantly, a tool’s designed functionality fuses 
together with the motives of users to form the structure of human activity at a given point and time. 
As it happens, I was hanging out with graduate students in cell biology at the time and was given an 
article that described the relationship between the genotype and phenotype of organisms. (It pays to read 
broadly!) A genotype is the basic genetic structure of an organism, while a phenotype is the observable 
characteristics of an organism resulting from the interaction of its genotype with the environment. To give 
a brief example, two Giant Sequoia trees (sequoiadendron giganteum) with identical genotypes can 
manifest dissimilar phenotypes; one seeded in rich alluvial soil can exceed 80 meters in height while the 
second, growing in less hospitable conditions, may achieve only a fraction of that size. This catalyzed an 
epiphany that provided me with the analogic mapping I had been looking for to wed together the design 
Steven L. Thorne Cultures-of-use and Morphologies of Communicative Action 
 
Language Learning & Technology 187 
elements and interactional effects of digital communication tools (genotype) with the ways that such 
artifacts are meaningfully and differentially perceived based on their histories of use by individuals within 
discourse communities (phenotype). This became the central organizing taxonomy of my dissertation 
project (Thorne, 1999), and I used this two-level genotype-phenotype framework to tease apart the 
material and social-psychological-cultural effects of tool mediation. Findings, which eventually led to the 
development of cultures-of-use in the 2003 article, were that the genotype of (specifically synchronous) 
CMC tools required users to develop communicative tactics that included an increase in personal 
addresses (to mark relevance to a desired interlocutor), the use of discourse markers to illustrate the 
continuance of a conversational thread, and the need to adapt to a turn exchange system marked by the 
non-adjacency of related posts and a correspondingly weaker overall sense of interactional coherence in 
large group synchronous CMC discussions (see also Herring, 1999). This aspect of the research was 
informed by ethnomethodological conversation analysis (e.g., Sacks, Schegloff, & Jefferson, 1984). In 
particular, I outlined the differences in the turn exchange economy between spoken and computer-
mediated multiparty discussion, positing that the missing transition relevance place (where shift of 
speaker is a possible next action in oral communication) in CMC is a likely structural factor that increases 
opportunities for contributing a conversational turn (for elaboration, see Thorne, 2000). 
The contextual phenotype analysis of instructional uses of CMC provided insight into the importance of 
language socialization processes that some of these students had undergone in exogenous (i.e., non-
educational) on-line communities. In particular, the phenotype analysis helped to explain why 
experienced CMC users felt less culpability while using decidedly non-academic discourse in online 
discussions. This was due to the fact that they had been participants in recreational online communities 
and had imported these dispositions and discourse conventions into in-class CMC discussion. One student 
described his communication style vis-à-vis his prior participation in an online community as follows:  
That’s probably why I so . . . enjoyed [French language CMC sessions], because I had done this 
before in an atmosphere that was totally relaxed. I’m just saying this now, it’s like psychoanalysis 
or something. I had done it before . . . and people were . . . a little bit rude and clever sometimes. I 
thought it was really funny, so, maybe that’s why I have that perspective and . . . take that attitude 
towards like my classmates [in CMC sessions]. (Thorne, 2000, p. 8) 
It is relevant to recall that in the mid-1990s, the Internet was still fresh to the public and many students 
did not have extensive, or sometimes any, experience participating in non-academic online communities. 
This created a viscerally perceptible divide in digital communication style and interactional competence 
that explained the surprising consensus, based on ethnographic interviews, that the online sessions were 
less egalitarian and more judgmentally fraught than were the face-to-face classroom discussions. At the 
time, this was a little recognized phenomenon. 
CULTURES-OF-USE AS AN AXIS OF POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE IN INTERCULTURAL 
COMMUNICATION 
Emerging specifically from the observation that artifacts are understood phenotypically as a function of 
their situatedness in human activity, described in the section above, the cultures-of-use of digital 
communication tools presents an additional axis of potential intercultural alignment and divergence. For 
participants in the US–France online intercultural exchanges (OIEs) that informed the first of my cultures-
of-use publications (Thorne, 2003), the choice to use e-mail was a constraining variable in the 
intercultural communication process. Not only did many of the e-mail interactions sputter along, they did 
not happen at all for some participants. This was due, in part, to the fact that e-mail was perceived by 
numerous students as a medium well suited for vertical communication across power and generational 
lines (to communicate with professors, parents, employers, and for organization communication), but one 
that was inappropriate for age-peer relationship building. In an ethnographic interview, one student, Grace, 
Steven L. Thorne Cultures-of-use and Morphologies of Communicative Action 
 
Language Learning & Technology 188 
reported that e-mail was such an unsuitable tool for age-peer interaction that it overpowered the directive 
by the instructor to continue the exchanges. Although this student liked her French partner and enjoyed 
the project generally (video conferencing was also included), she chose not to participate in the e-mail 
exchanges. Grace’s perspective was not unique—approximately half of the students interviewed (24 in 
total) expressed broadly congruent views though usually in less extreme terms. The fact that similar 
projects have shown that e-mail is suitable for age-peer interaction makes the case that different 
populations variably construct cultures-of-use associated with this tool, which resultantly collide or align 
with specific communicative contexts and interlocutor relationships. For Grace, as well as other 
participants in the study, it is entirely possible that with more explicit or constructive guidance, she might 
have been able to transform e-mail into a different cultural tool, one that would have better served her 
communicative purposes. The implication for practice is that teachers and students should critically 
evaluate mediational artifacts and their cultures-of-use as an important (and generally neglected) 
dimension of online intercultural communication (for a related argument, see Kern, 2014). In the same 
OIE project, an opposing condition developed with another student who had had only halting email 
correspondence with her French partner. In this case, the two of them decided to adopt instant messaging 
as their medium and subsequently they developed a robust set of exchanges that included frequent chat 
sessions, explicit attention to language (e.g., prepositions of location, increased pragmatic awareness of 
the tu-vous distinction), an enhanced sense of communicative efficacy, and no small amount of mutual 
infatuation. 
In follow-ups to the 2003 article, I have periodically questioned students about how they use digital 
communication tools and the accounts of heterogeneity continue. In response to a question about 
communicating with close friends online in 2006, two undergraduates in separate interviews gave 
diametrically opposing responses: The first said: “there’s more [positive] sentimentality to email than 
instant messaging someone.” The second stated the following (quite comically): 
Sometimes its hard to fill up a whole email, like if I have to respond to a really long one or 
something. My ex-girlfriend used to say – “why don’t you just send email?” I’m like, “yeah, why 
don’t I just kill myself!” 
More recently, in response to my suggestion that Facebook had become a transgenerational social media 
tool, a 19 year-old male offered the following assessment: 
Oh yes, I use Facebook and have my [Facebook] friends in two categories, a small one for my 
real friends and a very large group for everyone else, like people in their twenties, parents, 
teachers, and family. I call the big group ‘old people’ and see that they are on Facebook all the 
time. Almost none of my real friends use Facebook anymore. We’re all on Instagram. 
As a point of clarification, and as the above examples illustrate, while there is substantial evidence that 
people and communities carry the historical residua of their uses of digital communication tools across 
time and contexts, patterns of past use do not necessarily determine present and future activity. Rather, 
the cultures-of-use framework provides a lens through which to explore, and potentially to pedagogically 
address, tool socialization and its variabilities and consistencies. The interplay of participant membership 
in multiple on-line communities and the design features of digital communication tools combine to create 
a complex social-material arena where multiple understandings of appropriate and preferred activity may 
co-exist, compete, or clash. An additional point of relevance (and complexity) is that on-line activity 
interpenetrates with off-line contexts and social networks. 
IMPACT AND ONGOING CONSIDERATIONS 
At the time of this writing, “Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication” has 545 
Steven L. Thorne Cultures-of-use and Morphologies of Communicative Action 
 
Language Learning & Technology 189 
citations (as measured by Google Scholar). A better indication of impact, however, is that the greatest 
number of citations in a given year, 67, occurred in 2013, ten years after the article’s initial publication. 
The great majority of references to cultures-of-use in the research literature have correctly interpreted its 
primary emphasis: that artifacts such as digital communication tools are produced by and productive of 
culturally organized systems of activity. As I hope to have made transparent through reference to the 
many individuals and theoretical traditions that have enabled my work, cultures-of-use is a collectively 
generated idea that owes its existence to generations of empirical and theoretical investigation. 
I concluded the 2003 cultures-of-use article arguing that humans and their tools co-evolve over time. My 
current thinking strengthens this position to suggest that networks of humans and artifacts jointly 
accomplish activity. In this view, tools are “participants in, rather than merely mediators of, cognition” 
(Shaffer & Clinton, 2006, p. 297; see also Thorne & Black, 2011). Influenced by Latour (2005), who 
emphasizes processes through which the social is generated, the proposal is that digital environments and 
the human experience of activity form unified ecologies with agency distributed throughout the system. 
The possibility of distributed agency does not necessarily imply symmetry between humans and artifacts 
(see Kaptelinin & Nardi, 2006), but it does suggest that catalysts for action can shift from brains to bodies 
and to a range of physical and virtual media in the flow of activity. This position contests the 
dichotomization of artifacts and humans as distinctly independent from one another. Rather, artifacts and 
humans together create particular morphologies of action. The implication for cultures-of-use is to expand 
our thinking to include the ontological possibility that it is not only humans who act on, with, and through 
technologies, but that technologies may also be acting on, with, and through us. 
 
NOTES 
1. The terms artifact and tool are used interchangeably. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I wish to thank Trude Heift and Phil Hubbard for their temporal generosity and sustaining intellectual 
encouragement. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Steve Thorne is Associate Professor of Second Language Acquisition in the Department of World 
Languages and Literatures at Portland State University, with a secondary appointment in the Department 
of Applied Linguistics at the University of Groningen. His research utilizes cultural-historical, usage-
based, distributed, ethnomethodological, and critical approaches to language development, often with a 
focus on human interactivity in technology-culture contexts. 
E-mail: sthorne@pdx.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Bakhurst, D. (1990). Consciousness and revolution in Soviet Philosophy: From the Bolsheviks to Evald 
Ilyenkov. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
 
Steven L. Thorne Cultures-of-use and Morphologies of Communicative Action 
 
Language Learning & Technology 190 
Chun, D. (1994). Using computer networking to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence. 
System, 22(1), 17–31. 
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press. 
Daft, R., & Lengel, R. (1984). Information richness: A new approach to managerial behavior and 
organizational design. In B. M. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, 6 
(pp. 191–233). Homewood, IL: JAI Press. 
Dubrovsky, V., Kiesler, S., & Sethna, B. (1991). The equalization phenomenon: Status effects in 
computer-mediated and face-to-face decision making groups. Human Computer Interaction, 6, 119–146. 
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity-theoretical approach to developmental 
research. Helsinki, Finland: Orienta-Konsultit. 
Herring, S. C. (1999). Interactional coherence in CMC. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 
4(4). doi: 10.1111/j.1083-6101.1999.tb00106.x 
Kaptelinin, V. (1996). Computer-mediated activity: Functional organs in social and developmental 
contexts. In B. A. Nardi (Ed.), Context and consciousness: Activity theory and human-computer 
interaction (pp. 45–68). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Kaptelinin, V., & Nardi, B. (2006). Acting with technology: Activity theory and interaction design. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity and 
characteristics of language production. Modern Language Journal, 79(4), 457–476. 
Kern, R. (2014). Technology as Pharmakon: The promise and perils of the Internet for foreign language 
education. Modern Language Journal, 98(1), 340–357. 
Kramsch, C., & Thorne, S. L. (2002). Foreign language learning as global communicative practice. In D. 
Cameron & D. Block (Eds.), Globalization and language teaching (pp. 83–100). New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Nardi, B. A. (1996). Context and consciousness: Activity theory and human-computer interaction. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-
taking for conversation. Language, 50(4), 696–735. 
Shaffer, D., & Clinton, K. (2006). Toolforthoughts: Reexamining thinking in the digital age. Mind, 
Culure, and Activity, 13(4), 283–300. 
Thorne, S. L. (1999). An activity theoretical analysis of foreign language electronic discourse. 
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California. 
Thorne, S. L. (2000). Beyond bounded activity systems: Heterogeneous cultures in instructional uses of 
persistent conversation. Proceedings of the Thirty-Third Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society. doi: 10.1109/HICSS.2000.926719 
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38–67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/thorne/ 
 
Steven L. Thorne Cultures-of-use and Morphologies of Communicative Action 
 
Language Learning & Technology 191 
Thorne, S. L. (2006). Pedagogical and praxiological lessons from Internet-mediated intercultural foreign 
language education research. In J. Belz & S. L. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural foreign 
language education (pp. 2–30). Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle. 
Thorne, S. L. (2009). ‘Community’, semiotic flows, and mediated contribution to activity. Language 
Teaching, 42(1), 81–94. 
Thorne, S. L. (2015). Mediated life activity, double stimulation, and the question of agency. Learning, 
Culture, and Social Interaction, 4, 62–66. 
Thorne, S. L., & Black, R. (2007). Language and literacy development in computer-mediated contexts 
and communities. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 27, 133–160. 
Thorne, S. L., & Black, R. W. (2011). Identity and interaction in Internet-mediated contexts. In C. 
Higgins (Ed.), Identity formation in globalizing contexts (pp. 257–277). New York, NY: Mouton de 
Gruyter. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Walther, J. (1994). Anticipated ongoing interaction versus channel effects on relational communication in 
computer-mediated communication. Human Communication Research, 40, 473–501. 
Wertsch, J. V. (1985). Vygotsky and the social formation of mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
