Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/marefathassanzadeh.pdf 
October 2016, Volume 20, Number 3 
pp. 107–127 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 107 
APPLYING FORM-FOCUSED APPROACHES TO L2 VOCABULARY 
INSTRUCTION THROUGH VIDEO PODCASTS 
Fahimeh Marefat, Allameh Tabataba’i University 
Mohammad Hassanzadeh, Vali-e-Asr University 
Since its inception, form-focused instruction (FFI) has been associated with grammar, 
with only a handful of studies examining its potential for vocabulary development (e.g., 
Laufer, 2006). Meanwhile, there has been an unresolved dispute between the two 
approaches of Focus on Form (FonF) and Focus on Forms (FonFs) in terms of their degree 
of efficiency. This classroom-based study sought to identify the most efficient FFI-driven 
approach in tapping learners’ lexical as well as comprehension gains by drawing largely 
on the protocols provided in Ellis (2008) and Laufer (2005). Eighty-eight Iranian students 
in four intact classes at Allameh Tabataba’i University (two FonF, one FonFs and one 
meaning-focused) were presented with a series of teacher-designed mini-lessons. Their 
medium of exposure was video podcasts (newscasts). Students’ gains were measured by 
active immediate and delayed vocabulary and comprehension tests. A series of between-
groups multivariate analyses of variance revealed that both FonF groups outperformed the 
FonFs in terms of all three variables. This indicates that the tendency to analyze words in 
isolation, despite intensive rehearsals typical of FonFs, failed to outweigh the FonF 
conditions in which contextual associations are prioritized. The findings of the study could 
provide useful avenues for FFI-driven vocabulary learning and instruction. 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English 
Keywords: Language Teaching Methodology, Vocabulary, Technology-mediated 
Communication, Computer-assisted Language Learning 
APA Citation: Marefat, F. & Hassanzadeh, M. (2016). Applying form-focused 
approaches to L2 vocabulary instruction through podcasts. Language Learning & 
Technology, 20(3), 107–127. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/marefathassanzadeh.pdf 
Received: July 6, 2014; Accepted: July 21, 2015; Published: October 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Fahimeh Marefat & Mohammad Hassanzadeh 
INTRODUCTION 
One major criticism leveled against the strong version of Communicative Language Teaching (CLT) boils 
down to its overriding emphasis on meaning-based instruction where target language forms are by and 
large sidelined or trivialized (Ellis, 2008; Ellis, Basturkmen, & Loewen, 2001; Williams, 2005). There is 
now a strong consensus that second language (L2) instruction should also incorporate a form-focused 
component. One plausible rationale for this claim is that learners, especially beginner learners, have a 
limited capacity to process the L2 and have difficulty attending to meaning and form simultaneously. 
Therefore, they will prioritize meaning over form or vice versa when performing a communicative 
activity (VanPatten, 1990). Lightbown and Spada (2013) define form-focused instruction (FFI) as a type 
of “instruction that draws attention to the forms and structures of the language within the context of 
communicative interaction. This may be done by giving metalinguistic information, simply highlighting 
the form, or by providing corrective feedback” (p. 218). 
Long (1997) considers FFI to be an umbrella term referring to any pedagogical technique, proactive or 
reactive, implicit or explicit, that draws students’ attention to language form. He has famously 
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  108 
distinguished between focus on form (FonF) and focus on forms (FonFs) procedures claiming that the 
former involves briefly drawing students’ attention to linguistic elements in context as they arise 
incidentally in lessons whose overriding focus is on meaning or communication. Long suggests that FonF 
occurs when learners participate in interactions in which communication problems arise, leading to 
attempts to negotiate for meaning (Ellis et al., 2001). From this standpoint, the role of the learner is that of 
a language user and language is viewed as a tool for communication. We can draw learners’ attention to 
form during a communicative activity through FonF by requiring them to briefly and perhaps 
simultaneously attend to form, meaning, and use during one cognitive event (Ellis, 2008). 
FonFs, however, is characterized by teaching discrete linguistic structures in separate lessons in a 
sequence determined by syllabus writers. Students view themselves as learners of a language and the 
language as the object of study (Laufer, 2006). It builds on explicit rule provision and practice exercises 
of various types (Ellis, 2012), and is said to be theoretically rooted in skills-learning approach; that is, 
classroom L2 or foreign language learning derives from general cognitive processes and thus entails the 
learning of a skill (Sheen, 2002). It rests on the assumption that L2 language acquisition, particularly of 
adult learners resembles the acquisition of other cognitive skills. Hence rules underlying grammatical 
structures ought to be explained, and frequent opportunities should be provided for practicing these 
structures in communicative and non- communicative activities. Sheen (2003) enumerated techniques 
such as grammatical explanations, deductive presentations of the subject matter, translation, the use of the 
native language, and contrastive analysis as hallmarks of FonFs. 
A glance at second language acquisition (SLA) literature shows that there is an ongoing debate as to 
which camp (FonF or FonFs) is more beneficial. FonFs is roundly lambasted by most advocates of FonF 
as being ineffective, outmoded, synthetic, simplistic, and even Neanderthal (Laufer, 2005). Long (1997) 
opined that FonFs tends to produce boring lessons, does not match learning processes, and consequently 
impinges on learner motivation. Similarly, Ellis (2008) highlighted the growing evidence suggesting that 
FonF instruction would facilitate acquisition. In contrast, proponents of FonFs argue that when it comes 
to empirical evidence, FonF falls short of credibility. Sheen (2003), who is favorably disposed towards 
FonFs, made a strong case for the validity and superiority of this approach over FonF, calling the latter “a 
myth in the making” (p. 225). He noted that given the great difficulty of learning the grammar and 
vocabulary of a foreign language, these cannot be learned effectively as a by-product of communicative 
activity, or simply by carrying out problem-solving activities. Poole (2005) warns that the enthusiasm for 
FonF as a miracle method needs to be curbed on the grounds that such studies present a mixed picture of 
the ability to promote L2 grammatical acquisition. 
Laufer’s (2005, 2006) vocabulary-oriented account of FFI might be considered a rarity as most studies in 
this domain tend to equate form with grammatical features. In a similar vein, the study at hand seeks to do 
away from this juxtaposition and bring to the fore the FFI of lexical items. Furthermore, although the 
FonF versus FonFs debate in grammar instruction has gone on for over two decades, their application and 
extension to the lexical domain may invigorate insights into the vocabulary instructional methods. 
It can be deduced from the literature that the superiority controversy between FonF and FonFs is for the 
most part theoretically-driven. According to Sheen (2003), such advocacies can only be justified if 
extended trialing provides reliable and supportive empirical evidence. Similarly, we believe more 
classroom-based investigations are required to reap the benefits of FFI. Here, we intend to do just that by 
carrying out a series of classroom experiments in which the FonF and FonFs instructional protocols are 
initially defined, and later empirically compared in order to cast new light on their pedagogical merits in 
getting learners to recall lexical features following L2 exposure. 
Another attribute of this study that might be considered an innovation concerns learners’ medium of 
exposure. Whereas vocabulary instruction is widely researched through the platform of reading passages 
(e.g., Paribakht & Wesche, 1996; Webb, 2005), video podcasts (newscasts) were used here as the medium 
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  109 
of exposure during the instructional sessions. 
Therefore, the purpose of this comparative experiment was threefold. First, it examined whether FFI is 
essentially more efficient than meaning-focused (MF) instruction in the lexical domain. Second, it sought 
to investigate which type of FFI (FonF or FonFs) works best for the immediate and delayed recall of 
vocabulary. The final objective of the study was to measure the comprehension gains of the instructional 
conditions in order to identify the protocol that leads to the least amount of hindrance to learners’ content 
comprehension when FFI is on the agenda. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
In this section, the focus will be on studies that have sought to explore the applications of FFI to 
vocabulary instruction in one way or another. Later, FFI taxonomy, its methodological dimensions and 
the way it is operationalized in the classroom will be discussed. Finally, video podcasts which serve as the 
platform of instruction in this study will be introduced. 
Vocabulary and Form-focused Instruction 
Although a large body of FFI research is informed by grammar instruction, it is by no means confined to 
this category alone by definition. In fact, form has been predominantly used in SLA research to represent 
grammar or grammatical form; however, some scholars have rejected this reductionism. Ellis (2001, p.1) 
for instance, defined FonF as “any planned or incidental instructional activity that is intended to induce 
language learners to pay attention to linguistic form”. The term form he adds, is intended to include 
phonological, lexical, grammatical, and pragmalinguistic aspects of language (see Doughty & Williams, 
1998; Ellis et al., 2001). 
FFI has, nevertheless, not received much attention in vocabulary research to date. As a trailblazer, Laufer 
(2005) explored the relevance of FonF and FonFs approaches to L2 vocabulary learning and dismissed 
the claim that words are best acquired from input, particularly from reading or through purely MF 
instruction (e.g., DeKeyser, 1998; Krashen, 1985). In another study, Laufer (2006) empirically compared 
the two approaches in learning new L2 words. The FonF group read a text containing the target words, 
discussed it in small groups, and answered comprehension questions. Meanwhile, the FonFs group 
studied the target words as discrete items with their meanings and examples of usage. The ultimate 
assessment revealed slightly greater gains among learners in the FonFs group. Of course, in her study 
comparing text comprehension gains was not considered as a variable of analysis. 
De la Fuente (2006) explored the effects of three vocabulary lessons (one traditional and two task-based) 
on the acquisition of basic meanings, forms, and morphological aspects of Spanish words. The findings 
suggested the significance of a proactive form-focused approach to task-based L2 vocabulary learning. 
The analysis also showed that a task-based lesson with an explicit FonFs component—rather than 
without—proved more effective in promoting the acquisition of word morphological aspects. 
Acknowledging the merits of FonF approach, Rott, Williams, and Cameron (2002) observed the 
effectiveness of various types of instructional interventions in lexical acquisition. As they concluded, the 
goal of intervention was to improve both the extent and speed of lexical acquisition as well as reading 
comprehension. Yet, they added the caution that instructional interventions are often an effort to draw 
learner attention briefly away from the primary task of reading and toward the form and meaning of the 
new words. This drawing attention to form would potentially decrease the cognitive resources needed for 
text comprehension or, at the very least, briefly interrupt the reading process. 
It is our contention that a crucial issue in FFI-driven vocabulary teaching is to design the instructional 
intervention in a way that would lead to optimal word acquisition while causing minimum or no 
distraction from text comprehension on the part of the learners. Highlighting the significance of 
measuring comprehension in FonF research, Williams (2005) has argued that many studies of this type 
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  110 
report only its effect on the noticing or use of form, without controlling for an effect on comprehension, 
which would make it difficult to determine the overall impact of FonF. 
FFI Subcategories and Methodological Procedures 
While FonF procedures are associated with several subcategories and pedagogical options in SLA 
literature, FonFs in contrast, has remained relatively unexpanded. Perhaps the only available bifurcation 
has been dubbed by Laufer (2005) as pure and task-related FonFs. Based on her analysis, in vocabulary 
instruction, task-related FonFs is characterized by the following parameters: 
 Words are the object of learning. However, they are related to, though not embedded in, a 
meaning-based task which is central in a lesson. An example of such an activity is an exercise 
which requires learners to match new words from a text with their synonyms, and which is 
performed after a reading comprehension task. 
 Learners are presented with bilingual word lists. Further explanations or any additional 
information requested by the learners about the target words are provided by the teacher in the 
L2. 
 Rich instruction is encouraged. The term, according to Nation (as cited in Laufer, 2005), entails 
focusing on a word as the object of learning and giving elaborate attention to it: going beyond the 
immediate demands of a particular context of occurrence. It is also assumed that rich instruction 
compensates for lack of massive exposure and use which occur in L1, and speeds up the 
incremental process of expanding and consolidating word knowledge. Exercises that require 
learners to distinguish between words like historic and historical, lunch and launch, economic and 
economical, and so forth are exercises in FonFs and can be considered as part of rich instruction. 
 Effective contrastive analysis is performed. Problematic sets or pairs of words that are lexicalized 
differently in the two languages have to be periodically practiced. Such explanation and practice 
are not parts of a communicative task. 
 Fluency can be developed through practicing words in isolation or in sentences which are 
communicatively unrelated. 
Pure FonFs activities on the other hand, require learners to work with isolated words that are not related 
to any meaning-based task whatsoever. An example is a crossword puzzle exercise that serves to rehearse 
already familiar words. 
With regard to classroom practices and pedagogic considerations, FonF has turned out to have a number 
of subcategories, although there is no broad consensus on how to implement these instructional 
procedures in classroom. Inevitably, several questions still remain unresolved including the one 
highlighted by Ellis (e.g., 2001, 2008): Do some types of FFI work better than others? 
Despite the existence of a number of experimental studies surrounding FFI, scant attention has been paid 
to creating pedagogical frameworks for it. An exception to that was accomplished by Ellis (2008) where 
he presented his own four macro-options as: 
1. Input-based options 
2. Output-based (production) options 
3. Explicit options 
4. Corrective feedback options 
Out of these four frameworks, two highly credible FonF manifestations that have received considerable 
attention in SLA research (e.g., Izumi, 2002) are enhanced input and production conditions. However, 
this widespread reference largely belongs to the realm of grammar and as far as vocabulary is concerned, 
this might be considered a relatively fresh territory. That said, this study focuses on the following two 
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  111 
pedagogical protocols: 
a) Input enhancement is a pedagogical model initially used by Sharwood Smith (1993) to refer to the 
deliberate manipulation of the input learners are exposed to in order to promote learning and increase 
learner awareness. It is carried out by manipulating aspects of the input so that those desired teacher-
induced features become salient to the learners. Techniques such as typographical enhancement (i.e., 
color coding, boldfacing, underlining, capitalizing, or highlighting selected input forms, see Izumi, 2002), 
use of gestures, special stress, and intonation and nonlinguistic signals are among the actions that can 
accentuate language input so that learners are induced to pay attention to them. 
b) Output-based FonF refers to instruction directed at enabling or inducing learners to produce utterances 
containing the target structure. In this approach, the learner’s otherwise elusive attention is directed 
towards selected aspects in the input through production processes. According to Ellis (2008), most 
production practice is aimed at enabling learners to produce the correct target language (TL) forms by 
avoiding errors. Swain and Lapkin (2001) underscored that if learners are left to their own devices when 
solving immediate production difficulties, they may engage in various thought processes that can 
consolidate existing knowledge or perhaps generate some new knowledge on the basis of their current 
knowledge. The act of producing language is believed to increase the likelihood of learners becoming 
sensitive to what they can and cannot say in the TL, which eventually makes learners reassess their 
interlanguage capabilities. Having observed the merits of output-provoking classroom activities, Izumi 
and Bigelow (2000) concluded that a text-reconstruction task significantly promotes noticing the gap 
when a specific form is targeted since these tasks maximize the similarities between the learner’s 
production and the TL model. However, they warn that the learners’ processing capacity should not be 
overloaded during output and input processing in order to allow for the adequate allocation of attentional 
resources to forms. In particular, collaborative output tasks (Swain & Lapkin, 2001), which require 
learners to produce the TL cooperatively (e.g., dictogloss), have been observed to improve learner 
accuracy in using the target form. Swain and Lapkin argue that through talk in collaborative tasks in 
which learners work in pairs or small groups, they notice linguistic problems and through their dialogue 
in those tasks, the learners engage in making meaning clearer when debating language forms. 
Video Podcasts 
“Podcasts are digital audio and visual recordings that can be created and downloaded, that is, moved from 
the Internet to an individual computer” (Larsen-Freeman & Anderson, 2011, p. 213). Nowadays many 
broadcast media websites, for instance, post their recorded newscasts for online users. Overall, podcasts 
encompass a whole range of topics from news stories and lectures to talk shows and many other themes. 
Interestingly, these clips could be used and shared for pedagogical purposes as well. The tendency to use 
this apparatus is gradually picking up steam as its potential benefits are only beginning to unfold for 
several SLA-related themes (see Ducate & Lomicka, 2009; Lomicka & Lord, 2011; Rosell-Aguilar, 2013; 
Young, 2007). Perhaps along with the advancement of technology, video podcasts could be a worthwhile 
candidate to replace or complement paper-based texts or textual materials currently at the core of 
researchers’ and L2 teachers’ choices (e.g., Nation, 2013; Paribakht & Wesche, 1996). 
Research Questions 
The overall aim of this study was to draw a comparison between four methodological approaches (three 
form-focused and one meaning-focused) using newscasts in order to measure EFL learners’ vocabulary 
development as well as their concurrent comprehension gains. These four approaches are: 
 FonF 1 (input-enhancement) 
 FonF 2 (production) 
 FonFs (task-related) 
 MF (control) 
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  112 
In light of the four protocols provided above and the three dependent variables of (a) immediate 
vocabulary recall, (b) delayed vocabulary recall, and (c) text comprehension, the following research 
questions were proposed: 
1. Which instructional approach (FonF 1, FonF 2, or FonFs) will lead to the optimum result in terms 
of immediate active vocabulary recall? 
2. Which instructional approach will lead to the optimum result in terms of vocabulary retention 
(delayed active recall)? 
3. Which instructional approach will provide the least amount of distraction from text 
comprehension? 
METHOD 
In this section, we will focus on the methodological aspects of this quantitative study and the details of 
how it was operationalized. To address the research questions, a quasi-experimental design was used 
drawing on the models and guidelines presented in Ellis (2008) and Laufer (2005, 2006). 
Participants 
The sample consisted of 88 male and female Iranian EFL undergraduates aged between 19 and 22 at 
Allameh Tabataba’i University where students above the intermediate level of proficiency are essentially 
in the majority. Nevertheless, a paper-based TOEFL test was administered for more accurate grading, and 
in order to encompass an adequate subject pool, all those scoring within one standard deviation above and 
below the mean in four intact classes were initially nominated for the study (M = 541, SD = 18.32). 
Further lexical knowledge screening was also carried out via a Vocabulary Levels Test. The 5000-word 
level test (Nation, 2001) was administered whereby, in a 30-item test, all those scoring above 24 qualified 
(one point was allocated to each item). High proficiency subjects were selected to be able to cope with the 
highly sophisticated language of the newscasts. Eventually, two FonF (input enhancement, n = 13 and 
production, n = 21), one FonFs (task-related, n = 28), and one MF (control, n = 26) groups qualified in 
the tests to go through distinct treatment sessions over a span of about one month. The learners were all 
students of English language and literature in four intact classes. By courtesy of their respective 
professors who dismissed the classes a few minutes early for the sake of our experiment, the teacher (one 
of the authors of this paper) managed to implement the intended instructional protocols. The learners too, 
fully cooperated, given that the novelty of experiencing newscasts spurred them to stay on for some extra 
minutes beyond their class timeline. 
Design 
Unlike conventional experiments where the language input normally comprises the reading text or written 
input, this study enjoyed an audiovisual medium; video podcasts in the form of news episodes adopted 
from the American program NBC Nightly News were used with the aid of a classroom video projector and 
a set of speakers connected to the teacher’s laptop computer. The episodes had been carefully viewed by 
the instructor before being played for the learners and those with potentially more difficult vocabulary 
items were opted (for the contents of a sample episode, see Appendix A). Those low frequency 
vocabulary items unlikely to be familiar to the subjects were then extracted and administered through a 
pilot test to 20 students of similar English proficiency who had not been part of the experiment. They 
were then requested to put a checkmark against the words whose meanings were known to them. The 20 
items with the fewest checks were designated for classroom practice across all the groups. Of the 20 
words, five which were totally unchecked by all pilot test-takers became the final target words for our 
experiment, appearing on the post-test at the end of each session. Similar word screening was carried out 
three times to come up with the required vocabulary items for the three sessions across all four groups 
(out of a total of 60 words for classroom practice, 15 target words were ultimately chosen for the post-
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  113 
tests). Overall, 12 sessions of treatment went into the current work. Each treatment session lasted for the 
better part of three quarters of an hour. 
Instruments 
Since this study intended to gauge learners’ immediate and delayed active recall of words plus their 
ability to comprehend the text in which those new words appeared, six five-point tests (three vocabulary 
and three comprehension) were designed across the four treatment conditions who underwent a total of 
three independent treatment sessions that included teacher-designed mini-lessons. The classes met once a 
week each and all four groups went through different classroom instruction but identical vocabulary and 
comprehension post-tests (a total of three newscast episodes, 15 vocabulary test items, and 15 
comprehension test items). At the end of each session, one immediate vocabulary recall together with a 
comprehension check quiz, designed by the teacher, were given to the students followed by a delayed 
vocabulary post-test, administered a week later. The comprehension check questions consisted of true-
false items based on the newscast content (for a sample, see Appendix B). Regarding the construction of 
test items, since the experiment entailed achievement tests of active lexical knowledge, a series of five-
item active recall vocabulary tests (for a sample, see Appendix C) were supplied by the teacher based on 
tests by Laufer, Elder, Hill, and Congdon (2004). Reliability of the instruments was checked using mean 
inter-item correlations suggested by Pallant (2013) for tests with fewer than 10 items. The means for both 
comprehension and vocabulary tests were well above the suggested criteria (.20 to .40) by Briggs and 
Cheek (1986). All the inter-item correlations were either .60 or .70. The only exception was the mean for 
comprehension test 1, which was .50. We employed expert judgment to ensure the validity of the 
comprehension and vocabulary tests. All the four judges were lecturers at the same university, where the 
data were collected, for at least five years. 
As outlined in Nation and Chung (2009), active recall of vocabulary is measured by supplying a form for 
a given meaning or definition; thus the first letter of the intended word is given to prevent the learners 
from supplying non-target words as in the following example:  
An improvement in relations between two countries: t_______ (thaw) 
With respect to scoring, each correct answer received one point, a wrong or no response received zero, 
and half a point was allocated to a misspelled or approximate response. In order to ensure their accuracy 
and authenticity, the stem sentences in all tasks were obtained from exemplars in the Longman Dictionary 
of Contemporary English (2009). 
Procedure 
The two FonF groups (input enhancement and production), one FonFs group (task-related), and one MF 
(control) group were supplied with the following instructional procedures for three weeks running: 
Group 1 
Input-enhancement FonF: During each of the three treatment sessions, 20 vocabulary items were 
presented in a list in which the words (printed in boldface) along with example sentences were reviewed 
by the learners (see Appendix D for a sample lesson). The teacher made every attempt to accentuate the 
words in a meaning-oriented ambience. Students were allowed to use their dictionaries (English-English) 
and ask further questions regarding the uses of the new words. English was the dominant language used 
by the teacher and the learners throughout the period. Overall, words were treated as tools for 
communication rather than object of study. Upon examining the lexical items, the newscast was played 
twice for two reasons: contextualizing and focusing on the reviewed vocabulary as well as consolidating 
their comprehension. Meanwhile, students were told to simultaneously take notice of the words in 
question and attend to the subject-matter of the news stories. As another measure of input enhancement, 
upon encountering the target words during the second run, the video was briefly paused by the teacher in 
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  114 
order to induce further consciousness-raising. After the treatment, all learners were unexpectedly tested 
both immediately and one week later on the active recall of the target words. The immediate test was 
preceded by a true-false comprehension test. 
Group 2 
Output-based FonF: Complying with FonF instructions, the learners in this group were provided with the 
vocabulary items in a list along with some example sentences (same examples as in Group 1). They had 
to look words up in their dictionaries and consult their meanings in pairs. In this group, students were 
required to carry out a vocabulary reconstruction task (Izumi, 2002) whereby during the screening of the 
newscast (two times), they were asked to pay close attention to its content and make quick notes of all the 
sentences that contained the target vocabulary items. This was done through collaboration. It was 
emphasized that precise wordings were not required and all they had to do was to pick up a good 
approximation of the target sentences within their comprehension means. Once the broadcast was over, 
the students were given a short time to check their answers in pairs. In the meantime, they provided one 
another with corrective feedback as a result of peer consultation. Then, the teacher checked the correct 
answers with students by randomly asking them to read out their sentences. In fact, the sentences that 
were originally used in the clip were reiterated by individuals in the class. This way, they were pushed to 
correctly reproduce the intended TL forms. Later, the two post-tests (comprehension followed by 
immediate vocabulary recall) were administered accordingly, with the delayed vocabulary post-test 
coming a week later. 
Group 3 
Task-related FonFs: A sustained effort was made on the part of the teacher in this group to comply with 
FonFs requirements (see Laufer, 2005) and to segregate vocabulary instruction from a context-embedded 
setting. The target items were presented to the students in a word-matching task where they had to match 
the 20 target words of each session with their English synonyms or definitions (see Appendix E for a 
sample). Students felt free to ask about the L1 (Farsi) equivalents of words and the teacher supplied any 
additional explanation they needed, including contrastive analysis of the words along L1 and L2. 
Sometimes other parts of speech regarding the target words were discussed; for instance, convict (verb), 
conviction (noun), convict (noun). Problematic words that have no straightforward L1 equivalent (e.g., 
déjà vu) were also explicitly defined and elaborated by the teacher. All examples appeared in isolation 
without much communicative relevance. Overall, words were treated as the object of learning all along. 
Following an essential FonFs (task-related) principle, which postulates that words should be related to, 
though not embedded in, a meaning-based task, the newscast was shown twice similar to other conditions. 
However, the teacher proceeded with caution as not to lay too much emphasis on the uses of the words in 
their meaningful contexts, but lead students to infer the meanings from context. Lastly, the post-tests were 
handed out. 
Group 4 
MF: Finally, in the fourth condition which also served as the control group, students were provided with 
no particular instruction. Since no attention to form was permissible, learners were asked to fully 
concentrate on the content of the newscast clip for both times each session. Some students did not feel at 
ease in the face of what they were going to watch and what they had to do. But the teacher did his utmost 
to relieve their concerns by asking them to focus on the comprehension questions and to look out for the 
gist of the stories during its broadcast. The teacher made no mention of the target vocabulary items 
throughout the period. The clip was played twice before the learners took the respective comprehension 
and vocabulary post-tests. 
 
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  115 
RESULTS 
Primarily, the sum total of the learners’ scores on the three immediate vocabulary tests were averaged to 
come up with a single representative score. This process was also done for the delayed vocabulary and the 
comprehension tests separately. 
Table 1. Levene's Test for Equality of Variances 
Dependent Variable F df1 df2 p 
Word recall 1.911 3 84 .119 
Word retention 1.826 3 84 .140 
Comprehension 1.776 3 84 .158 
Table 1 indicates no significant difference among the group variances in terms of word recall 
(immediate), word retention (delayed recall) and text comprehension, and consequently the assumptions 
regarding the equality of variances have been met (p > 0.05). 
Table 2. Tests of Between-subjects Effects 
Source Dependent Variable F p Partial η2 
Method Word recall 184.74 .000 .868 
 Word retention 39.84 .000 .587 
 Comprehension 6.96 .000 .199 
The results depicted in Table 2 demonstrate that at a 95% confidence interval, all three dependent 
variables of word recall, word retention and text comprehension were significantly affected by the 
instructional procedures in general. Thus, the group means must have been significantly different in at 
least two of the methods. The effect size indices indicate that in general, the instructional procedures had 
an 86.8% impact on the active recall of the words and a 58.7% impact on their delayed production. 
Meanwhile, they have had a minimum effect of 19.9% on learners’ comprehension as a whole. 
Table 3. Descriptive Statistics for Immediate Recall 
Method Mean SD N 
Input-based FonF 4.63 0.54 13 
Output-based FonF 4.71 0.46 21 
Task-related FonFs 3.96 0.89 28 
MF (control) 0.77 0.57 26 
Total   88 
Considering the first research question, Table 3 displays the descriptive statistics on how different 
instructional approaches affected our subjects’ immediate recall of the vocabulary items. It should be 
noted that the values under the Mean column on all tables (immediate recall, delayed recall, and 
comprehension) reflect the learners' obtained test scores ranging from 0 (minimum) to 5 (maximum) 
based on the number of questions answered correctly. 
The data were then submitted to a Multivariate Analysis of Variance (MANOVA) to test for differences 
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  116 
in the four instructional conditions. The MANOVA revealed significant differences between the three 
form-focused approaches and the control group, F(3, 84) = 184.74, p < .001. 
Table 4. Subsets for Immediate Recall 
Method N 
Subset 
1 2 3 
MF (control) 26 0.77   
Task-related FonFs 28  3.96  
Input-based FonF 13   4.63 
Output-based FonF 21   4.71 
p  1.00 1.00 0.98 
The ensuing Tukey tests (see Table 4) used for multiple comparisons of our instructional procedures 
found that, for one thing, learners in the FonFs (task-related) and FonF (output-based & input-based) 
conditions displayed significantly greater gains than the MF group in terms of their active recall of 
vocabulary. For another, it can be seen that the two FonF groups have consistently and significantly 
outdone their counterparts in the FonFs group. 
Table 5. Descriptive Statistics for Delayed Recall 
Method Mean SD N 
Input-based FonF 2.31 1.13 13 
Output-based FonF 3.87 1.18 21 
Task-related FonFs 1.32 1.44 28 
MF (control) 0.42 0.48 26 
Total   88 
Table 6. Subsets for Retention (Delayed Recall) 
Method N 
Subset 
1 2 3 
MF (control) 26 0.42   
Task-related FonFs 28 1.32   
Input-based FonF 13  2.31  
Output-based FonF 21   3.87 
p  0.06 1.00 1.00 
The mean and standard deviation values of the second research question, concerning the delayed recall, 
are presented in Table 5. The highest mean scores here again belong to the FonF groups (production = 
3.87, input-based = 2.31). The MANOVA run at this stage also found statistical differences between our 
instructional groups, F(3, 84) = 39.84, p < .001. Tukey post-hoc tests revealed no significant difference 
between the FonFs and the MF (control) groups. Since the control group went through no particular 
instruction during the treatment, it can be deduced that task-related FonFs is less effective in tapping 
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  117 
learners’ long-term recall of vocabulary. There is also a difference between the two leading FonF 
conditions whereby the production group has outstripped the input enhancement group by a significant 
margin (see Table 6). 
Table 7. Descriptive Statistics for Text Comprehension 
Method Mean SD N 
Input-based FonF 4.33 0.61 13 
Output-based FonF 4.38 0.57 21 
Task-related FonFs 3.45 0.65 28 
MF (control) 3.86 1.09 26 
Total   88 
Table 8. Subsets for Text Comprehension 
Method N 
Subset 
1 2 
MF (control) 26 0.42  
Task-related FonFs 28 1.32  
Input-based FonF 13  2.31 
Output-based FonF 21   
p  0.06 1.00 
Last but not least, it is time to address the third question regarding the efficacies of the different 
instructional protocols on learners’ comprehension (see Table 7 for descriptive statistics). The MANOVA 
run at this stage indicated no significant difference between the three (2 FonFs and the FonF) groups and 
the control group, F(3, 84) = 6.96, p < .001. Therefore, it can be stated that none of the three methods had 
a significant effect on learners’ comprehension of the newscast content. However, the post-hoc tests 
(Table 8) showed that the only observable difference lies between the FonFs condition and the other FonF 
conditions whereby input-based and output-based FonF groups have outdone the task-related FonFs 
group. Figure 1 illustrates the four treatment conditions’ standings. 
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  118 
 
Figure 1. Comparative Results are shown for Immediate Recall, Delayed Recall (of vocabulary), and Text 
Comprehension across the four conditions. 
DISCUSSION 
This study aimed at finding out what kind of formal instruction of lexical items would work best, while at 
the same time examining how FFI protocols would affect learners’ comprehension. A quick overview of 
the findings indicates that the two FonF protocols have displayed higher gains. Regarding the immediate 
test of the target words, both FonFs and FonF approaches managed to enable students to recall the 
vocabulary items far better than their MF counterpart. It can be said that mere exposure to L2 without an 
FFI component, as seen in the MF group, would not lead to a favorable lexical development. This 
happens because learners are mainly engaged in deciphering the storyline in the text rather than bothering 
to notice the unfamiliar items of vocabulary. Even if they do notice, it is not always easy to surmise or 
process what the new words mean given the huge and incessant influx of input data. This seems to be in 
line with previous findings in the literature on comparing FFI and non-FFI tasks (Ellis & He, 1999; 
Laufer, 2001, 2003). 
The highest gains addressed by our first research question, namely on the immediate word recall, went to 
the production and enhanced-input FonF protocols hailed by Ellis (2012, p. 284) as “performance-based 
instruction”. In the output-based group, learners had to collaboratively reconstruct the sentences that 
encompassed or contextualized the target words in the input. This bears testimony to the efficiency of 
reconstruction tasks that help promote noticing the gap when a specific form is targeted (also see Izumi, 
2002). Such tasks maximize the similarities between the learner’s production and the TL model. It is also 
advised that for input to promote noticing and learning of a specific form, relevant task characteristics 
need to be introduced—this is just what was done in our experiment. Recent studies in L2 pedagogy 
encourage the use of tasks which require learners to produce output collaboratively. Swain (1995) argues 
that it is possible to design tasks that urge learners to produce language and then reflect upon its form. If 
the task is devised in a way to make learners talk about the language they are producing, their talk may 
serve their awareness of language form. 
Moreover, input-based instruction or more precisely, the input-enhancement approach, was also found to 
promote noticing and aid acquisition. According to Ellis (2012), if input-based instruction makes the 
meaning of a target structure clear, it is as effective as explicit instruction and in some cases even more 
effective. It is sometimes the case that learners do not necessarily have to produce a grammatical structure 
Input-based
FonF
Output-based
FonF
Task-related
FonFs
Meaning-
focused (control)
Immediate recall 4.63 4.71 3.96 0.77
Retention 2.31 3.87 1.32 0.42
Comprehension 4.33 4.38 3.45 3.87
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
4.00
4.50
5.00
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  119 
in order to acquire it. Thus, input-based instruction may hold an advantage where the aim is to teach new 
linguistic features. 
The empirical findings also provide further support for the FonF protocol over FonFs. It was shown that 
both FonF conditions (M = 4.71 for the output group and 4.63 for the input group) significantly produced 
better gains than the FonFs group (M = 3.96) with regard to immediate use of the words. It may be the 
case that in FonFs, language is manipulated at the sentence level rather than the discourse level. In the 
latter case, meanings are taken from referents in both preceding and following sentences and not from 
individual sentences in isolation. The heavy emphasis on contrastive analysis and discrete context-free 
analysis of vocabulary seemed unable to measure up to FonF activities that typically extend past the level 
of isolated sentences and which utilize the meaningful context to generate learning. 
As Ellis (2012) emphasizes the inclusion of delayed post-tests as the building block of ensuring the 
external validity of an FFI study, the second research question sought to measure the durability of the FFI 
treatment types. Interestingly, the same scenario also worked much the same for the delayed recollection 
of words, dealing a further blow to the FonFs perspective. This time around, FonFs proved 
significantly—and perhaps surprisingly—ineffective in augmenting the retention of words following a 
week’s time of practice (M = 1.32). It seems that FonF procedures with all their meaning and context-
oriented attributes have managed to induce a more elaborate processing (M = 3.87 for the output group 
and M = 2.31 for the input group). The output condition excelled again substantiating generative models’ 
claim that learning and retention are improved when learners use, reformulate, or elaborate the new 
information. Creating opportunities for learners to plan production apparently allowed them to 
spontaneously focus on form and increase accuracy. 
All in all, comparing the productive FonF task with input-based FonF, it could be argued that the benefits 
of the former seem to outweigh those of the latter, particularly in terms of the delayed recall of the new 
words. Literature also suggests that various productive tasks are largely deemed to be more effective than 
comprehension tasks (Ellis & He, 1999; Keating, 2008; Laufer, 2003; Webb, 2005). 
One compelling explanation for the success of FonF over FonFs could be found in the library metaphor 
used by Sharwood Smith (1993). He differentiated between the two concepts of knowledge and control by 
arguing that one may know a library very well: say, for instance how many floors it has, where each 
section (field of study) is located, where the periodicals are, and so on. However, control has to do with 
the ability to use knowledge to perform a whole range of specific tasks such as efficiently borrowing two 
fiction books or a Victorian-era novel from the library. Therefore, knowing the makeup of a library is one 
thing, and using it swiftly and efficiently is another. The same argument, he maintains, holds true for the 
mental language system. Knowing a word or structure is different from knowing how to produce or 
understand it effectively. We believe this metaphor could by and large be extended to account for the 
FonF and FonFs controversy. In FonFs one might know a given word very well due to a vast array of 
activities from contrastive analysis to rich instruction and perhaps scrutinizing the etymology of that 
word, but still fall short of being able to use it in the right place and at the right time. 
The third absolutely pivotal research question, though largely overlooked in many vocabulary studies, 
concerned the comprehension issue. Comparing the mean scores in the three FFI groups with the control 
(MF) group revealed that no remarkable impediments were created by these approaches, thus raising 
hopes that learners can maintain their concentration on text comprehension while being in absolute 
awareness and attending to new items of vocabulary. Although mean differences turned out 
inconsequential among the four conditions (M = 4.38 for the output group, 4.33 for the input group, 3.45 
for the FonFs group, and 3.87 for the MF group), a significant difference was observed between the FonF 
groups and the FonFs group which happened to gain the lowest mean scores by a narrow margin from the 
control group. This provides further support for the claim that lexical FonFs, despite all the merits 
associated hitherto with it in L2 research, tends to take place at the expense of undercutting learners’ 
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  120 
comprehension of the text content to a limited extent. 
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS 
One reason we opted for podcast-driven procedures for vocabulary instruction is the possibility of 
creating massive attention-engaging means of exposure to lexical items in a meaningful context where the 
learner can identify with the characters or events in the TL. This referential meaning is absent in FonFs 
procedure where the glue between the word and its meaning seems more likely to come off over time. 
Poor retention gains by the FonFs group in this study help testify to this claim. It is worthy of note that in 
the EFL environment, video podcasts can be doubly beneficial, since in some countries learners usually 
have little, if any, access to authentic L2 resources in order to see for themselves how it is naturally 
spoken by native speakers. Capitalizing on these handy resources can arguably open up new avenues for 
foreign language classrooms. 
Even though readings into how FFI must be implemented in the classroom vary across scholars, one thing 
is for certain: More classroom research is required to streamline FFI processes and put them into action. A 
crucial task teachers need to consider is the significance of selecting podcasts that are of general interest 
to the learners and which are germane to their goals and motives. 
The outcome of the study builds up more support for how FFI could apply to vocabulary instruction in the 
EFL setting. The time is ripe for FFI studies to have a major departure from grammar instruction to other 
skills including vocabulary, pronunciation, interlanguage pragmatics and so forth. It should be highlighted 
that generalizations are ill-advised. After all, FFI is an intricate practice and to operationalize that, various 
studies have gone through various instructional procedures. Nevertheless, probing FFI applications to 
vocabulary instruction is still in its infancy. Even prominent scholars such as Ellis (e.g., 2012) have 
sufficed to mention vocabulary in FFI only in passing. Therefore, there is plenty of room for innovative 
research to be done.  
We could learn from the results that student gains from comprehension activities could well be 
supplemented through timely presentation of lexical items that are aligned with FonF protocols. L2 
teachers need to be aware that decontextualized discrete practice of vocabulary espoused by FonFs, in 
spite of its short-term benefits happens to desensitize learners to the contextual clues which are otherwise 
a huge asset in making words remain in their memories. The results also indicate that the long-term merits 
of FonFs are far less considerable than FonF. This should not escape the attention of teachers and course 
book developers. 
LIMITATIONS AND SUGGESTIONS 
A major setback which impacted the arrangements of the study was the issue of time. Since time was 
borrowed from a number of university instructors to carry out the experiment in their classes, there was an 
urge to economize on task design and test construction. It would have definitely been wiser to increase the 
number of test items or add more varied tasks, but there were strict time constraints. Furthermore, to 
maintain the balance, a pure FonFs framework, as explained in Laufer (2005) had been put on the agenda 
for the experiment. However, since this approach to vocabulary instruction is essentially one of 
decontextualized, no video podcasts would have been permissible on the syllabus and consequently the 
subjects could not be assessed on their comprehension gains; thus it was excluded. 
Additionally, it cannot be fully guaranteed that the 15 target words were totally unfamiliar to each and 
every participant of the study since it had been piloted across a different pool. But considering their low 
frequency and the overall feedback received by the researcher from the participants during each session, 
an overwhelming majority found the words highly difficult or elusive. In any case, such measures 
sometimes seem inevitable in vocabulary research (also see Laufer, 2006). 
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  121 
Another possibly less tenable part of the study concerns the issue of power. While the output-based FonF, 
the FonFs, and the MF groups enjoyed the participation of more than 20 students each, the input-
enhancement condition contained a smaller sample size of 13. Therefore, in the interest of addressing this 
issue, replication studies ought to be conducted to test the generalizability of the findings. 
Even though there are a number of frameworks specifying the various methodological options involved in 
FFI, the room for maneuver is wide open. Our suggestion is that more innovative protocols that help 
facilitate the simultaneous attention to form and meaning need to be devised. As recommended by Ellis 
(2008), such methodological frameworks are valuable because they provide a basis for describing the 
types of FFI available to teachers and enable SLA researchers to systematically investigate the effects of 
specific options on L2 acquisition. 
It must be borne in mind that in the final analysis, FFI is not a substitute, but a complement, to MF 
instruction and that FonF and FonFs instructional approaches should complement rather than exclude one 
another. Without a doubt, similar and dissimilar trialing of FFI needs to be designed and executed through 
more innovative means. 
 
APPENDIX A. NBC Nightly News Transcript 
April 19, 2009  
Leads: NBC Nightly News  
LESTER HOLT, anchor:  
Back home, but first, answering questions about that infamous handshake.  
And what could be a new wedge between the US and Iran--the American journalist jailed for spying.  
President BARACK OBAMA: Obviously, I am gravely concerned with her safety and well-being.  
HOLT: Behind bars. Tonight we'll talk with her father in Iran about how Roxana Saberi is holding up.  
SEA CHANGE. A big threat to the world's fish. What's being done to reel it in?  
And, on the rocks. Are diamonds still a girl's best friend?  
Announcer: From NBC News world headquarters in New York, this is NBC NIGHTLY NEWS with 
Lester Holt.  
HOLT: Good evening.  
Newscast: Obama answers criticisms, questions after visit to Latin America LESTER HOLT, anchor:  
President Obama arrived back in this country just a short while ago from Trinidad, marking the end of his 
second trip abroad in less than a month. But unlike his largely well-received swing through European 
capitals a few weeks ago, this gathering of mostly Latin American leaders proved to be a much tougher 
crowd for the new president, with disagreements over Cuba and those curious exchanges with an 
outspoken American foe stealing the headlines. Before boarding Air Force One for the trip home, Mr. 
Obama faced questions about all of that, as well as another potential diplomatic flashpoint with Iran. Our 
chief White House correspondent Chuck Todd reports.  
CHUCK TODD reporting:  
The president arrived back home tonight from a four-day trip focused on trying to improve America's 
relationship with Latin America and the Caribbean. At a closing press conference here today, the 
president addressed the two issues which dominated the summit: Hugo Chavez and Cuba, making light of 
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  122 
the Venezuelan president's surprise gift.  
President BARACK OBAMA: You know, I think it's just that President Chavez is better at positioning 
the cameras.  
TODD: But one Republican senator called the exchange irresponsible. Senator JOHN ENSIGN 
(Republican, Nevada): (From "State of the Union") When you're talking about the prestige of the United 
States and the presidency of the United States, you have to be careful who you're seen joking around with.  
TODD: The president emphatically dismissed that criticism.  
Pres. OBAMA: It's unlikely that as a consequence of me shaking hands or having a polite conversation 
with Mr. Chavez that we are endangering the strategic interests of the United States.  
TODD: As for Cuba, the president said he's waiting for more than just a change in tone.  
Pres. OBAMA: The test for all of us is not simply words, but also deeds.  
TODD: This trip was the culmination of an eight-country, three-continent, three-week swing that brought 
the president face to face with some 90 world leaders. Asked how that travel is shaping the Obama 
foreign policy doctrine, the president outlined his guiding principle.  
Pres. OBAMA: If we are practicing what we preach and if we occasionally confess to having strayed 
from our values and our ideals, that strengthens our hand.  
TODD: On Iran, the president made his disapproval clear over the country's decision to imprison 
American journalist Roxana Saberi.  
Pres. OBAMA: She's an Iranian-American who was interested in the country which her family came 
from, and it is appropriate for her to be treated as such and to be released.  
TODD: Monday the president turns his attention back to domestic issues where he'll be holding his first 
full Cabinet meeting at the White House. Later in the week, a sense of deja vu as the president makes his 
first visit to Iowa since taking office. …  
For more please visit: http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-216348779.html# 
 
APPENDIX B. True or False Comprehension Check Questions for a Sample Session 
1. President Obama had travelled to Europe a few weeks back. 
2. Obama’s handshake with President Chavez was welcomed by US Republicans. 
3. Obama sent a letter to Iranian officials asking for Saberi’s release. 
4. Roxana Saberi was sentenced to 6 years in prison. 
5. The two jailed American journalists were finally released from North Korea last month. 
 
APPENDIX C. Sample Vocabulary Test 
1. An improvement in relations between two countries: 
t_________ 
2. Difficulties, problems: 
r________ 
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  123 
3. To wind the handle on the fishing rod so that the fish caught on the line comes towards you: 
r___________ 
4. Agree: 
c_________ 
5. Force somebody to do something especially by threatening them: 
c___________ 
 
APPENDIX D. Sample Lesson for Input-enhancement Protocol 
1. Wedge  (n.) 
 The divorce has driven a wedge between the two families.  
2. Gravely (adv.) 
 We are gravely concerned about these developments.  
3. Sea change  (n.) 
 A sea change in attitudes 
4. Reel something in (phr. v.) 
 It took almost an hour to reel the fish in. 
5. Flashpoint (n.) 
 Vukovar was one of the early flashpoints in the former Yugoslavia.  
6. Make  light of something (v.) 
 She tried to make light of the situation, but I could tell she was worried. 
7. Position (v.) 
 If you use a mirror in this way, be careful where you position it.  
8. Stray (v.) 
 I have perhaps strayed away from matters of industry.  
9. Déjà vu (n.) 
 A strange sense of déjà vu 
10. Conviction (n.) 
 The trial and conviction of Jimmy Malone took over three months. 
11. The  defense (n.) 
 Today, the defense makes its final presentation to the jury.  
12. Dual (adj.) 
 He has dual nationality because his father was born in Pakistan and his mother is British.  
13. Coerce (v.) 
 Officials coerced peasants into voting for the government candidates. 
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  124 
14. Advocate  (n.) 
 Clinton was seen as a strong advocate for a variety of educational improvements. 
15. Concur (v.) 
 The committee largely concurred with these views.  
16. Espionage (n.) 
 He is serving a 20-year prison sentence for espionage.  
17. Thaw (n.) 
 The thaw in East-West tensions 
18. Hint (at something) (v.) 
 The President hinted at the possibility of military action. 
19. Rigors  (n.) 
 The stresses and rigors of modern life 
20. Intermediary (n.) 
 Switzerland's foreign minister served as an intermediary between the two countries. 
 
APPENDIX E. Sample Lesson for FonFs Protocol 
New Words Definition 
1. Wedge  (n.)… a. to force someone to do something 
2. Gravely (adv.)… b. to move away 
3. Sea change (n.)… c. to place something 
4. Reel something in (phr. v.)… d. to agree 
5. Flashpoint (n.)… e. an improvement in relations 
6. Make light of something (v.) … f. a feeling that something you see now has happened to you 
before 
7. Position (v.)… g. a deterioration in relations 
8. Stray (v.)… h. having two of something 
9. Déjà vu (n.)… i. act of spying 
10. Conviction (n.)… j. to wind back a fishing rod to get the caught fish  
11. The defense (n.)… k. a go-between 
12. Dual (adj.)… l. a big or drastic change 
13. Coerce (v.)… m. supporter; proponent 
14. Advocate  (n.)… n. to joke about something or treat it as not being serious  
15. Concur (v.)… o. all the lawyers in court 
16. Espionage (n.)… p. seriously 
17. Thaw (n.)… q. to indirectly suggest something 
18. Hint (at something) (v.)… r. a place filled with violence 
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  125 
19. Rigors  (n.)… s. a decision in a court of law that someone is guilty 
20. Intermediary (n.)… t. difficulties 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers and the editors of Language Learning & Technology 
for their insightful feedback and their constructive remarks. Many thanks are also due to our friend, Ali 
Asghar Manzarpour for his meticulous reading of the manuscript and the helpful comments.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Fahimeh Marefat (PhD, Allameh Tabataba’i University) is an Associate Professor of Applied Linguistics 
at Allameh Tabataba’i University, Iran. Her research interests include writing, assessment, CALL, and 
English for research publication purposes. 
E-mail: f.marefat110@gmail.com 
Mohammad Hassanzadeh (PhD, Allameh Tabataba’i University) is an Assistant Professor of Applied 
Linguistics at Vali-e-Asr University of Rafsanjan, Iran. His research program focuses on L2 vocabulary 
instruction, use of technology in the L2 classroom, and teacher education. 
E-mail: mhassanzadeh17@gmail.com 
 
REFERENCES 
Briggs, S. R., & Cheek, J. M. (1986). The role of factor analysis in the evaluation of personality scales. 
Journal of Personality, 54(1), 106–148. 
De La Fuente, M. (2006). Classroom L2 vocabulary acquisition: investigating the role of pedagogical 
tasks and form-focused instruction. Language Teaching Research, 10(3), 263–295. 
DeKeyser, R. M. (1998). Beyond focus on form: Cognitive perspective on learning and practical second 
language grammar. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language 
acquisition (pp. 42–63). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Doughty, C., & Williams, J. (1998). Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Ducate, L., & Lomicka, L. (2009). Podcasting: An effective tool for honing language students' 
pronunciation? Language Learning & Technology, 13(3), 66–86. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num3/default.html 
Ellis, R. (2001). Introduction: Investigating form-focused instruction. In R. Ellis (Ed.), Form-focused 
instruction and second language learning (pp. 1–46). Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
Ellis, R. (2008). The study of second language acquisition (2nd ed.). Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press. 
Ellis, R. (2012). Language teaching research and language pedagogy. London, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Ellis, R., & He, X. (1999). The roles of modified input and output in the incidental acquisition of word 
meanings. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 21(2), 285–301. 
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  126 
Ellis, R., Basturkmen, H., & Loewen, S. (2001). Pre-emptive focus on form in the ESL classroom. 
TESOL Quarterly, 35(3), 407–432. 
Izumi, S. (2002). Output, input enhancement, and the noticing hypothesis. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 24(4), 541–577. 
Izumi, S., & Bigelow, M. (2000). Does output promote noticing and second language acquisition? TESOL 
Quarterly, 34(2), 239–278. 
Keating, G. D. (2008). Task effectiveness and word learning in a second language: The involvement load 
hypothesis on trial. Language Teaching Research, 12(3), 365–386. 
Krashen, S. D. (1985). The input hypothesis: Issues and implications. London, UK: Longman. 
Larsen-Freeman, D., & Anderson, M. (2011). Techniques and principles in language teaching. Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press. 
Laufer, B. (2001). Reading, word-focused activities, and incidental vocabulary acquisition in a second 
language. Prospect, 16(3), 44–54. 
Laufer, B. (2003). Vocabulary acquisition in a second language: Do learners really acquire most 
vocabulary by reading? Some empirical evidence. Canadian Modern Language Review, 59(4), 567–587. 
Laufer, B. (2005). Focus on form in second language vocabulary acquisition. In S. H. Foster-Cohen, M. 
P. Garcia-Mayo, & J. Cenoz (Eds.), EUROSLA Yearbook 5 (pp. 223–250). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John 
Benjamins. 
Laufer, B. (2006). Comparing focus on form and focus on forms in second language vocabulary learning. 
Canadian Modern Language Review, 63(1), 149–166. 
Laufer, B., Elder, C., Hill, K., & Congdon, P. (2004). Size and strength: Do we need both to measure 
vocabulary knowledge? Language Testing, 21(2), 202–226. 
Lightbown, P. M., & Spada, N. (2013). How languages are learned (4th ed.). Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press. 
Lomicka, L., & Lord, G. (2011). Podcasting - Past, present, and future: Applications of academic 
podcasting in and out of the language classroom. In B. Facer & M. Abdous (Eds.), Academic podcasting 
and mobile assisted language learning: Applications and outcomes (pp. 1–20). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. 
Long, M. (1997). Focus on form in task-based language teaching. Retrieved from 
http://www.mhhe.com/socscience/foreignlang/top.htm 
Nation, I. S. P. (2001). Learning vocabulary in another language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Nation, I. S. P. (2013). Designing reading tasks to maximise vocabulary learning. Applied Research on 
English Language, 3(1), 1–8. 
Nation, I. S. P., & Chung, T. (2009). Teaching and testing vocabulary. In M. Long & C. Doughty (Eds.), 
Handbook of language teaching (pp. 543–559). Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Pallant, J. F. (2013). SPSS survival manual: A step by step guide to data analysis using IBM SPSS. New 
York, NY: Open University Press. 
Paribakht, T. S., & Wesche, M. B. (1996). Enhancing vocabulary acquisition through reading: A 
hierarchy of text-related exercise types. Canadian Modern Language Review, 52(2), 155–178. 
 
Fahimeh Marefat and Mohammad Hassanzadeh Applying Form-focused Approaches 
 
Language Learning & Technology  127 
Poole, A. (2005). Focus on form instruction: Foundations, applications, and criticisms. The Reading 
Matrix, 5(1), 47–56. 
Rosell-Aguilar, F. (2013). Podcasting for language learning through iTunes U: The learner’s view.  
Language Learning & Technology, 17(3), 74–93. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2013/rosellaguilar.pdf 
Rott, S., Williams, J., & Cameron, R. (2002). The effect of multiple choice L1 glosses and input-output 
cycles on lexical acquisition and retention. Language Teaching Research. 6(3), 183–222. 
Sharwood Smith, M. (1993). Input enhancement in instructed SLA: theoretical basis. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 15(2), 165–179. 
Sheen, R. (2002). Focus on form and focus on forms. ELT Journal, 56(3), 303–305. 
Sheen, R. (2003). Focus on form - A myth in the making. ELT Journal, 57(3), 225–233. 
Swain, M. (1995). Three functions of output in second language learning. In S. Gass & C. Madden (Eds.), 
Input in second language acquisition (pp. 235–253). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (2001). Focus on form through collaborative dialogue: Exploring task effects. In 
M. Bygate, P. Skehan, & M. Swain (Eds.), Researching pedagogic tasks: Second language learning, 
teaching, and testing (pp. 99–117). London, UK: Longman. 
VanPatten, B. (1990). Attending to content and form in the input: an experiment in consciousness. Studies 
in Second Language Acquisition, 12(3), 287–301. 
Webb, S. (2005). Receptive and productive vocabulary learning: The effects of reading and writing on 
word knowledge. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 27(1), 33–52. 
Williams, J. (2005). Form-focused instruction. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Handbook of research in second 
language teaching and learning (pp. 671–691). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Young, D. J. (2007). iPods, MP3 players and podcasts for FL learning: Current practices and future 
considerations. The NECTFL Review, 60, 39–49. 
