Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2016/chapelle.pdf 
June 2016, Volume 20, Number 2 
pp. 159–161 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 159 
CALL IN THE YEAR 2000: A LOOK BACK FROM 2016 
Carol A. Chapelle, Iowa State University 
This commentary offers a brief reflection on the state of CALL in 1997, when Language 
Learning & Technology was launched with my paper entitled “CALL in the year 2000: 
Still in search of research paradigms?” The point of my 1997 paper was to suggest the 
potential value of research on second language learning for the study of CALL. This look 
back from 2016 claims that theory and research in second language acquisition has proven 
useful for evaluating the quality of technologies for language learning. 
Keywords: Research Methods, Second Language Acquisition 
APA Citation: Chapelle, C. A. (2016). CALL in the year 2000: A look back from 2016. 
Language Learning & Technology, 20(2), 159–161. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2016/chapelle.pdf 
Received: June 2, 2015; Accepted: August 17, 2015; Published: June 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Carol A. Chapelle 
Like many articles in the late 1990s, “CALL in the year 2000: Still in search of research paradigms?” 
(Chapelle, 1997) looked ahead to the symbolic gateway into a new era of language learning and teaching. 
At the time of its publication, the potentials for language learning technologies had expanded dramatically 
because of improvements in hardware and software, not the least of which was the World Wide Web. The 
promise of massive progress was evident to those of us who had engaged with computer-assisted 
language learning (CALL) over the previous twenty years. But how would progress be made and 
measured? My article in the first issue of Language Learning & Technology (LLT) addressed this 
question. As of March, 2016, it had been cited 474 times according to Google Scholar, making it among 
the most-cited articles in the journal. Why has this article caught the attention of so many readers over the 
years? 
I can only speculate about why so many professionals have read and cited this article, but I do know why 
I wrote it. To explain the motivation, I have to turn back the clock to the 1990s. LLT was launched into a 
much different professional landscape than the one it occupies today. The World Wide Web was 
relatively new even though we had been communicating via the text-based Internet for over ten years. 
CALL existed as a professional area of study with an organization (CALICO) and a professional journal 
in the United States, both born in the early 1980s and growing in the 1990s. The web was yet another 
addition to a progression of developing technologies that fed the imaginations of professionals in CALL. 
There was always something new to work with in higher education—new technologies, new software, 
and new ideas across many disciplines. What better environment could an academic dream of! What 
problem could serve as a meaningful starting point for the new web-based journal, LLT? The problem that 
was core to our work was how to evaluate the innovations that we were developing for language learning. 
Evaluation of technological innovations was very much an open question with a range of cross-
disciplinary inputs to the process. 
The main contribution of my article was the suggestion that research evaluating the quality of 
technologies for language learning could benefit from approaches taken to investigating instructed second 
language acquisition. Instructed second language acquisition, or second language classroom research, had 
developed considerable momentum through the 1980s and early 1990s (e.g., Chaudron, 1988). Such 
research examines teachers’ and learners’ face-to-face interactions and discourse as they unfold in the 
classroom. Results are informative for the design of instruction, feedback to teachers about their 
classroom behavior, and teacher education more broadly. Developed by and for second language 
researchers, classroom research is focused on language, for example, what language is used by teachers 
Carol Chapelle CALL in the Year 2000 
 
Language Learning & Technology 160 
and students, who talks how much during the lesson, how long the turns are, what functions are 
performed using the target language, and how language is repeated, recast, modified, and corrected. These 
data from the classroom are theorized in terms of their probable benefit for second language learning. In 
other words, instructed second language acquisition research interprets students’ observable linguistic 
performance in a manner that allows for evaluation of the success of the classroom activities. 
“CALL in the year 2000: Still in search of research paradigms?” suggested that CALL research might 
fruitfully be informed by the approaches used in second language classroom research. I pointed out that 
diverse cross-disciplinary perspectives are directed at a range of questions. These questions may be good 
for some purposes, but there is a need to specify the questions particularly relevant to CALL and to 
identify ways that they can be investigated through empirical research. Failure to do so in the past had 
resulted in product-oriented comparison studies about learning outcomes with no theoretical explanatory 
basis as well as studies investigating aspects of software performance, communication patterns, and 
community formation with unspecified links to language learning. The suggestion that theoretical 
concepts from instructed second language acquisition research should be useful for CALL research has 
been picked up, discussed and expanded to the point that it is typical for CALL research articles to begin 
with an explanation of the theoretical basis for the study. Importantly, today this theoretical basis 
typically is pertinent to second language acquisition. 
The critical issue is that “evaluating the quality of learner language in an L2 task requires that some 
assumptions be held concerning the types of language use expected to be beneficial for L2 development” 
(Chapelle, 1997, p. 22). This statement is as true today as it was twenty years ago. The difference is that 
the second language acquisition research that can form the basis for CALL research today is much 
broader than it was in the 1990s. At that time, it was primarily interactionist second language acquisition 
(Gass, 1997) that theorized the type of linguistic input and conditions of interaction as well as 
characteristics of linguistic production in a manner that was useful for empirical research. Throughout the 
late 1990s and first decade of the 2000s, second language classroom researchers recognized the 
following: 
Learning through technology depends critically on learners’ access to and use of technology, 
factors controlled by circumstances that may be only partly under the learner’s control. 
Theoretical perspectives of language socialization, sociocultural theory, and activity theory open 
the theoretical lens to encompass the learner in context, thus making space for relevant factors 
such as learners’ agency and identity, which affect opportunities for learning. (Chapelle, 2009, p. 
750) 
Analysis of the contemporary state of research on CALL suggests that approaches to research are being 
sought and that a variety of approaches are being taken. Perhaps in some measure due to the influence of 
my article, the variety of approaches includes a major representation from second language acquisition. 
Such approaches provide researchers with a frame of reference to interpret the value of the learning 
processes that students engage in as they use technology for language learning. 
With a range of approaches to second language research to select from, CALL researchers are able to 
design evaluation studies to investigate questions of interest to second language teachers and researchers. 
Over the past fifteen years, expectations that evaluation research have a theoretical framing relevant to 
second language development have increased dramatically. It seems inevitable that the theory–research 
link be better structured around the specific claims designers wish to make about learning activities. 
Theoretical perspectives about what promotes learning allow researchers make value claims supportable 
by the behavior they observe and learners’ reports of their learning processes. For example, researchers in 
many studies have looked for evidence of negotiation of meaning or learners’ modification of their output 
based on feedback. Such claims lend themselves well to investigations that follow the research traditions 
Carol Chapelle CALL in the Year 2000 
 
Language Learning & Technology 161 
set out by interactionist second language acquisition. However, other theoretical perspectives are needed 
to interpret the private turns, strategic decision-making, or enactment of certain collaborative roles during 
online conversation. As LLT continues to bring us articles on critical issues in the field, I am certain that 
the topic of frameworks for planning research that serves in the evaluation of CALL will appear on its 
virtual pages. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Carol A. Chapelle is Distinguished Professor of Liberal Arts and Sciences at Iowa State University. She is 
editor of the Encyclopedia of Applied Linguistics as well as co-editor of Language Testing and of the 
Cambridge Applied Linguistics Series. She is past president of the American Association for Applied 
Linguistics and former editor of TESOL Quarterly. Her research investigates the use of technology in 
language learning and assessment. 
E-mail: carolc@iastate.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Chapelle, C. A. (1997). CALL in the year 2000: Still in search of research paradigms? Language 
Learning & Technology, 1(1), 19–43. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/chapelle/default.html 
Chapelle, C. A. (2009). The relationship between SLA theory and CALL. Modern Language Journal, 
93(S1), 741–753. 
Chaudron, C. (1988). Second language classrooms: Research on teaching and learning. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Gass, S. (1997). Input, interaction, and the second language learner. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
