Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/review2.pdf 
February 2016, Volume 20, Number 1 
pp. 42–45 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 42 
REVIEW OF MULTIPLE AFFORDANCES OF LANGUAGE CORPORA 
FOR DATA-DRIVEN LEARNING  
Multiple Affordances of Language Corpora for Data-
driven Learning 
Agnieszka Leńko-Szymańska & Alex Boulton  
2015 
ISBN: 978-90-272-0377-9 
US $149.00 
312 pp. 
John Benjamins Publishing Company 
Amsterdam 
 
 
Review by Hyung-Jo Yoon and Jungmin Lim, Michigan State University 
Since the first availability of corpora for language analysis in the 1960s, the technologies related to corpus 
compilation, annotation, and analysis have greatly improved. Now many corpus researchers are showing 
increasing interest in how to use corpus data as a useful pedagogical tool. Contributing to this line of 
interest, Multiple Affordances of Language Corpora for Data-driven Learning presents a range of 
pedagogical applications of corpora. This volume, composed of 12 chapters, addresses three major 
themes: corpora for language learning (Part I), corpora for skills development (Part II), and corpora for 
translation training (Part III). All chapters emphasize the varied affordances of corpora that enable 
learners to have greater exposure to authentic language in context. Interestingly, the pedagogical use of 
corpora introduced in this volume is applied to a wide range of language skills for second language 
learners as well as to language specialists, such as translators. 
The introduction by the editors, Leńko-Szymańska and Boulton, starts with the notion of the direct use of 
corpora and their multiple affordances for language teaching. Recognizing the currently marginal role of 
direct corpus use in class settings, the authors suggest a range of advantages of using corpus data: access 
to authentic language, increased language awareness, and learner autonomy. Further, they provide 
effective justifications for inductive data-driven learning (DDL) activities and solutions to some obstacles 
such as extra demands and its predominant focus on grammatical structures rather than meaning. 
In the second chapter, to address what she views as a lack of theoretical underpinnings in many corpus 
studies, Flowerdew links corpus applications to language learning theories. Most notably, she explains the 
relevance of the noticing hypothesis and how it relates to the inductive learning principles of DDL. She 
further discusses the collaborative dimensions of DDL activities, such as scaffolding (in relation to 
Vygotskyan sociocultural theories), that promote learner autonomy and interaction. 
In Chapter 3, Tribble describes how corpus applications have evolved and will further develop by 
reflecting on his own hands-on experience of corpus applications. He reviews the literature on direct 
corpus applications in classroom settings. Furthermore, this chapter focuses on a summary of a survey on 
teachers’ corpus tool preferences and perceived benefits to the students, suggesting that many teachers 
have positive attitudes toward corpus use, despite the existence of notable difficulties. These introductory 
chapters clearly help readers better understand the history and development of in-class corpus 
Hyung-Jo Yoon and Jungmin Lim Review of Multiple Affordances of Corpora for DDL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
applications. 
Part I consists of three chapters (Chapters 4, 5, and 6) that commonly illustrate alternative corpus-based 
methods that focus on chunks. The authors of these chapters discuss how language learners benefit from 
new methods and tools aimed at facilitating autonomous corpus searches. In Chapter 4, Aston proposes a 
methodology which uses speech corpora and aligned transcripts to teach phraseological items. In the first 
part of this chapter, he focuses on the necessity of using speech corpora and corresponding transcripts for 
a better understanding of distinctive prosodic features. Then, with some exemplary n-gram analyses (i.e., 
presenting high-frequency contiguous sequence of n number of words) of a speech corpus (a collection of 
TED talk videos), Aston suggests how teachers can assist their students in identifying and interpreting 
high-frequency n-grams more effectively with the help of speech corpora. He further discusses student 
willingness to learn phraseological items as a prerequisite for successful implementation of this new 
method. The fifth chapter by Thomas also emphasizes the importance of multi-word units (here 
collocations) to avoid deviations. Using Sketch Engine, the author demonstrates a specific procedure 
named Collocation Plus, in which learners are encouraged to explore lexicogrammatical features 
surrounding target collocations and then to produce sentences using the collocations to which they have 
been exposed during the previous stages. The author predicts that this procedure promotes discourse-level 
understanding of vocabulary in relation to its specific corresponding construction. 
In Chapter 6, to address the issue of low accessibility of corpus resources to beginning EFL students, 
Chujo, Oghigian, and Akasegawa introduce a new DDL tool (GPPS) appropriate for low-proficiency 
students. Distinguished from other concordance tools that present search results in authentic context (i.e., 
KWIC), the GPPS is adjustable for different proficiency levels and shows sentence-level search results 
with translations in a separate column. Unlike the previous two chapters advocating full text use, the 
authors argue for the exploitation of sentence-level results rather than fully contextualized ones from the 
GPPS so that low-proficiency students can better develop their familiarity with sentence structures. 
Part II suggests potential uses of corpora in the classroom to build language skills and strategies, 
including academic writing (Chapter 7) and reading comprehension (Chapters 8 and 9). In Chapter 7, 
Charles demonstrates corpus-based English for Academic Purposes writing courses in which graduate 
students and post-doctoral students from diverse academic backgrounds build and analyze their own 
corpus from academic journals and share the lexical items with peers. She also illustrates how to prepare 
students to exploit different functions of AntConc, a freely available corpus analysis tool, as their 
discovery tools. Learners reported this learning method helped them to construct representations of 
discipline-appropriate discourse. 
Turning to the reading skills, Chapter 8 by Babych examines how teaching materials using news articles 
in which connectors are annotated with their functional categories can enhance student awareness of text 
structures. In addition, this chapter addresses special population learning cognates of a previously learned 
language. Babych extracted connectors at the beginning of sentences in a large corpus of each language 
and classified them into 16 functional categories. She constructed a corpus of online news for each 
language in which the connectors were highlighted and glossed with their functions. After applying this 
corpus as online reading materials, the author detected significant gains in global comprehension, 
translation, and vocabulary among her study participants. She concludes the chapter with practical 
suggestions for developing reading skills. 
Chapter 9 by Curado Fuentes reports on an experimental study into the development of reading 
comprehension skills, in which the effectiveness of DDL activities using news keywords was examined in 
comparison with traditional paper-based activities. Fully aware of the fact that textual features of 
newspapers are highly authentic and complex, the author investigated how highly contextualized DDL 
activities led to intermediate-level student comprehension of the keywords extracted from newspapers. 
The findings from the post-test, questionnaire, and short writing point to the benefits of DDL activities on 
high learner motivation and favorable attitudes. 
Hyung-Jo Yoon and Jungmin Lim Review of Multiple Affordances of Corpora for DDL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
Part III targets translator trainers and suggests corpus-based tasks for a variety of translation skills: web-
based practicing (Chapter 9), raising awareness of interference of source text (Chapter 10), and 
highlighting genre-specific features of film subtitle translation (Chapter 11). In Chapter 9, Molés-Cases 
and Oster illuminate a gap between the abundance of corpus resources for translators and the lack of 
knowledge of these resources by trainees. The authors introduce two exemplary corpus-based tasks 
delivered in webquests about pronunciation and pragmatics in German. The webquests are structured in a 
way that helps learners develop their autonomous use of authentic language in corpora and interact with 
peers and teachers while sharing feedback. Based on active student participation and survey responses, 
the authors confirm the effectiveness of webquests as learning tools for future translators. 
In terms of awareness-raising tasks for translator trainees, Marco and van Lawick introduce a successful 
pedagogical attempt to enhance translator trainee awareness of source text interference in Chapter 10. The 
authors propose using comparable corpora to help learners better notice unnatural style of translated texts 
due to traces of original text. Participants performed cyclical tasks of analyzing translated Catalan texts in 
comparison with natural Catalan texts using WordSmith Tools until they achieved a certain level of 
awareness on source text interference. Drawing on the revisions participants made on their writing after 
receiving training, this learning cycle was reported to be positive for learning and for familiarizing 
students with corpora for translation practices. The next chapter by Sotelo illustrates how trainee 
awareness on a specific subtitle genre can be promoted by DDL using multimedia corpus. She proposes 
four tasks for students to notice features of translated texts such as condensations, omissions, and 
additions. Based on her observations of student engagement with tasks and responses to their learning 
experience, Sotelo remarks positively on the pedagogical application of multimedia corpus on translator 
training and its match with technological competence. 
This book ends with Boulton’s proposal for practical applications of DDL. As clearly demonstrated by 
the chapters above, DDL is promising for language development in diverse contexts, but it usually 
requires learners to access an appropriate corpus and use specific corpus analysis tools; these 
preconditions surely demand a good amount of time and training. Boulton recommends the use of the 
Web as a large corpus and powerful search engines, such as Google, as DDL tools. Despite having less 
accuracy, results from carefully arranged search terms on the web could be sufficient for many learning 
contexts. The author highlights the practicality and ease of the Web, thus leading to a great benefit for 
teachers and learners. 
As the title of this book suggests, the overarching theme of this edited volume is to introduce a variety of 
pedagogical affordances elicited from corpora and corpus-analysis tools. The chapters are easy to follow, 
and on the organizational side, one can tell that the editors put great effort into showing various aspects of 
DDL from theoretical and broad language learning contexts to more specialized settings of translator 
training. This book has its unique value in that it introduces a wide range of corpus types that differ in 
size, language type, and language modality. This book also provides information about how to use 
various corpus analysis tools to fit varying needs of target students. In addition, this volume suggests and 
exemplifies how language teachers can design and sequence tasks for DDL. For example, individual tasks 
delivered in the online platform can promote autonomous learning, while in-class group tasks can 
increase interactions between students. The book focuses mostly on real applications of corpus data and 
tools in language learning settings. Accordingly, little attention is given to technical dimensions of 
corpora such as how to systematically annotate and analyze collected texts. For those seeking additional, 
detailed explanations of how to build corpora, one might have to look elsewhere. If one is interested in 
having a balanced view of corpora in terms of their annotations and pedagogical use, referring to other 
books focusing on corpus annotations (e.g., Kübler & Zinsmeister, 2015; Lu, 2014) can be one 
possibility. 
Most chapters emphasized that the quality of DDL depends on how teachers construct and sequence 
corpus-based tasks. However, the chapters lacked detailed guidelines about how to sequence DDL tasks 
Hyung-Jo Yoon and Jungmin Lim Review of Multiple Affordances of Corpora for DDL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
in a particular setting, and they did not suggest specific criteria for the decisions about which types of 
corpus data and analysis tools to employ. Thus, this book can be well supplemented with other books or 
articles related to task-based language teaching and task sequencing. Similarly, with regard to the 
illustration of training procedures in some empirical chapters, the authors briefly discuss how they trained 
learners to use corpus tools. However, as admitted by Tribble in Chapter 3, DDL has not yet achieved its 
firm role in language classrooms. One major stumbling block has been the additional efforts required for 
teachers to guide their students because DDL activities cannot elicit effective learning without thorough 
learner training. Furthermore, in ESL settings, the classroom may consist of students with a wide variety 
of backgrounds. Some may have limited experience of using computers, and thus low digital literacy, 
making it extremely difficult to teach them how to use corpus tools. Given the pivotal role of learner 
training for the successful implementation of DDL activities, it would have been great to include more 
detailed descriptions of how language learners with different backgrounds and learning goals can be 
motivated and trained for effective corpus-based text analysis. 
Nonetheless, this book is a valuable resource for practitioners and researchers who hope to learn the value 
and effectiveness of data-driven learning and to understand how to use various types of corpora and 
analysis tools in educational settings. The rationale for choosing DDL over traditional learning is its 
possibility to expose learners to authentic texts and then to draw their attention to target forms inductively 
in accordance with the principles of focus on form. Given the consistent findings showing the necessity of 
an explicit focus on form in meaning-based language learning (Norris & Ortega, 2000), language teachers 
may greatly benefit from this book. By reading this book, teachers who have vague ideas of how to use 
corpus data for language teaching can shape their ideas into specific plans aimed at guiding learners in 
using corpora for their own learning. This volume is a valuable resource to possess. The book is also for 
those interested in DDL research, corpus building, and corpus tool development. Reading this book will 
lead them to clearly understand the true value of DDL as an effective and flexible teaching method that 
makes full use of current technological advances. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Hyung-Jo Yoon is a Ph.D. student in Second Language Studies at Michigan State University. While 
pursuing a degree, he has been working as an English instructor at the English Language Center. His 
research interests include second language writing, language assessment, and computational analysis of 
natural language. 
E-mail: yoonhyu9@msu.edu 
Jungmin Lim is a doctoral student in the Second Language Studies program at Michigan State University. 
Her research interests are second language writing, computer-assisted language learning, and language 
assessment. 
E-mail: limjung2@msu.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Kübler, S., & Zinsmeister, H. (2015). Corpus linguistics and linguistically annotated corpora. London: 
Bloomsbury. 
Lu, X. (2014). Computational methods for corpus annotation and analysis. NY: Springer. 
Norris, J. M., & Ortega, L. (2000). Effectiveness of L2 instruction: A research synthesis and quantitative 
meta-analysis. Language Learning, 50(3), 417–528. 
