Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/review1.pdf 
February 2016, Volume 20, Number 1 
pp. 38–41 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 38 
REVIEW OF INCLUSIVE LANGUAGE EDUCATION AND DIGITAL 
TECHNOLOGY 
INCLUSIVE LANGUAGE EDUCATION AND DIGITAL 
TECHNOLOGY 
Editors: Elina Vilar Beltrán, Chris Abbott, & Jane Jones 
YEAR: 2013 
ISBN: 9 781847 699725 
US $39.95 
182 pp. 
Publisher: Multilingual Matters 
Location of Publication: Bristol, United Kingdom 
 
 
Review by Dustin Crowther, Michigan State University 
As discussed by both the editors of and the contributors to Inclusive Education and Digital Technologies, 
ongoing globalization has increased the necessity for people to be able to function using multiple 
languages. The value of such knowledge can be tied directly to what Bourdieu (1991) has referred to as 
linguistic capital, in which the possession of certain languages provides speakers with greater economic 
and social opportunities. However, the extent of language education is rarely consistent across all 
contexts, with certain learners often being privileged over others. In their volume, Vilar Beltrán, Abbott, 
and Jones (the editors) place a focus on one specific group of learners, those with special educational 
needs (SEN), while at the same time promoting the value of information and communication technology 
(ICT) as a tool for inclusive language education for all. Throughout the volume, the editors provide a 
range of highly interesting and relevant viewpoints on SEN, ICT, and the learning of modern foreign 
languages (MFL).  
From the outset, the editors specifically target an audience with a vested interest in how SEN and digital 
technologies can impact MFL teaching and learning, though acknowledging the European-centric nature 
of the volume as whole. Following a brief introduction from the editors, the volume is divided into two 
parts: “The Key Issues” and “Case Studies.” Part 1 consists of three chapters in which three different 
authors—Jones, Abbott, and Wilson—attempt to identify and draw out three key issues: inclusive 
education, languages, and digital technologies. They subsequently show how these three constructs are 
“inextricably interwoven” (p. xii). Part 2 includes a series of six case studies from six different sets of 
authors that highlight a range of cultural contexts in which current and emerging MFL practices occur. 
While the intent of the editors would appear to be to use Part 2 as a way to reinforce the arguments in Part 
1, there is at times a disconnect between how the three key constructs identified (SEN, ICT, MFL) are 
used both within and across the two parts. Despite this limitation, it is important to first note the value that 
exists within each individual chapter, specifically those included as case studies. 
Dustin Crowther Review of Inclusive Language Education  
 
Language Learning & Technology 39 
As already stated, Part 1 places a focus on key issues related to SEN, ICT, and MFL. Chapter 1 sets the 
stage for the rest of the volume. Jones first provides an overview of important policy changes in the 
United Kingdom (UK) regarding inclusivity in the MFL classroom. She then transitions into an overview 
of common contemporary foreign language classroom practices, specifically indicating how 
communicative language teaching has “perhaps unintended consequences of ‘closing down’ options once 
again in marginalising reading and writing, especially for learners with SEN” (p. 9). This leads the author 
to highlight the importance of the learning community, learner personalization, and formative assessment 
in developing the MFL classroom. Though briefly discussing the role of ICT in her conclusion, Jones 
leaves the larger discussion of ICT to Abbott in Chapter 2. While Jones placed a focus on SEN in MFL, 
Abbott focuses solely on the usage and potential benefits of ICT in the MFL classroom. First, Abbot 
provides a brief history of ICT in language learning, with a particular focus on how ICT can be used to 
practice, assist, and enable MFL learners. Second, he discusses the importance of making ICT available to 
all learners. Last, he argues the need for teachers to “have a nuanced and rich understanding of the 
affordances of the technology” (p. 42). In Chapter 3, Wilson brings Jones’s focus on SEN and Abbott’s 
focus on ICT together, with six lessons that (a) identify a need to consider best practices both over history 
and across contexts; (b) recognize the need to not only be able to identify and assess SENs, but also to 
differentiate between such learners; and (c) highlight the need to both observe and verify potential 
learning gains and also to research instances in which expected gains do not occur. Despite occurring near 
the beginning of his chapter, the key take away from Wilson’s view would be that in regards to learners 
with SENs, the primary concern of MFL teachers should be “the welfare of their human charges, not how 
cutting-edge their choice of computer hardware or software might be” (p. 46). This statement furthers 
Abbott’s previous argument that teachers need a rich understanding of how ICT can be applied to the 
MFL classroom. 
With Part 1 having established the overall focus of the volume, Part 2 moves to demonstrate the intersect 
of SEN and ICT across multiple MFL classrooms, located primarily in the United Kingdom (3 studies). 
Evidence is also provided from Austria, Spain, and Poland (1 study each). While obvious value exists in 
placing a specific focus on both the MFL teacher (Chapters 4 and 6) and the creation of SEN-targeted 
activities (Chapter 8), the true strength of the volume is found in the three chapters that target learners 
with specific SENs: hearing impairment, visual impairment, and dyslexia. Domagała-Zyśk (Chapter 5) 
focuses on learners with different degrees of hearing impairment, demonstrating how “technology serves 
as a tool to enhance education and to promote socialization of D/deaf and hard of hearing students” (p. 
88). When incorporating computer-based technology (such as the Internet) for such learners, several key 
considerations are provided, related to material preparation, software selection, and learner needs. Just as 
importantly, Domagała-Zyśk stresses the necessity of teamwork between deaf learners, teachers, support 
assistants, and others in remaining up to date on the tools available for such learners. Crombie (Chapter 7) 
discusses dyslexia, providing an overview of potential ICT applicable to learners with such impairments. 
She also highlights the struggle between cost and benefit, stating that the “main disadvantage of 
technology…is that the hardware is generally quite expensive…the costs of assistive technology as it 
applies to dyslexic learners may well match the equivalent costs of books” (p. 131). A further concern 
raised by Crombie is the significance of the social plane in making learning meaningful, an area of 
difficulty for learners with dyslexia, and how technology must be considered as an aid in attaining 
meaningful learning, but not as a solution to all an instructor’s dilemmas. The final chapter by Jeitler & 
Wassermann (Chapter 9) addresses learners with different levels of visual impairments, providing a list of 
potential solutions to the difficulty of accessing written sources. A key point raised is the need to consider 
two types of support: one through the school and another through personal assistance. Discussing good 
practice, the authors highlight a need for open communication between learners with SENs and their 
intended academic institutions before beginning their studies.  
In Chapter 4, Vilar Beltrán and Sales Ciges argue for the SEN-pedagogical virtues of digital technologies, 
Dustin Crowther Review of Inclusive Language Education  
 
Language Learning & Technology 40 
which include material creation, content presentation, and accessibility. In reference to teacher education, 
Meiring and Norman (Chapter 6) argue that there are two major challenges: “meeting the needs of all 
learners and…improving/enabling the learning experience” (p. 108). In referencing the relationship 
between these two challenges, Connor (Chapter 8) states the need that an “abiding principle…must 
always be that of assessing how far a particular tool can enhance an existing and effective pedagogy” (p. 
153). While all the above authors recognize the potential benefits of ICT in the classroom, they also 
indicate that such benefits are a direct result of appropriate implementation of such technology. 
There is little doubt that the contributions of both Part 1 and Part 2 provide valuable insights into how 
ICT can help improve the teaching of MFL to learners with SENs. Key themes that consistently arise 
include (a) the necessity to recognize the various needs of learners with different types of SENs, and 
subsequent pedagogical adjustments to account for these needs; (b) the importance of educating MFL 
teachers on both SENs and available ICT; and (c) the importance of providing learners with SEN support 
from multiple levels (i.e., fellow learners, teachers, administrators). Despite these strengths, there are 
several means in which the overall message could have been reinforced. One potential consideration that 
could have added valuable insight is broader reference to second language acquisition (SLA) literature. 
By drawing direct links between SLA research (see VanPatten & Williams, 2015 for a recent overview of 
existing SLA theories) and how the integration of ICT in MFL classrooms aids learners with SENs, the 
editors, as well as the authors, could have provided a sounder theoretical base for their collective work. 
Beyond the potential addition of a theoretical framework for learning, there is also some inconsistency in 
how SENs and ICT are treated. Despite several chapters stressing the importance of differentiating 
between learners with different types of SENs (see Chapters 3, 5, 7, and 9), others propose usages of ICT 
in the MFL classroom without any type of differentiation (see Chapters 4 and 8). This leaves open a 
question of whether members of the volume’s target audience (teachers, advisors, and researchers) should 
focus on individualized approaches towards aiding learners with SENs, or take a more generalized 
approach. The result of this split in focus subsequently manifests itself in the types of ICT discussed. 
Authors of chapters addressing learners with specific SENs discuss the usage and benefits of more 
specialized ICT (i.e., brands of hearing aids for deaf learners), where those with a more general focus on 
SENs reflect a similar focus for the ICT discussed (i.e., Web 2.0 tools, social media). Considering that 
educating MFL teachers on the benefits of ICT in language teaching is a key theme of this volume, it 
might have been helpful if the editors had clarified whether they were promoting a SEN-specific or SEN-
general approach towards education. 
Though at times the overall impact of the volume is limited due to a lack of cohesion between 
contributors, specific chapters, such as Chapter 5, Chapter 9, and Chapter 7, provide a substantial analysis 
of specific SENs within the MFL classroom and how such SENs may be addressed. Such analyses will be 
of great benefit to MFL instructors at various educational levels (e.g., high school, university). Vilar 
Beltrán, Abbott, and Jones have brought attention to an important area of language learning and teaching 
in Inclusive Language Education and Digital Technologies, providing examples from a range of locales 
across Europe. Through their work, it has become clear that from top to bottom (e.g., administrators, 
teachers, personal assistants), there is a lack of focus in how SENs are treated in the MFL classroom, and 
that a potential solution exists through the use of ICT. Their volume is an initial step in bringing clarity to 
this area, and they show how specific SENs can serve as a strong target for future work. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Dustin is a PhD student at Michigan State University with a focus on Second Language Studies. He 
previously completed his MA in Applied Linguistics at Concordia University in Montréal, Canada. His 
primary research interests include the perception of nonnative speech by both native and nonnative 
Dustin Crowther Review of Inclusive Language Education  
 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
speakers, with a primary focus on the linguistic dimensions of second language speech that promote 
mutual understanding between interlocutors. He has extensive language teaching experience in both 
second- and foreign-language settings, having worked with both adult and young learners of English. 
E-mail: crowth14@msu.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Bourdieu, P. (1991). Language and symbolic power. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
VanPatten, B., & Williams, J. (Eds.). (2015). Theories in second language acquisition: An introduction  
(2 ed.). New York, NY: Routledge. 
