Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/yoon.pdf 
February 2016, Volume 20, Number 1 
pp. 209–229 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 209 
CONCORDANCERS AND DICTIONARIES AS PROBLEM-SOLVING 
TOOLS FOR ESL ACADEMIC WRITING 
Choongil Yoon, Ewha Womans University 
The present study investigated how 6 Korean ESL graduate students in Canada used a 
suite of freely available reference resources, consisting of Web-based corpus tools, Google 
search engines, and dictionaries, for solving linguistic problems while completing an 
authentic academic writing assignment in English. Using a mixed methods design, the 
study examined the processes and outcomes of combined use of concordancers and other 
reference resources by the participants and their perceptions of the reference suite as a 
means of writing assistance. 
Results showed that while the reference suite served as an effective cognitive tool 
extending the cognitive powers of the participants in solving lexical and grammatical 
problems, the individual resources in the suite were each shown to have unique functions 
for which they were best suited, suggesting that concordancing may optimally be 
consulted in combination with other resources. However, some participants also 
experienced difficulties in using the tool stemming largely from the nature of their writing 
tasks and writing stages, and different goals and needs arising from them. This paper 
concludes by discussing theoretical and pedagogical implications of the findings. 
Keywords: Writing, Corpus, ICT Literacies, Human Computer Interaction. 
APA Citation: Yoon, C. (2016). Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
for ESL academic writing. Language Learning & Technology, 20(1), 209–229. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/yoon.pdf 
Received: February 2, 2014; Accepted: November 19, 2014; Published: February 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Choongil Yoon 
INTRODUCTION 
The digital age we live in has seen a proliferation of online language reference resources for foreign and 
second language (L2) writers. Specifically, advances in data processing power and storage capacity have 
not only made traditional reference resources (e.g., dictionaries) available online, often complemented 
with varied additional linguistic information that cannot be provided in offline resources, but also 
generated new types of reference resources that support L2 writers in ways that the more traditional 
resources cannot (Frankenberg-Garcia, 2005; Tono, 2013). 
Concordancing (or corpus consultation), one of the new breeds of reference resources, has been getting 
growing attention as a tool for effectively providing typical and frequent patterns in which a linguistic 
item is used, extracted from naturally occurring language data (Hyland, 2003; Johns, 1991). While 
corpora have been steadily explored as language learning resources since the 1980s, it is only in the last 
decade that concordancing has started to be empirically examined as a reference resource for L2 writing, 
particularly in university settings (e.g., Gilmore, 2009; Kennedy & Miceli, 2010; O’Sullivan & 
Chambers, 2006; Park, 2010; Yoon, 2005, 2008). More recently, researchers working in the growing area 
of Google assisted language learning (GALL) have investigated Google as a handy concordancing tool 
for L2 writers (e.g., Conroy, 2010; Fujii, 2007; Hubbard, 2005). These studies, on the whole, conclude 
that if strategically used, concordancing can be an effective tool to aid L2 writers in solving lexical and 
grammatical problems encountered while writing in their target language. 
Despite the emphasis on content and idea development in writing under the influences of process-oriented 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 210 
writing pedagogy and research, especially in North America, accuracy and appropriateness in written 
form are still given great importance in the professional and academic world and are often a major factor 
that affects instructors’ assessments of students’ writing (Canagarajah, 2002; Hegelheimer, 2006; Yoon, 
2008). L2 writers, even at advanced levels, struggle in terms of accurate and appropriate use of 
vocabulary and grammar (Hinkel, 2002; Silva, 1993) but writing support for these aspects are normally 
not sufficient (Conroy, 2010). Given that reference resources are often the only sources from which L2 
writers can get immediate support for addressing problems in language features as they arise, the addition 
of concordancing to their existing reference resources may equip L2 writers with an effective problem-
solving tool and help them become more autonomous writers. 
Concordancing as a Reference Tool for L2 Writing 
Concordancing as a pedagogical tool has typically been associated with data-driven learning (DDL) 
(Johns, 1991), which entails learners taking the role of a researcher to work out the rules and regularities 
of specific linguistic items using concordance data, often with explicit language learning goals (for a 
detailed discussion of DDL, see Boulton, 2010). More recently, some researchers (Rüschoff, 2003; Park, 
2010) have approached learner concordancing from the perspective of a cognitive tool that extends 
learners’ cognitive abilities (Jonassen, 1992; Norman, 1993) and suggested that corpus consultation can 
help learners solve immediate problems arising during an L2 task. 
With specific reference to L2 writing, Hyland (2003) classified the uses of concordancing into two 
categories depending on the role played: a research tool with which L2 writers can systematically 
investigate a specific linguistic item or phenomenon and infer underlying rules and a reference tool that 
L2 writers can consult to find immediate solutions to linguistic problems encountered when composing. 
Although there is much overlap, concordancing in these two roles has been explored in different ways in 
previous research. The research tool approach has been examined largely in the form of DDL activity 
facilitating the learning of specific lexical items, grammatical structures, or genre features (e.g., 
Cresswell, 2007; Lee & Swales, 2006). Meanwhile, concordancing as a reference tool has been treated as 
more of a problem-solving tool that aids L2 learners in successful completion of their writing tasks at 
hand without necessarily involving explicit language learning goals. Many of the recent studies of 
concordancing for English for Academic Purposes (EAP) and L2 writing examined the latter line of 
concordancing. 
I will briefly review previous research on concordancing as a reference tool and more broadly reference 
resource consultation. The review starts with the concept of cognitive tool as a theoretical basis. 
Concordancing as Cognitive Tool 
Jonassen (1992) defined cognitive tools as technologies that extend and reorganize the cognitive 
functioning of users, thereby facilitating their knowledge construction and meaning making. However, 
this facilitative role played by cognitive tools does not mean that they possess inherent cognitive powers 
themselves. It is still the human user that engages in noticing, inducing, and drawing conclusions (Wolff, 
1997). In other words, “cognitive tools enable mindful, challenging learning, rather than the effortless 
learning (Jonassen & Reeves, 1996, p. 698). 
These characteristics of cognitive tools can also be attributed to concordancing (Rüschoff, 2003; Wolff, 
1997). Concordancers sort and display language data in ways that allow users to discover patterns, test 
hypotheses, and figure out solutions to language problems at hand. These higher-order cognitive activities 
would not be possible or would take much more time and cognitive effort if done by users alone. Yet, 
concordancers do not analyze language data. It is the users who do the decision making and problem 
solving at every stage of analysis while the concordancing tool helps them overcome the limitations of 
their mind on memory and computing. This “intellectual partnership” between the user’s mind and 
cognitive tools (Salomon, Perkins, & Globerson, 1991, p. 2) can be seen as a form of distributed 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 211 
cognition between the human mind and cognitive artifacts (Park, 2010). 
Previous Empirical Studies 
Empirical research in concordancing as a reference resource can be grouped roughly into four strands. 
The studies in the first strand typically involved one-time classroom tasks after a period of training. The 
participants consulted corpora while correcting errors in given writing samples or revising them based on 
corrective feedback or on their own. These studies demonstrated that concordancing may help learners 
notice and learn lexico-grammatical patterns, especially the usages of prepositions and idiomatic 
expressions (Chambers & O’Sullivan, 2004; O’Sullivan & Chambers, 2006), and enhance the naturalness 
of the text that users produce (Gilmore, 2009). At the same time, some participants often failed to discern 
the unique functions of corpus tools and could not exploit the tools as intended (Kennedy & Miceli, 
2010). 
The second strand of studies traced how L2 writers used corpus tools during their authentic writing 
assignments lasting a semester or longer. It was found that corpus consultation during L2 composition 
over time seemed to increase lexico-grammatical awareness and performance of participants by providing 
them with scaffolding through “dialogic negotiation” (Park 2010, p. 160). It also fostered writer 
autonomy by allowing the participants to take greater responsibility for their writing (Yoon, 2008). 
However, there were still some participants who failed to perceive the affordances of the corpus tool 
provided and did not use it in intended manners or as often as expected (Hafner & Candlin, 2007). Based 
on the mixed findings, it was suggested that the extent and purposes of corpus consultation while writing 
are largely determined by the needs of the writers arising from the disciplinary or professional context for 
which they write (Hafner & Candlin, 2007; Yoon, 2008). 
The studies in the third group explored Google as a concordancer. The common rationale for using 
Google was that it was both easy to use and familiar to most learners while providing a huge amount of 
authentic language data from the Web. Positive effects of Google use identified in these studies were, 
among others, increased accuracy and naturalness of L2 writers’ text (Fujiji, 2007), facilitation of written 
error corrections (Watson Todd, 2001), and a greater sense of independence in L2 writing (Conroy, 
2010). However, some caveats have also been raised regarding the use of Google as a linguistic reference 
resource. Because of the heterogeneity of Web contents in terms of variety, genre, and register, and the 
considerable amount of lexical and grammatical errors contained on the Web, Google may pose 
challenges to L2 writers in academic settings, for which accurate and appropriate text production is 
crucial (Wu, Franken, & Witten, 2009). Mindful of this limitation, some researchers have used more 
specialized Google services that retrieve search results only from academic publications or pre-designated 
Web sites, such as Google Scholar (Brezina, 2012) and Custom Search Engine (Park, 2010). 
Lastly, a small number of studies (e.g., Kennedy & Miceli, 2010; Lai & Chen, 2015) looked directly into 
how their participants consulted different types of reference resources during L2 composition. These 
studies offered some common findings: (a) participants used different resources for different purposes 
(e.g., dictionaries for word form and meaning, and corpora for word usage) and (b) some participants used 
different resources strategically in complementary manners, starting with one resource and expanding on 
it with another. 
One final issue to consider is the types of corpora used in these studies. Research on corpus use in 
academic writing has shown growing interest in specialized corpora that are highly relevant to the genres 
and disciplines in which learners have to write and thus cater to L2 writers’ needs more directly (e.g., 
Hafner & Candlin, 2007; Kennedy & Miceli, 2010; Lee & Swales, 2006). For example, in a specially 
designed EAP course for doctoral students, Lee and Swales (2006) examined how four English as a 
second language (ESL) doctoral students gradually familiarized themselves with the “‘corpus’ way of 
investigating language” (p. 60), particularly in terms of conventions of disciplinary writing while using 
corpora of academic discourses. However, despite their proven and potential benefits, specialized corpora 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 212 
have not been widely adopted in research and classroom application yet, mainly for practical reasons 
(Charles, 2014; Park, 2010; Yoon, 2008). First, many of these genre- or discipline-specific corpora were 
compiled for individual academic writing courses or research projects, and as such are often unavailable 
to outside users. Second, compiling one that is large enough is time-consuming and requires sufficient 
knowledge and skills. For these reasons, readily available general purpose corpora such as the British 
National Corpus (BNC) and the Collins COUBUILD Corpus (or the Web as a corpus) have often been 
used in the majority of the studies. 
Present Study 
The studies reviewed above provide valuable insights into the potential of concordancing as a means of 
writing assistance. Nonetheless, many of these studies are confined to examining one-off timed written 
error correction or revision tasks, mostly in classroom settings, with a concordancing tool provided as the 
only or main resource to consult. 
To expand the scope of inquiry to a more typical and authentic setting for L2 student writers, the present 
study traced how six Korean ESL graduate students in a Canadian university independently used a suite 
of freely available online language reference resources (consisting of concordancers and dictionaries, 
each of which is described below) over the entire course of completing an authentic writing assignment 
(e.g., a term paper or a research proposal). It especially examined the potential of the reference suite as a 
cognitive tool that extends the cognitive powers of L2 writers and mediates their problem solving while 
writing. The present study situated the use of reference resources in a context where the participants 
engaged in one of their real-world writing assignments with all their contextual complexities and 
constraints (as opposed to writing tasks designed for research purposes). In addition, other useful 
reference resources were provided along with the concordancers, reflecting the wide real-life choice 
today’s L2 writers have regarding reference resources to consult. Several participants had already been 
using some of these resources for years. The focus here was to examine how concordancing tools can be 
consulted in combination with other resources as a whole rather than investigating whether one resource 
is better than another. 
The present study was specifically guided by the following research questions: 
1. How and for what purposes do the participants consult the reference suite? 
2. How does the use of the reference suite affect the participants’ problem-solving performance? 
3. What are the strategies used and pitfalls encountered by the participants in their interactions 
with the suite? 
4. How do the participants evaluate concordancers and other resources in terms of their utility as 
writing support tools? 
METHODS 
Participants 
A total of six Korean ESL graduate students residing in Toronto, Canada, participated in the study. The 
rationale for having this specific group of participants was as follows: First, graduate students are likely to 
have the levels of cognitive skills and linguistic knowledge required to use sophisticated search options in 
some of the reference resources (see below). They are also assumed to be willing and motivated to invest 
time and energy in improving their writing performance using a reference tool for their academic success 
and career advancement. Second, by sharing the same L1 (Korean) with the participants, I would be able 
to directly observe and analyze participants’ natural writing and linguistic problem solving, if any, that 
involves both textual and conceptual L1-L2 translation. Table 1 presents profiles of the six participants. 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 213 
Table 1. Participant Profiles 
 Jae Yumee Jinho Goeun Shia Ian 
Gender Male Female Male Female Female Male 
Age 37 28 24 29 34 31 
Degree 
pursued,field of 
study 
PhD, Adult 
Education 
& Human 
Resources 
PhD, 
Educational 
Technology 
MA, 
Information 
Studies 
PhD, 
Language 
Assessment 
MA, Social 
Work 
PhD, 
Second 
Language 
Education 
Prior 
experience with 
corpus tools 
None None None COCA None None 
Writing 
assignments  
Conference 
paper 
Research 
proposal  
Term paper  Term paper  Term paper  Research 
proposal 
Approximate 
duration of 
participation 
18 weeks 
 
20 weeks 
 
16 weeks 
 
12 weeks 
 
7 weeks 
 
16 weeks 
Note. All participant names are pseudonyms 
The participants were all from writing-intensive disciplines. Four were doctoral students from the broad 
discipline of education and two were master’s students: one in information science and one in social 
work. None of the participants had prior experience using corpora and concordancing tools, except 
Goeun. 
Reference Suite (RS) 
RS (also referred to as “the suite” hereafter) is a mini Web browser developed for the study. It allows a 
user to access eight different language reference resources (five concordancers including Google search 
engines, and three types of dictionaries) that are freely available on the Web. RS allowed access to these 
resources in a single interface, making it easier to move back and forth between multiple resources on the 
same window. Every query performed in the RS search box (see Figure 1) was automatically recorded in 
a query log. With the query log program running in the background, participants could, by and large, 
consult the tool without much interruption. 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 214 
 
Figure 1. A screenshot of RS. This specific screenshot shows the search results of the query issue 
performed on JustTheWord (JTW). 
Multiple concordancers were provided in RS to examine how and for what purposes the participants 
would use different concordancers in terms of their size, part-of-speech (POS) tagging, features, and 
options provided. These concordancers were accessed on the first three tabs (see the arrow in Figure 1). 
The first tab linked to the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA), a 450 million-word POS-
tagged corpus and its concordancing interface. Not only does COCA contain various genres of text, 
including an academic subsection, but it also provides the most varied and sophisticated search options. 
However, these sophisticated search options require the use of query syntax that takes some time to learn 
and get used to. On the second tab, Google, three different Google search engines were accessed. Unlike 
the two other concordancers featured in RS, these Google search engines retrieved data from the Web—
huge in size but not POS-tagged, therefore not allowing sophisticated search refinement options. Google 
was one of the most familiar resources to the participants and one of the easiest for them to use. However, 
it may have posed some challenges to learners due to the heterogeneity of its language data. Google 
Scholar (GS) and Custom Search Engine (CSE)1 were added to compensate for these possible weaknesses 
of Google as a language reference. Along with the academic subsection of COCA, these two resources 
helped meet the needs of graduate academic writing by allowing the users to confine their searches to 
academic registers in general (GS) or to a particular domain or academic field (CSE). Finally, 
JustTheWord (JTW) was an easy-to-use concordancer that did not require the use of query syntax. 
However, it ran on a relatively small POS-tagged corpus (an 80 million-word subsection of the BNC). 
Simply typing in a word in this resource retrieved from the source corpus all the collocational 
combinations the word made and displayed them in highly organized manners. 
The last tab was dedicated to three types of online dictionaries: Naver (an online bilingual Korean-
English, English-Korean dictionary), LDOCE (an online version of the Longman Dictionary of 
Contemporary English), and Thesaurus (Roget’s 21st Century Thesaurus). Table 2 summarizes the major 
characteristics of the eight resources described above. 
 
 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 215 
Table 2. Reference Resources Accessed in Reference Suite 
Tab name Resource name and URL Description 
COCA Corpus of Contemporary American 
English 
http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/ 
The largest corpus/concordancing interface freely 
available on the Web.  
POS-tagged 
Offers many features and options  
Requires the use of query syntax for sophisticated 
searches 
Google Google Web 
http://www.google.com 
Powerful concordancer using the entire Web as its 
corpus 
Provides rich but highly heterogeneous data posing 
challenges to language learners 
Google Scholar (GS) 
http://scholar.google.com 
Retrieves data from academic publications 
Custom Search Engine (CSE) 
http://www.google.com/cse 
 
Retrieves results only from the designated sites 
and URL patterns 
Enables domain- or field-specific searches 
JTW JustTheWord 
http://www.just-the-word.com 
POS-tagged 
Shows all the combinational relationships the 
queried word has with other words 
Dictionaries Naver (bilingual) 
http://endic.naver.com 
Online Korean-English bidirectional dictionary 
LDOCE (monolingual) 
http://www.ldoceonline.com/ 
Online version of Longman Dictionary of 
Contemporary English 
Thesaurus 
http://www.thesaurus.com 
Online Roget’s 21 Century Thesaurus 
Procedures 
The present study was conducted in two phases. In the first, exploratory phase, the participants filled out 
an initial survey and had an interview about their approaches and attitudes toward English academic 
writing and their uses of reference resources. Next, they received three hours of individual tutoring from 
me, which covered basic corpus linguistics concepts, the purposes for which each resource in RS can be 
consulted, and strategies for their effective use. After using RS for a few weeks independently whenever 
they needed to consult reference resources, the participants recorded their uses of the suite for an hour 
using a free screen-recording software (BB Flashback) installed on their computer. While watching the 
screen-recorded videos together, I provided each participant with feedback on how to improve his or her 
RS consultation. 
In the second phase of the study, the participants chose a major writing assignment (10 pages or longer) 
they were required to complete either for an academic course they were taking or as part of their degree 
requirements (e.g., a term paper or a research proposal) and were asked to consult RS while working on 
their chosen assignment. The users were instructed to use RS as was suggested in the tutoring and to 
address the feedback they received in the first phase. While working on their assignment, they recorded 
their writing processes using screen capture software at their convenience. Three sessions of about one 
hour were recorded: two at the drafting stage and one at the editing or proofreading stage. Each screen 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 216 
recording was followed by a stimulated recall session conducted within two days of recording, in which 
the participants shared their intentions behind each query and decision they made. Lastly, the participants 
had a final interview and filled out an evaluation survey in which they shared what they perceived as the 
advantages and disadvantages of using the tool for their academic writing. The instructions for each step 
were provided in person and also electronically with detailed guidelines. 
All these procedures were conducted individually with each participant, so the duration of data collection 
(the first and second phases combined) varied depending on the participant, ranging from seven weeks to 
20 weeks. This wide difference was caused mainly by different types of writing assignments the 
participants completed for the study (see Table 1) and their varied time availability for the assignments. 
Data Analysis 
To answer the research questions (RQs), multiple analyses were conducted. For RQ 1 regarding how and 
why the participants consulted RS, I segmented the collected data into units of analysis, or problem 
spaces2. In this study, a problem is defined as a linguistic question arising while writing that prompts a 
reference resource consultation. A problem can be resolved (or abandoned) with one or more look-ups in 
the suite. A problem space in this study, then, refers to all of the look-ups or queries the writer performed 
for the resolution of a problem using RS. To identify the process and purposes of each problem-solving 
incidence identified, I developed a coding scheme based on previous research (Frankenberg-Garcia, 2005; 
Kennedy & Miceli, 2010; Park, 2010; Roca de Larios, Manchón, & Murphy, 1996) and a preliminary 
analysis of the first-phase data. First, problems were classified into two types: confirmatory and 
compensatory. Confirmatory problems refer to instances where writers tried to confirm the accuracy or 
appropriateness of a certain linguistic item they already had in mind or in writing in terms of its match 
with the intended meaning or context. Compensatory problems refer to instances when writers tried to 
extract a linguistic item from the reference resources that could express the intended meaning accurately 
and appropriately. Second, queries were classified into two types according to the format of the question 
that motivated a look-up in RS. A verification query is prompted by a closed-form question writers pose 
(i.e., yes or no questions, see Kennedy & Miceli, 2001). A sample verification question could be, “Is the 
adverb deeply the most typical collocate of the word entrenched?” An elicitation query is prompted by an 
open-form question (i.e., a “what” or “how” question). For example, a participant might ask, “What are 
the typical adverbs that modify the word entrenched?” Last, queries were classified according to the 
content of the question into 14 different purposes such as finding or checking a collocate and finding an 
L2 equivalent. The definitions and examples of the categories described above are provided in Appendix 
A. 
To answer RQ 2 concerning the effects of RS consultation on problem solving, each problem space 
identified was coded on two dimensions: (a) positive or negative depending on whether the RS 
consultation resulted in a correct text formulation or revision, and (b) satisfied or dissatisfied depending 
on whether the writer was satisfied with the consultation results—that is, whether he or she perceived the 
given problem as successfully solved. I coded the data on these two dimensions to examine how 
successfully the participants carried out RS consultations and how it compared with their own perceptions 
of the consultation results. 
For RQ 3, I contrasted what the participants said they intended to do with RS with what they actually did 
with it. For RQ 4, about the participants’ evaluations of the tool, the initial and final surveys and 
interviews as well as informal interviews conducted at the end of stimulated recalls, were analyzed 
through several iterations of thematic coding. 
To establish reliability of the analysis, two additional coders—both PhD students in second language 
education—participated in the coding. Each problem and query identified was assigned a unique ID 
number and 20% of them were randomly selected. After having an individual practice session, one of the 
coders independently coded the randomly selected 20% for problem type, query type, and query purpose. 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 217 
The other coder likewise coded 20% of the problems for the effects of RS consultation on problem 
solving. The inter-coder agreements were high: 100% for problem type and 93%, 91%, and 84% for 
query type, purpose, and effect on problem solving, respectively. Since only 20% of the data was 
checked, no attempt was made to resolve the disagreements. 
RESULTS 
RQ 1: How and why do the participants consult RS? 
Analysis of problems and queries 
During the study period, the participants carried out a total of 3,170 queries. Of those, 515 queries were 
screen-recorded during the participants’ self-chosen writing assignments and recalled within a few days. 
Findings presented below come from the analysis of these 515 queries. 
Through the 515 queries, the participants attempted to solve a total of 245 problems, performing an 
average of 2.1 queries per problem space (see Appendix B for an example of a problem space and the 
consultation sequence within it). Out of 245 problems, 142 problems (about 58%) were confirmatory (i.e., 
testing an intuitive hypothesis made based on the problem solver’s existing knowledge) while 103 (about 
42%) were compensatory (i.e., extracting linguistic items that were inaccessible by the problem solver 
from RS). At the query level, the participants carried out more verification queries seeking answers to 
whether questions than elicitation queries for what or how questions at a ratio of 3:2 (see Table 3). These 
results suggest that the participants consulted RS to confirm their existing linguistic knowledge more 
often than to seek linguistic items that were beyond their current linguistic repertoires. 
Table 3. Analysis of Problems and Queries 
Types Purposes  
Problems f % Initial query f  % Subsequent query f  % 
(N = 245)   (N = 245)   (N = 270) 
 Confirmatory 142 58  Collocation 52 21.2  Simple confirmation 86 31.9 
 Compensatory 103 42  L2 equivalent 44 18.0  Intended meaning 10 25.9 
     Simple confirmation 40 16.3  Collocation 43 15.9 
Queries f %  Intended meaning 38 15.5  Register 24 8.9 
(N = 515)    Upgrading 27 11.0  Upgrading 16 5.9 
 Verification 317 61.6   alternative     alternative 
 Elicitation 209 40.6  Register 15 6.1  General usage 15 5.6 
     Simple alternative 15 6.1  Simple alternative 15 5.6 
     Argument pattern 11 4.5  L2 equivalent 12 4.4 
     General usage 8 3.3  Argument pattern 6 2.2 
     Noun ending 8 3.3  Part of speech 5 1.9 
     Article/determiner 6 2.4  Sentence/phrase 5 1.9 
     Part of speech 3 1.2   hunting 
     Sentence/phrase 3 1.2  Article/determiner 3 1.1 
      hunting    Noun ending 1 0.4 
     Spelling 2 0.8  Others 7 2.6 
     Others 7 2.8 
Note. A considerable portion of the queries were classified into more than one category, so the sums of the percentages exceed 
100%. 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 218 
Turning to the purposes for which the participants consulted RS, findings were presented separately for 
initial queries and subsequent queries. An initial query (i.e., the first query within a problem space) was 
considered primary, as it showed the initial motivation that prompted an RS consultation. Therefore, the 
content of the problems the writers addressed using RS can be inferred from the initial query purposes. 
Subsequent queries within problem spaces were considered secondary, as they were performed to build 
on the previous query results (see Appendix B for examples). For initial queries, the participants 
consulted RS for collocation, L2 equivalent, and simple confirmation most frequently (see Appendix A 
for a detailed description of each query purpose). When it came to subsequent queries, the participants 
were shown to expand on the previous query results or get corroboration through queries for simple 
confirmation, intended meaning, collocation, and register (see Table 3). 
Resources Consulted 
Over the course of completing their writing assignments, the participants most frequently consulted Naver 
and COCA, performing 25.6% and 25.4% of their queries in each resource, respectively. Google was a 
relatively close third (18.1%), followed by JTW (11.1%), LDOCE (7.8%), and Roget’s Thesaurus (5.2%). 
CSE and GS ranked lowest and were consulted for less than 5% of total queries. 
Table 4. Major Purposes for which each Resource was Consulted 
Resource Consultation 
frequency  
(N = 515) 
% Major purposes % within each 
resource 
Naver 
(Bilingual) 
132 25.6 L2 equivalent 
Intended meaning 
General usage  
41.7 
27.3 
9.8 
COCA 131 25.4 Collocation 
Intended meaning 
Simple confirmation 
Upgrading alternative  
35.9 
20.6 
14.5 
14.5 
Google 93  18.1 Simple confirmation 78.5 
JTW 57  11.1 Collocation 
Intended meaning 
Upgrading alternative 
59.6 
15.8 
15.8 
LDOCE 
(Monolingual) 
40 7.8 Intended meaning 
Collocation 
Noun ending 
70.0 
12.5 
10.0 
Thesaurus 27 5.2 Simple alternative 
Upgrading alternative 
Intended meaning 
48.1 
33.3 
18.5 
GS 18 3.5 Simple confirmation 
Register 
55.6 
50.0 
CSE 17 3.3 Register 
Simple confirmation 
88.2 
58.8 
Note. Percentage figures in this column represent the percentages of the given purposes within each resource. Many queries 
were performed for more than one purpose, so the sum of percentages within each resource exceeds 100%. 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 219 
A general trend emerged, suggesting that each resource had a unique set of predominant purposes for 
which it was consulted. For example, the participants preferred to consult Naver for L2 equivalent, 
Google for simple confirmation, and COCA and JTW for collocation (see Table 4). Another closely 
related finding was that in about a quarter of the total problem spaces, the participants consulted different 
resources in combination within a given problem space to corroborate or expand on initial query results. 
This overall trend demonstrates that the participants were aware of what information each resource 
provided and strategically used each resource for a distinct purpose. 
RQ 2: How does the use of the reference suite affect the participants’ problem-solving 
performance? 
RS consultations proved to be overall helpful to the participants in problem solving during their writing 
assignments. In 170 problem spaces (69.4%), RS consultation had a positive effect and resulted in a 
correct text formulation or revision. However, RS use led to an incorrect text, having a negative effect in 
31 problem spaces (12.7%). In the remaining 44 problem spaces (18%), the participants abandoned RS 
consultation due to difficulties finding relevant items from the query results. 
The problem-solving performance rates presented above, however, did not necessarily match the 
participants’ perceptions of the consultation results. The participants were dissatisfied with 13 out of the 
total 170 problem spaces where RS consultation had a positive effect whereas 20 problem spaces ended 
up with an incorrect text even though the participants perceived them as successfully solved. These 
mismatches were caused by different factors such as a wrong solution retrieved from the query results or 
misapplication of the chosen solution to writing. 
In terms of problem type, the rate of positive effects from RS consultation was considerably higher with 
confirmatory problems. Out of a total of 142 confirmatory problems, 109 (76.8%) led to a correct text 
compared to 61 (59.2%) of compensatory problems. Meanwhile, the rate of abandoned consultations was 
much higher with compensatory problems (28.2%) than with confirmatory (10.5%). This result 
demonstrates that the participants had greater difficulties solving compensatory problems than 
confirmatory problems by consulting the suite. 
RQ 3: What are the strategies used and pitfalls encountered by the participants in their interactions 
with the suite? 
As presented above, the participants used the reference suite quite effectively, with RS use contributing to 
correct text formulation or revision about 70% of the time. To a large extent, this effective use was made 
possible through strategies the participants employed or developed as they became more familiar with the 
suite. These strategies can be broadly broken down into querying and evaluation strategies. 
Querying strategies are ones that the participants used for formulating and refining query terms. One 
commonly used strategy was to use a different resource to expand or build on the previous query. The 
most common sequence in using this strategy was getting a hint from Naver for an L2 form expressing 
the intended meaning and then performing an English query on COCA or Google to find its acceptability 
or frequency. Another common strategy was to perform further queries by refining the query term when 
the initial query results were not satisfactory. Participants replaced either all or part of the previous query 
term with an alternative in terms of meaning, POS, or syntactic structure (see Appendix B for an 
example). 
Evaluation strategies, in turn, refer to the strategies the participants used to evaluate query results and 
apply the solution found to their writing. The most frequently used strategy of this type was utilizing 
frequency information. Specifically, it involved choosing the most frequent item from multiple 
alternatives (in an elicitation query), or accepting a certain number of instances of the target item as 
evidence of its acceptability (in a verification query). Some participants used, though much less 
frequently, their content familiarity with the items or authority of their data sources as criteria for 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 220 
choosing the item to apply in their writing. 
Despite their overall effective use of the suite, the participants still fell into pitfalls in its use, which 
contributed to incorrect text formulations or revisions, false perceptions of successful problem resolution, 
or consultation abandonment. What can be called “lack of rigor” in observing query results (Kennedy & 
Miceli, 2001, p. 77) was the most common cause for unsuccessful problem-solving outcomes. The 
participants sometimes simply picked the most frequent item or checked the target item’s frequency 
information but did not check whether it carried the intended meaning or was appropriate in the intended 
context. 
The second pitfall commonly observed was lack of flexibility in trying out different options. The 
participants missed out on opportunities to reach better solutions or the same solutions more effectively 
by fixating on certain ways of representing problems and on only one or two resources for most of their 
queries. For example, some participants showed a strong preference for verification over elicitation even 
for problems for which elicitation queries would have been more helpful. In one of her problem spaces, 
Yumee carried out a verification query of made its identity on Google to see if the verb make can be a 
good collocate of the noun identity. Her intended meaning was develop its identity. She could have found 
appropriate and alternative collocates including develop, establish, and create by querying identity on 
JTW or COCA. 
The last pitfall stemmed from the limitations of the resources themselves. For example, Google 
sometimes returned a considerable number of hits for even an ungrammatically formulated query term, 
giving the participant false confirmation on that queried word or sequence. 
RQ 4: How do the participants evaluate concordancing and other resources in terms of their utility 
as a writing support tool? 
Overall, the participants evaluated RS positively. The participants responded that RS provided them with 
easy access to mutually complementary reference resources from a single interface. Most participants 
shared the view that the multi-resource consultation capability made it possible to get corroboration on 
the linguistic items in question from different resources relatively quickly, therefore allowing them to use 
the solutions they found in their writing with confidence. There were other important benefits of using RS 
mentioned by the participants. First, the presence of multiple resources motivated the participants to 
venture beyond their current linguistic repertoires and experiment with new ways of expressing intended 
meanings, as evidenced by the following remarks from Goeun: 
[RS] allows me to go beyond my current linguistic repertoire (…) to try new ways of 
expressing my thoughts. (…) I feel like my English is becoming fossilized. With this tool, 
you can check whether your experimental expressions can actually be used or not. (Final 
Interview) 
Second, the participants became more attentive to the accuracy and appropriateness of the language they 
used in their writing and increased their lexico-grammatical awareness. Third, these changes combined to 
increase, if not drastically, their confidence in the linguistic aspects of English academic writing, 
providing them with a sense of independence as L2 writers. According to Jae: 
[RS] helps me have confidence a lot. In the past I felt helpless, but now I think I can 
produce, to some degree, refined texts as long as I have time and motivation to use the tool. 
I would say RS (…) helps users edit their writing on their own. (Final Interview) 
However, the participants also experienced various challenges while using RS, especially the 
concordancers. The first and foremost challenge that all participants shared was the time-consuming 
nature of RS consultation. Most participants expressed frustration with the time required to go through the 
consultation cycle, from devising a search strategy to evaluating the results, to find what they were 
looking for. Some participants found going through the consultation cycle not only time-consuming but 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 221 
also cognitively taxing, as it required them to make decisions at every step, when much of their 
attentional resources were already consumed by other various aspects of the writing task at hand. Closely 
related, some participants also reported that they sometimes became so engrossed in their RS 
consultations that they had their flow of thoughts interrupted in terms of global content of their writing, 
especially at the drafting stage. This point was poignantly expressed by Ian: 
(…) what bothered me a little was that it can easily distract you from your writing. You cannot 
afford to be interrupted while writing down what is shaping up in your head in terms of content. 
But when I use this tool, I am tempted to use each resource here to confirm the accuracy. (3rd 
Stimulated Recall) 
Another shortcoming of RS expressed by the participants was the nature of interactivity they had with the 
suite. Jae and Goeun pointed out that unlike getting support from a human tutor or expert, it is still almost 
solely the user’s responsibility to find a solution by feeding the right query terms into the resources and 
making the correct judgments about the results, and even then there is no guarantee that the solution 
found is the right one. 
As for the advantages and challenges of using each component resource, Naver was received as an all-
purpose reference resource with its versatility of functioning as a dictionary, thesaurus, and corpus. In 
addition, the speed and ease with which it could be consulted was a major contributor to its frequent use 
among the participants. COCA was considered a concordancer that provided considerable amounts of 
reliable examples in terms of their sources. Its sophisticated search options and operators allowed some 
participants to elicit and verify phraseologies and grammar in creative ways. However, the very same use 
of query syntax and operators in COCA also posed difficulties to other participants. JTW was seen as a 
simple-to-use but powerful tool for finding and checking collocations, but at the time of collecting data, 
the participants were frustrated by its frequent crashes due to its unstable server. As for Google, most 
participants agreed that it was a quick and easy tool in checking the presence and frequency of a word 
sequence of any length. However, they were not completely sure about the reliability of the linguistic 
information they retrieved from the Web. The final resources that drew a common response were GS and 
CSE. The participants all mentioned that these two Google resources were intended for checking the 
register of given linguistic items but they gradually stopped using them over time as they realized these 
resources were too small in size to provide sufficient data on which to base their decisions. 
DISCUSSION 
Concordancing versus Other (More Traditional) Reference Resources 
One major thrust of the present study was to explore the utility of concordancing as a reference resource 
for L2 academic writing. The study results demonstrated that overall, concordancing enabled the 
participants to effectively solve specific types of problems such as collocation and simple confirmation. 
At the same time, as in some of the previous studies (Kennedy & Miceli, 2010; Lai & Chen, 2015; Yoon, 
2008), concordancing proved to be neither the most preferred resource in terms of frequency of use nor 
the best suited for many consultation purposes. Rather, the participants were shown to strategically 
consult each resource (type) for a unique set of purposes, often using multiple resources within a single 
problem space. As evident in the high rate (69.4%) of positive effects from RS consultation, the pattern of 
using multiple resources in complementary ways contributed to successful problem solving, lending 
support to the arguments in previous research in favor of using corpus tools along with, rather than in 
place of, other reference resources (e.g., Conroy, 2010; Flowerdew, 2009). 
By examining this combined use of multiple reference resources, this study provides some important 
insights into reference resources as a problem-solving tool for academic writing. First, previous studies in 
similar settings (e.g., Park, 2010; Yoon, 2008) found that learners showed a strong tendency to use the 
given corpus tools to confirm their existing knowledge rather than to elicit new knowledge on their target 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 222 
language. In this study, however, the participants tried to perform a considerable number of elicitation 
queries (40% of all queries), with many of them leading to successful problem solving. This is a welcome 
finding, as a balanced use of two types of queries seems to enable more effective problem solving and 
provide greater opportunities for language development (Park, 2010). The greater tendency to pursue 
compensatory consultation found in this study may be linked to the multiplicity of reference resources 
and search options and the flexibility to use them in combination in order to meet the writer’s ongoing 
needs. The presence of multiple resources with largely unique functions provided the participants with 
both motivation and means to carry out different types of queries. 
Second, within concordancer-type resources, the extent and frequency of use differed widely depending 
on the size and tagging status of the source corpus. While the participants used COCA and JTW—both 
POS-tagged corpora—for finding or checking collocates and alternatives through both elicitation and 
verification queries, they used Google—running on untagged but abundant language data—mainly for 
confirming the acceptability of multi-word strings they formulated predominantly through verification 
queries. 
Meanwhile, GS and CSE were consulted the least, accounting for less than 5% of all queries, and were 
mainly used to check register. This was a somewhat surprising result, as these two search engines had 
been included in the suite specifically to meet the needs of academic writing and to compensate for the 
weaknesses of Google. In actual use, however, the participants could hardly afford to explore discipline- 
or genre-specific textual patterns using these resources as they were working on their papers under 
pressure with tight deadlines. Even when the participants did use these resources to check whether a 
certain string was in the right register, GS and CSE often returned no or few hits of the queried item, 
making the participants dismiss them as too small to be useful. Also worth noting is that some 
participants, especially PhD students, pointed out that they did not feel much need for a discipline-
specific corpus because they had their own content knowledge and readings to turn to for usages of 
discipline-specific vocabulary. These findings, in sum, imply that GS and CSE would be more usefully 
consulted as research tools that help writers discover discipline-specific textual patterns and genre 
characteristics when given sufficient time and motivation as in Lee and Swales’ (2006) experimental 
course. These resources may still be lacking as reference tools that can assist time-constrained writers in 
finding immediate solutions to problems. 
Last, the participants consulted Naver more than any other resource (25.6%), even though the training and 
feedback during the study were focused on the various, often novel, ways of solving linguistic problems 
using the concordancers. This frequent use of the bilingual dictionary by the participants can be linked to 
a few factors. First, the participants performed a higher number of translation queries than expected for 
students of their academic level. This shows that that they performed a great deal of conceptual and 
textual L1 to L2 translation. Second, the participants had already been using this resource for years prior 
to the study, so they knew very well what to query and where to click. Third, Naver was the most 
versatile resource in RS proving extra linguistic information such as synonyms and collocations. While 
working on the real-life writing assignments that came with tight deadlines, the participants often turned 
to this familiar resource that served multiple purposes. 
Taken together, the findings suggest that as a reference resource for on-the-fly problem solving during L2 
writing (as opposed to a DDL research tool), a concordancer should have a large POS-tagged source 
corpus so that it allows different types of elicitation queries, and provides sufficient concordances for 
verification queries. At the same time, it should not be too complicated to operate and fast enough not to 
interrupt the flow of thoughts of the writer. 
Cognitive Extension versus Cognitive Distraction 
The main theoretical assumption for the present study was that linguistic reference resources, especially 
concordancing, can provide L2 writers with an intellectual partnership and extend their knowledge and 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 223 
thinking during problem solving. By and large, RS was shown to serve as an intellectual partner to the 
participants through a cognitive division of labor and to enhance their intellectual performance for solving 
lexico-grammatical problems that arose while writing. To give only the simplest description of the typical 
division of labor that happened in problem solving, RS provided the participants with lexical and 
grammatical options that they would not have been able to access instantly, as these items had been 
neither acquired nor fully internalized (i.e., compensatory problem solving). RS also made it possible to 
test and readjust their form-meaning mappings (i.e., confirmatory problem solving). As such, the 
participants and the suite jointly solved linguistic problems in ways that the participants alone would not 
have been able to do—at least not as effectively. 
However, most of the participants also experienced varying degrees of frustration with respect to the 
cognitive processes involved in using RS. While the reference suite was supposed to amplify their 
cognition in problem solving as described above, the participants sometimes found the use of the tool to 
be cognitively taxing. Most of these conflicting perceptions among participants of the current study can 
be traced back to misalignments between the goals of the participants and the affordances offered by the 
tool. 
The participants were all graduate students whose approaches to academic writing for course assignments 
and degree requirements typically focused on meaning or content. Therefore, they did not engage in the 
writing task with an explicit language learning goal. However, the presence and use of RS heightened 
their awareness of language problems and provided a means to address them on the fly. Sometimes these 
affordances offered by RS led the participants to focus on linguistic features of writing more than they 
normally would. It is on these occasions that the main goals of the participants and the affordances of the 
tool were misaligned and thus RS consultation felt like an extra cognitive burden. This misalignment 
often took place at the drafting stage of writing, when their attentional resources were mainly focused on 
content rather than on rhetorical concerns. This resonates with the evaluative comments by some 
participants in Hafner and Candlin (2007) that using corpus tools made them focus unnecessarily on 
linguistic structure at the expense of content. In line with the findings from previous research (Hafner & 
Candlin, 2007; Yoon, 2008), this interpretation strongly suggests that overall educational contexts, the 
types of writing tasks, stages in the writing process, and the goals and expectations arising from each 
stage are major factors influencing individual writers’ intellectual partnership with and perceptions of 
reference resources. 
Limitations of the Study and Suggestions for Future Research 
Although the study shed some new light on the under-researched aspects of learner concordancing and 
reference resource consultation, there were also some limitations. First, the study was based on only a 
small number of the participants, so the findings can hardly be generalized to larger groups of L2 writers. 
Another, related limitation is that while this study focused on the general trends emerging from this small 
group of L2 writers, many of the findings were presented as group findings, obscuring possible individual 
differences among the participants. 
Acknowledgment of the limitations above leads to suggestions for future research. First, the study can be 
extended to larger and more various groups of L2 writers with more sophisticated research designs. One 
specific avenue for further research would be to systematically investigate how reference resources are 
consulted by L2 writers in different stages of the writing process (e.g., drafting vs. revising). Another 
suggestion would be, as one of the reviewers of this paper suggested, to conduct a large-scale study that 
compares one group of students using only their usual reference resources, such as a bilingual dictionary, 
with another group using a suite of mutually complementary resources. 
CONCLUSION 
The findings of this study suggest that using concordancing tools along with other complementary 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 224 
reference resources within a single interface may provide advanced L2 writers in academic settings with 
means and motivation to engage in robust meaning negotiations during their L2 written language 
production and therefore ultimately help them become more confident and autonomous as writers. 
However, as evident in the various cognitive, affective, and technical forms of challenges and difficulties 
the participants experienced in their uses of the reference suite, effective and meaningful uses of reference 
tools should be preceded by appropriate training and guidance. 
In this regard, it seems appropriate to conclude this article by making a few suggestions for learner 
training. A synthesis of the findings of the present and previous studies indicates that there is a number of 
principles to bear in mind. Firstly, learner training should be progressive and contingent on the abilities 
and traits of individual learners, reference resources available, and ongoing needs arising from their 
writing contexts. Secondly, this training should be provided in ways that students can directly connect 
tool use to their real-life tasks and thus have ample opportunities to develop a meaningful intellectual 
partnership with reference tools. Thirdly, the content of training can vary depending on the specific needs 
of students and the particular set of resources provided, but may include universally applicable principles 
for successful reference resource consultation, including general strategies to use and pitfalls to avoid, 
such as the ones identified in this study. Lastly, as an underlying principle, student writers should be 
reminded of the argument by Salomon et al. (1991) that a mindful intellectual partnership with a cognitive 
tool requires the human user’s active participation. More specifically, students should be taught to 
abandon the expectation that reference resources work for them, helping them to complete the same 
writing tasks with less time and effort and taught instead to view them as tools that one should work with 
in a cognitive division of labor. In other words, students should realize that the greater autonomy afforded 
by reference resources comes with a greater responsibility for their own writing and learning. 
 
APPENDIX A 
Coding Scheme for Problems and Queries 
Name Description 
Problem types  
 Confirmatory The writer has a specific linguistic item in mind or in writing for a meaning she 
intends to express and tries to confirm whether they match accurately and/or 
appropriately in a given context.  
 Compensatory The writer does not have a clear idea about how to convert her intended 
meaning into text and tries to extract potential target items from the reference 
resources. 
Query types  
 Verification Performed to verify the presence or frequency of the instances of an item or its 
lexical, grammatical accuracy, and/or stylistic appropriateness in a given 
context. Typically prompted by a whether question the writer poses – for 
example, is the adverb deeply the most typical collocate of the word 
entrenched? 
 Elicitation Performed to elicit linguistic items that match the writer’s intended meaning 
and typically prompted by a what or how question – for example, what are the 
typical adverbs that modify the word entrenched?  
Query purposes  
 Simple Is X (a word, phrase, or syntactic pattern) actually used? Can I say X in this 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 225 
confirmation context? Is X typically and frequently used in the given context? 
 L2 equivalent What is the L2 equivalent of X? 
 Collocation Is X a typical or appropriate collocate of Y? 
What is the most typical or appropriate collocate of X? 
 Intended meaning Does X deliver the intended meaning?  
What is the accurate meaning of X in the given context? 
 Simple alternatives What are the alternatives that can replace X to avoid repetition? 
 Upgrading 
alternatives 
What are the alternatives of X that are more accurate and appropriate in the 
given context? How can X be better expressed? 
 Article/determiner Should X be used with an article/determiner? 
 Argument pattern What are the typical/frequent object types X takes? Does X take a noun 
(phrase), to infinitive, gerund, or clause as its object? Is X a transitive or 
intransitive verb?  
 Noun ending Should X be in the singular or plural? Is X a countable or uncountable noun? 
 Sentence/phrases 
hunting 
How can multiple content words be combined in a sentence? (searching for 
sentences similar to what the writer is trying to say) 
 General usage How is X used in sentences? (aimed to discover typical syntactic patterns in 
which it is used or its collocation) 
 Register  Is X in the right register? (formal/informal or academic/non-academic) 
 Part of speech Is X a noun (or a verb, etc.)? Which word class does X belong to?  
 Spelling Is X spelled correctly? How is X spelled? 
 Others  
Note. Collocations here include both lexical (i.e., combinations among nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs) and grammatical 
(i.e., verbs, adjectives or nouns combined with a preposition or a grammatical structure) collocations. 
 
APPENDIX B 
An Example of a Problem Space 
Step  Operations and decisions  
Encounter a problem Initial state: (…) more devastating images and videos of youth culture 
and life have been produced and shared online (…) 
 
Define and represent 
the problem 
 Do native speakers use the phrase devastating images in the 
way I used it in the given context? 
 
Devise a search 
strategy (Query 1, 
initial query) 
Resource: 
Query term: 
Query syntax: 
Google 
devastating images 
Use “” to get exact matches 
 
Perform the query   Click the Google tab of RS and type in “devastating 
images” in the search box 
  
Evaluate the query Query results: - (…) devastating images of Texas’ drought (…) 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 226 
results  
 
Evaluation:  
- (…) devastating images of eco-disasters (…) 
 
I intended to mean something like images that make people 
uncomfortable or irritated, but the results showed that 
devastating images are mostly concerned with natural 
disasters. So I decided to perform another query. 
Query 2 (subsequent query) 
Devise a search 
strategy 
Resource: 
Query term: 
COCA 
devastating images 
 
Evaluate the query 
results 
Query results: 
 
 
Evaluation: 
- (…)broadcast the devastating images and angry reaction 
from the scene (…) 
 
Here too the example showed that it is more about physical 
destruction or a disaster, and there was only one instance. So 
I decided to look for a word that has a meaning closer to 
what I intended to say. 
Query 3 (subsequent query) 
Define and represent 
the problem 
 What are the words that are similar in meaning to 
devastating? 
Devise a search 
strategy 
Resource: 
Query term: 
Query syntax: 
COCA 
devastating 
[=devastating] ([=word] is a query operator used in COCA 
that returns the synonyms of the word) 
 
Evaluate the query 
results 
Query results: 
 
 
Evaluation: 
- overwhelming, disturbing, shocking, harmful, destructive,  
(…) 
 
The word disturbing seemed the closest to what I intended to 
say. So I wanted to search for disturbing image as the next 
query. 
Query 4 (subsequent query) 
Define and represent 
the problem 
 Do native speakers use disturbing images in the context I 
intended?  
Devise a search 
strategy 
 
Resource: 
Query term: 
COCA 
disturbing image 
Evaluate the query 
results 
Query results:  
 
 
 
 
Evaluation: 
- Rated PG-13 for intense violent thematic material and 
disturbing images (…) 
- (…) included several disturbing images of women being 
victimized by (…) 
 
This matched what I intended to mean. And there were also 
many more instances than devastating images. So I decided 
to replace devastating with disturbing. 
 
Apply the solution 
found to the writing 
Goal state:  (…) more disturbing images and videos of youth culture and 
life have been produced and shared online (…) 
Note. This specific example is from Yumee’s data.  
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 227 
 
NOTES 
1. CSE is a customizable search engine that searches websites or URLs sharing specific patterns 
designated by the user. I created 5 CSEs that search websites of major journals in each participant’s 
field of study and added them to RS. (Two participants were from the same academic discipline, so 
they shared the same CSE.) 
2. The concept of problem space in psychology refers to all the states and steps a problem solver goes 
through to reach a desired (goal) state (Anderson, 1995). 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback and suggestions on earlier 
versions of the article. I would also like to extend special thanks to Dr. Alister Cumming for his advice 
and inspiration for the study. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Choongil Yoon completed his PhD in Language and Literacies Education at the Ontario Institute for 
Studies in Education of the University of Toronto. His research interests include second language writing, 
corpus linguistics, and computer-assisted language learning. 
E-mail: topher.kris@gmail.com 
 
REFERENCES 
Anderson, J. R. (1995). Cognitive psychology and its implications (4th ed.). New York: W. H. Freeman. 
Boulton, A. (2010). Data-driven learning: Taking the computer out of the equation. Language Learning, 
60(3), 534–572. 
Brezina, V. (2012). Use of Google Scholar in corpus-driven EAP research. Journal of English for 
Academic Purposes, 11(4), 319–331. 
Canagarajah, S. A. (2002). Critical academic writing and multilingual students. Ann Arbor, MI: The 
University of Michigan Press. 
Chambers, A., & O’Sullivan, I. (2004). Corpus consultation and advanced learners’ writing skills in 
French. ReCALL, 16(1), 158–172. 
Charles, M. (2014). Getting the corpus habit: EAP students’ long-term use of personal corpora. English 
for Specific Purposes, 35(1), 30–40. 
Conroy, M. A. (2010). Internet tools for language learning: University students taking control of their 
writing. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 26(6), 861–882. 
Cresswell, A. (2007). Getting to ‘know’ connectors? Evaluating data-driven learning in a writing skills 
course. In E. Hidalgo, L. Quereda, & S. Juan (Eds.), Corpora in the foreign language classroom (pp. 
267–287). Amsterdam: Rodopi. 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 228 
Flowerdew, L. (2009). Applying corpus linguistics to pedagogy: A critical evaluation. International 
Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 14(3), 393–417. 
Frankenberg-Garcia, A. (2005). A peek into what today’s language learners as researchers actually do. 
International Journal of Lexicography, 18(3), 335–355. 
Fujii, Y. (2007). Making the most of search engines for Japanese to English translation: Benefits and 
challenges. The Asian EFL Journal Professional Teaching Articles, 23, 1–36. 
Gilmore, A. (2009). Using online corpora to develop students’ writing skills. ELT Journal, 63(4), 363–
372. 
Hafner, C. A., & Candlin, C. N. (2007). Corpus tools as an affordance to learning in professional legal 
education. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 6(4), 303–318. 
Hegelheimer, V. (2006). Helping ESL writers through a multimodal, corpus-based, online grammar 
resource. CALICO Journal, 24(1), 5–32. 
Hinkel, E. (2002). Second language writers’ text: Linguistic and rhetorical features. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Hubbard, P. (2005). Google as a tool for academic writing. Retrieved from 
http://www.stanford.edu/~efs/google/index.htm 
Hyland, K. (2003). Second language writing. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Johns, T. (1991). Should you be persuaded: Two samples of data-driven learning materials. English 
Language Research Journal, 4, 1–16. 
Jonassen, D. H. (1992). What are cognitive tools? In P. A. Kommers, D. H. Jonassen, & J. T. Mayes 
(Eds.), Cognitive tools for learning (pp. 1–6). Berlin: Springer Verlag. 
Jonassen, D. H., & Reeves, T. C. (1996). Learning with technology: Using computers as cognitive tools. 
In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and Technology (pp. 
693–719). New York: Macmillan. 
Kennedy, C., & Miceli, T. (2001). An evaluation of intermediate students’ approaches to corpus 
investigation. Language Learning & Technology, 5(3), 77–90. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num3/kennedy/default.html 
Kennedy, C., & Miceli, T. (2010). Corpus-assisted creative writing: Introducing intermediate Italian 
learners to a corpus as a reference resource. Language Learning & Technology, 14(1), 28–44. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num1/kennedymiceli.pdf 
Lai, S., & Chen, H. (2015). Dictionaries vs concordancers: Actual practice of the two different tools in 
EFL writing. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 28(4), 341–363. 
Lee, D., & Swales, J. (2006). A corpus-based EAP course for NNS doctoral students: Moving from 
available specialized corpora to self-compiled corpora. English for Specific Purposes, 25(1), 56–75. 
Norman, D. A. (1993). Things that make us smart. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
O’Sullivan, I., & Chambers, A. (2006). Learners’ writing skills in French: Corpus consultation and 
learner evaluation. Journal of Second Language Writing, 15(1), 49–68. 
Park, K. (2010). Enhancing lexicogrammatical performance through corpus-based mediation in L2 
academic writing instruction. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). The Pennsylvania State University, 
University Park, PA. 
 
Choongil Yoon Concordancers and dictionaries as problem-solving tools 
 
Language Learning & Technology 229 
Roca de Larios, J., Manchón, R., & Murphy, L. (1996). Strategic knowledge in L1 and L2 writing: A 
cross-sectional study. Paper presented at the The European Writing Conference, Barcelona, Spain. 
Rüschoff, B. (2003). New technologies and language learning: Theoretical considerations and practical 
solutions. Retrieved from http://www.ellinogermaniki.gr/ep/geh-
mit/htm/New_Technologies_and_Language_Learning.doc 
Salomon, G., Perkins, D. N., & Globerson, T. (1991). Partners in cognition: Extending human 
intelligence with intelligent technologies. Educational Researcher, 20(2), 2–9. 
Silva, T. (1993). Toward an understanding of the distinct nature of L2 writing: The ESL research and its 
implications. TESOL Quarterly, 27(4), 657–677. 
Tono, Y. (2013). Lexicography across languages. The Encyclopedia of Applied Linguistics. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell. doi: 10.1002/9781405198431.wbeal0700 
Watson Todd, R. (2001). Induction from self-selected concordances and self-correction. System, 29(1), 
91–102. 
Wolff, D. (1997). Computers as cognitive tools in the language classroom. In A.-K. Korsvold & B. 
Rüschoff (Eds.), New technologies in language learning and teaching (pp. 17–26). Strasbourg, France: 
Council of Europe. 
Wu, S., Franken, M., & Witten, I. H. (2009). Refining the use of the web (and web search) as a language 
teaching and learning resource. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 22(3), 249–268. 
Yoon, H. (2005). An investigation of students’ experiences with corpus technology in second language 
academic writing. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH. 
Yoon, H. (2008). More than a linguistic reference: The influence of corpus technology on L2 academic 
writing. Language Learning & Technology, 12(2), 31–48. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num2/yoon.pdf 
