Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2016/news.pdf 
June 2016, Volume 20, Number 2 
pp. 13–16 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 13 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
University of Hawai‘i Center for Language and Technology (CLT) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC) 
 
 
 
 
 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
2016 ONLINE INSTITUTE: FUNDAMENTALS OF PROJECT-BASED LANGUAGE 
LEARNING 
Project-Based Learning has a rich and productive history extending for over 100 
years. Embark on a journey of discovery to better understand project-based language 
learning (PBLL) and explore its connections with 21st Century Skills, content-based 
instruction, performance assessment and your own instructional context. Experts in 
the field guide you through the creation of a project blueprint. Connect with 
colleagues who have a common interest in quality PBLL implementation.  
Successfully complete all assigned tasks and earn an NFLRC digital badge. Registration for this online 
institute is $25. Sign up today. 
5TH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON LANGUAGE DOCUMENTATION & 
CONSERVATION (ICLDC) 
 
The 5th International Conference on Language Documentation and Conservation (ICLDC), “Vital Voices: 
Linking Language & Wellbeing,” will be held March 2–5, 2017, at the Hawaiʻi Imin International 
Conference Center on the campus of the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa. The 5th ICLDC is hosted by the 
Department of Linguistics and the National Foreign Language Resource Center at the University of 
Hawaiʻi at Mānoa. 
The conference program will feature two keynote talks, Talk Story Roundtable Discussions, and 
Workshops. An optional Hilo Field Study (on the Big Island of Hawaiʻi) to visit Hawaiian language 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 14 
revitalization programs in action will immediately precede the conference (February 28–March 1). 
Wellbeing is a state of the body and mind that encompasses the presence of positive moods and emotions, 
life satisfaction, fulfillment, and positive functioning and the absence of negative emotions like anxiety. 
Public health experts, policymakers, and economists are coming to recognize the implications of 
wellbeing for society as a whole, as well as individuals, thanks to a growing set of results from cross-
sectional, longitudinal and experimental studies. 
Increasingly, researchers in several fields have noted a positive correlation between language 
maintenance and wellbeing in endangered language communities. While the nature of the connection 
between language and wellbeing remains the subject of much debate, the existence of a connection is not 
entirely unexpected, given the range of outcomes associated with wellbeing. In addition, languages 
encode knowledge systems, so language loss represents not only the loss of a communicative system, but 
also the loss of traditional knowledge systems. Importantly, traditional knowledge systems encode 
cultural practices related to wellbeing. Understanding the connections between language and wellbeing 
will potentially have implications for public health policy and beyond, but also for language researchers, 
since traditional knowledge systems are among the most threatened domains of endangered language. 
Knowledge of esoteric domains such as botanical classification and traditional medicines is forgotten well 
before basic vocabulary and language structure. Hence, these areas of traditional knowledge are precisely 
the areas which need to be prioritized by language documenters. 
Exploring the connections between language and wellbeing is potentially transformational for language 
documentation and conservation, and thus it will be the theme for the 5th ICLDC. 
In April 2016, the website for ICLDC 5 became available, and its Call for Proposals for Workshops, Talk 
Story Roundtable Discussions, and General Sessions (papers, posters, and electronic posters) was 
announced. 
2017 INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY FOR LANGUAGE STUDIES (ISLS) CONFERENCE 
The International Society for Language Studies, co-sponsored by the University Hawai‘i at Mānoa, will 
hold a conference June 15–17, 2017 at the Hawai‘i Imin International Conference Center in Honolulu. 
The theme of the conference will be “Intersections of Peace and Language Studies.” 
Peace is often defined as freedom from oppression, the end of conflict or even harmony in relationships. 
Whatever the definition, the word peace means different things to different people. Peace is an important 
concept that also connects to the focus of ISLS: the intersections and meeting places of language and 
power, identity, and social justice. It is in this light that we invite proposal submissions that specifically 
address some aspect of this focus and its intersection with the concept of peace. 
The ISLS conference is a venue for individuals from all disciplines to come together and discuss language 
from a critical, interdisciplinary lens (i.e., language use, language learning, language teaching, critical 
language studies, etc.). To that end, we encourage submissions from across fields of study where their 
work connects language to peace. The paper proposal submission opened on the ISLS website in April 
2016, and will conclude on November 30, 2016. Submissions will not be accepted after the November 30 
deadline. Notification of proposal acceptance or rejection will be sent by January 15, 2017. All presenters 
who have not registered for the conference by February 28, 2017 will not be scheduled in the conference 
program. Selected conference papers will be published by ISLS in the Readings in Language Studies 
peer-reviewed book series in 2018. 
STAY IN TOUCH WITH SOCIAL MEDIA 
Did you know that the NFLRC has its own Facebook page with close to 3,000 fans? It’s one of the best 
ways to hear about the latest news, publications, conferences, workshops, and resources we offer. Just 
click on the “Like” button to become a fan. For those who prefer getting up-to-the-minute “tweets,” you 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 15 
can follow us on our Twitter page. Finally, NFLRC has its own YouTube channel with a growing 
collection of free language learning and teaching videos for your perusal. Subscribe today! 
NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
ScholarSpace 
 
NFLRC maintains a large searchable archive of free language research and 
teaching materials which currently contains over 350 items. These items 
include foreign language teaching materials (in print, audio, and video), 
language acquisition research papers, and collections of conference 
materials. 
Save the trees! Check out our other two online, open-access journals: 
  
Language Documentation & Conservation is a 
refereed, open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC 
and published by University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to 
language documentation and conservation, as well 
as book reviews, hardware and software reviews, 
and notes from the field. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed 
international journal of issues in foreign language 
reading and literacy, published twice yearly on the 
World Wide Web and sponsored by NFLRC and 
the University of Hawai‘i College of Languages, 
Linguistics, and Literature. 
 
 
View all NFLRC Publications 
  
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 16 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR) 
 
 
 
 
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
20TH ANNIVERSARY 
As Language Learning & Technology (LLT) celebrates its 20th anniversary this year, so does CLEAR! 
CLEAR’s co-sponsorship of LLT is our longest-running collaboration and we are proud to be a part of the 
journal. For a retrospective look at CLEAR’s 20 years of service to language education, we invite you to 
look at our Spring 2016 newsletter. 
SUMMER WORKSHOPS 
This year marks CLEAR’s twentieth year of offering summer professional development workshops. 
Teachers of all levels and languages have come to Michigan State University’s campus for these 
informative, hands-on courses. Learn more about all of these workshops and find information about 
accommodations, costs, and discount plans by visiting our website. Go to our website and click on 
“Professional Development” to apply online. The topics are as follows: 
• Speaking activities for oral proficiency development, July 11–13 
• Differentiated instruction in the language classroom, July 14 (one day workshop) 
• Keeping student and teacher talk in the target language, July 15 (one day workshop) 
• Teaching language with technology: Basic tools and techniques, July 18–20 
• Writing in the foreign language classroom, July 21–23 
Regular application deadline: June 3, 2016 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe here. 
