Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2016/furniss.pdf 
June 2016, Volume 20, Number 2 
pp. 38–60 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 38 
TEACHING THE PRAGMATICS OF RUSSIAN CONVERSATION USING 
A CORPUS-REFERRED WEBSITE 
Edie A. Furniss, University of Houston 
Pragmatic competence is essential for oral fluency and listening comprehension, allowing 
speakers to use and interpret language appropriately in varied contexts. The use of 
technological applications for teaching pragmatics is on the rise (Taguchi & Sykes, 2013), 
in part because they are well-suited to the types of awareness-raising tasks which support 
Schmidt’s (1993; 2001) noticing hypothesis. However, the effectiveness of computer-
assisted language learning (CALL) applications in the teaching of routine formulas—
phrases with pragmatic functions—has yet to be examined. This paper reports on the 
impact of an awareness-raising, corpus-referred instructional website on L1 English 
learners' acquisition of nine Russian routine formulas. Intermediate and advanced learners 
of Russian were recruited and assigned to either the experimental (n = 18) or control (n = 
16) group. All participants completed an oral proficiency assessment, a background 
questionnaire, and a pre-test, post-test (two weeks after the pre-test) and delayed post-test 
(four weeks after the post-test) that assessed comprehension, use, and aural recognition of 
the routine formulas. Experimental group participants completed the web-based modules 
and responded to a feedback form. Results indicate that the intervention had a durable 
effect on learners' awareness of the targeted routine formulas and lowered aural 
recognition of nonce formulas. 
Language(s) Learned in this study: Russian 
Keywords: Corpus, Speaking, Pragmatics, Less Commonly Taught Languages 
APA Citation: Furniss, E. A. (2016). Teaching the pragmatics of Russian conversation 
using a corpus-referred website. Language Learning & Technology, 20(2), 38–60. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2016/furniss.pdf 
Received: March 1, 2015; Accepted: December 20, 2015; Published: June 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Edie Furniss 
INTRODUCTION 
One growing area within the field of interlanguage pragmatics (ILP) focuses on the use of technology in 
promoting pragmatic competence among L2 learners, both in and out of the classroom. Pragmatic 
competence is essential to oral fluency and listening comprehension, as it allows speakers to use and 
interpret language appropriately in varied contexts. Applications of technology to improving speaking 
proficiency have been addressed over the years in Language Learning & Technology, most notably in a 
special issue on technology and oral language development (Nunan, 2005). However, these studies have 
not focused on the role of pragmatic competence in oral language proficiency. This article examines the 
effectiveness of a computer-assisted language learning (CALL) application in the instruction of a specific 
area of pragmatics—routine formulas—in Russian. 
The use of technological applications for teaching pragmatics is on the rise (Taguchi & Sykes, 2013), in 
part because they are well suited to the types of awareness-raising tasks which support Schmidt’s (1993; 
2001) noticing hypothesis. While there is a growing body of research on the use of CALL programs in 
ILP, particularly on speech acts (Ishihara, 2007; Li, 2013; Russell & Vasquez, 2011; Sykes & Cohen, 
2008; Waugh, 2013), there are no studies on routine formulas—formulaic phrases with pragmatic 
functions—in particular. Furthermore, acquisition of routine formulas by learners of Russian has yet to be 
studied; this is likely due to Russian’s status in the US as a less commonly taught language (LCTL).  
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 39 
In an article on the current state of CALL, Garrett (2009) listed several pressing issues of concern to 
researchers and practitioners. She described the need for applications devoted to the teaching of LCTLs, 
as technology can make instructional materials for these languages accessible to a wide audience. There is 
a logical place for pedagogically sound resources that can assist learners in acquiring language that may 
be neglected in the classroom. While the great potential for technological applications within the field of 
Russian language teaching has been noted (Robin, 2006), there is a need for more empirically validated 
research on CALL materials and other technological interventions in Russian language instruction. 
Additionally, although corpus linguistics has long been a presence in the field of applied linguistics, its 
impact has been felt predominantly within English language teaching and materials development. This 
study addresses these research gaps by investigating the effectiveness of a corpus-referred online 
instructional tool for learning Russian routine formulas. While the tool itself only targets the skill of 
speaking indirectly by raising awareness of these formulas, it is argued that this awareness is necessary 
for oral proficiency and will lead to improved speaking ability. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
ILP and Instructional Pragmatics 
Kasper and Schmidt (1996) defined ILP as “the study of the development and use of strategies for 
linguistic action by nonnative speakers” (p. 150). The field of ILP has been in existence since the late 
1970s, and has seen an influx of research in the past two decades (for an overview, see Barron, 2012). 
One of the central constructs in ILP is that of pragmatic competence, which entails selecting “the 
form/function composites required for particular circumstances” (Nattinger & DeCarrico, 1992, p. 11). As 
Barron and Warga (2007) reminded, there has long been a need for more longitudinal research—
particularly that which includes pedagogical interventions (Takahashi, 2010)—into the nature of the 
acquisition of pragmatic competence, especially for L2s other than English.  
Instructional pragmatics refers to the pedagogically-oriented subfield of ILP (Ishihara, 2010). Research 
has shown that pragmatics is amenable to instruction (Rose, 2005). According to Kasper (1997), there are 
two kinds of activities useful for the teaching of pragmatics: those “aiming at raising students' pragmatic 
awareness, and activities offering opportunities for communicative practice” (L2 classrooms as 
impoverished learning environments section, para. 5). Studies on instructional pragmatics predominantly 
focus on speech acts (Ishihara & Cohen, 2010); however, routine formulas are also an essential 
component of pragmatic competence and deserve scholarly attention. 
Routine Formulas 
Coulmas (1979) coined the term routine formulae, which are “expressions whose occurrence is closely 
tied to types of recurrent social situations” (p. 239). Within ILP research many terms for these types of 
expressions are used; this study uses routine formulas as a general term for any recurring word or phrase 
with a pragmatic function (e.g., expressing surprise or uncertainty) in interaction. These phrases, 
according to Bardovi-Harlig (2012), exhibit three key characteristics: “the form as a recurrent sequence, 
its occurrence in specific social contexts, and the idea of the social contract which extends to members of 
a particular speech community” (p. 207). Knowledge of routine formulas aids users in behaving fluently 
and appropriately in a given communicative situation through the use of sequences of language that are 
conventionalized and therefore expected (Roever, 2012). Routine formulas share features with pragmatic 
markers: they have both discourse-connecting and interpersonal functions and can be multifunctional, 
depending on context (Aijmer & Fetzer, 2014). This multifunctionality makes these formulas difficult to 
pin down; it is necessary to examine them in use in order to catalog their various functions or meanings. 
Acquiring routine formulas presents a huge challenge to learners, but it is critical to the development of 
pragmatic competence as deep knowledge of the routines associated with particular contexts and 
functions facilitates effective communication. An essential step in this process of acquisition is noticing. 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 40 
Noticing Hypothesis 
Schmidt’s (1990, 1993, 2001) noticing hypothesis is the theoretical framework used in the current study; 
it is also the most commonly used framework in ILP research (Taguchi, 2011). According to Schmidt 
(1993), the noticing hypothesis entails that “what must be attended to and noticed is not just the input in a 
global sense but whatever features of the input are relevant for the target system” (p. 209). Thus, learners 
must attend to both pragmalinguistic forms and sociopragmatic elements in order to acquire pragmatic 
knowledge. Pragmalinguistics refers to the linguistic means used to perform a pragmatic function in a 
given communicative context. Sociopragmatics refers to the contextual features (e.g., relationship 
between speaker and hearer) that influence the selection of pragmalinguistic form, or the decision to 
perform a particular speech act at all. Language users must pay attention to “the action that is being 
accomplished, the linguistic, paralinguistic, and nonverbal forms by which the action is implemented, its 
immediate interactional or textual context, and the dimensions of the situational context that are indexed 
by linguistic and pragmatic choices” (Kasper & Roever, 2005, p. 318). 
Studies in ILP have tested the noticing hypothesis with interventions in which the form–function 
relationship of the targeted feature is brought to learners' attention through various techniques. Overall, 
the results of these studies have shown explicit instruction (where metapragmatic information is provided) 
to be most effective in the teaching of pragmatics (Ishihara, 2010). In a study by Bardovi-Harlig and 
Vellenga (2012), expressions with pragmatic functions were taught to learners using tasks containing 
contextualized input that focused on increasing metapragmatic noticing. They found some improvement 
in both recognition and production, even though their instructional intervention did not include output-
focused activities. Narita (2012) found that the use of pragmatic consciousness-raising activities resulted 
in gains on measures of metapragmatic knowledge and production of pragmatic markers in Japanese. The 
noticing hypothesis has been substantiated in studies on pragmatics instruction generally, but more 
research is needed on teaching routine formulas. 
Teaching Routine Formulas with Technology 
Usó-Juan (2008) contended that “the acquisition of pragmatic competence through textbooks or other 
instructional material is quite unlikely” (p. 224). Pragmatic information in materials is rarely grounded in 
research and has been criticized for its demonstrated lack of representativeness, insufficient contextual 
information, and inaccuracy (Ishihara & Cohen, 2010). This is likely due to the way that pragmatics has 
been addressed generally in language teaching: as peripheral to grammar and vocabulary. However, 
speaking proficiency requires not only grammatical and lexical knowledge, but pragmatic knowledge as 
well. Technological innovations provide a possible solution to the inadequacy of materials on the 
pragmatics of conversation. 
Speech acts are a common target of technological interventions. For instance, Ishihara (2007) developed a 
web-based curriculum on speech acts in Japanese that consisted of awareness-raising activities (focused 
on grammar, lexicon, and prosodic features), audio dialogue samples, opportunities for linguistic analysis, 
metapragmatic information grounded in research, output practice, and feedback. She used the noticing 
hypothesis to inform the curriculum by providing learners with opportunities to pay attention to both 
pragmalinguistic and sociopragmatic features of the speech acts in question. 
Sykes and Cohen (2008) also developed a series of online modules on speech acts, but in Spanish and 
using a strategy-based approach. The modules consist of videos of the speech acts being performed, with 
transcripts and accompanying short-answer, multiple-choice (MC), and listening exercises. Empirical 
evidence served as the basis for the material on speech acts contained in the website. Learners completed 
pre- and post-tests consisting of discourse completion tasks (DCTs) and role-plays using situations similar 
to those found in the instructional website. The researchers concluded that students were interested in 
improving their pragmatic competence, and found the materials motivating. Russell and Vasquez (2011) 
created a similar tutorial that, they maintained, “makes better use of the capabilities of the Web-based 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
format, has a more appealing user interface design, and has greater interactivity for users” (p. 29) than the 
modules developed by Sykes and Cohen (2008). This is due to their added feature of a video-response 
DCT. 
Speech acts in English have also been the object of technological interventions. Waugh (2013) authored a 
set of online units devoted to speech acts and conversational gambits (similar to routine formulas) as part 
of an English in the Workplace program. These units incorporated analysis of native speaker interactions, 
explicit instruction of strategies, synchronous role-play activities, and cross-linguistic comparisons of 
speech acts. Pre- and post-tests, consisting of oral and written DCTs, showed improvement in learners' 
ability to respond in a pragmatically appropriate manner. 
In a study on the use of a CALL application in the explicit instruction of requests in Chinese, Li (2013) 
found that, in comparison with a control group, participants in two experimental groups (one that did 
input-based practice activities—grammaticality judgment and dialogue reading tasks—and one that did 
output-based practice activities—sentence translations and DCTs) saw an increase in speed and accuracy 
in both recognizing and producing the target request forms.  
Technological interventions have also been shown to be beneficial in the instruction of related language 
with pragmatic functions. Utashiro and Kawai (2009) created a web application to teach reactive tokens 
(i.e., back channels) in Japanese in a blended learning environment. The application incorporated videos 
of conversations between native speakers and awareness-raising, analysis, and production exercises. The 
researchers emphasized the importance of cooperation between CALL and ILP, stating that findings from 
ILP should be integrated into CALL applications “in order to identify important target pragmatic features 
and develop CALL instructional materials accordingly” (Utashiro & Kawai, 2009, p. 278). Results 
indicated that explicit instruction via the Web application was effective, as students showed some 
improvement in their production of the reactive tokens. While research specifically addressing the 
effectiveness of CALL for pragmatics instruction is limited, the studies cited here provide evidence for 
the potential of technology in this area. 
Corpus-Referred Materials 
Although pedagogical applications of corpus methodologies and data are still not widespread (for an 
overview, see Römer, 2011 and for a special issue of ReCALL documenting recent uses, see Boulton & 
Pérez-Paredes, 2014,), they have potential for enhancing the instruction of pragmatics as they allow for 
investigations of contextualized language in use. Flowerdew (2012) divided pedagogical corpus 
applications into two categories: indirect and direct. Indirect applications include the use of corpus data to 
inform the language teaching syllabus and materials, while direct applications refer to hands-on use of 
corpora in the classroom, by both teacher and student. The current study was informed primarily by 
previous research on indirect applications (although the instructional intervention contains direct 
applications as well). For instance, Möllering (2001) analyzed modal particles in German corpus data, 
then presented instructional worksheets on the basis of this analysis. Belz and Vyatkina (2005) also used 
corpus methodologies in the teaching of German modal particles, incorporating activities based on 
contrastive analyses of learner and native speaker corpus data. Participants used modal particles more 
frequently as a result of the intervention; their metapragmatic awareness also increased. Corpus 
methodologies can be used to determine the frequency and typical contexts of use for words, phrases, and 
grammatical constructions, and can thus inform language textbook design, resulting in materials that more 
accurately reflect usage. 
Insights from corpus linguistics have impacted English language materials (McCarten & McCarthy, 
2010); however, the trend has not carried over to Russian language textbooks and references. It would be 
wise to follow the lead of English language textbook publishers (for recommendations, see Furniss, 
2013). Although there are fewer corpora of Russian, researchers nonetheless have access to one extremely 
well-designed one—the Russian National Corpus. 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 42 
Research Questions 
As the review of the literature has demonstrated, there is a need for empirical research on the effects of 
CALL applications on the acquisition of routine formulas by learners of Russian, and the general effects 
of corpus-referred materials on language acquisition. This study addresses the following research 
questions: 
1. Does the corpus-referred instructional website increase users’ understanding and use of routine 
formulas, as measured by pre-, post-, and delayed post-tests? 
2. How did experimental group participants respond to the corpus-referred instructional website? 
A pre-, post-, and delayed post-test design was used in order to compare the acquisition of nine routine 
formulas, selected with reference to spoken corpus data, in experimental and control group participants. 
The experimental group completed a series of interactive web-based modules, supplemented with 
excerpts from the spoken subcorpus of the Russian National Corpus that illustrate authentic usage of the 
selected formulas; the control group underwent no intervention. All participants completed an oral 
proficiency assessment; a background questionnaire; and the pre-, post-, and delayed post-test at 
predetermined intervals. Additionally, experimental group participants completed a post-intervention 
feedback form. 
METHODOLOGY 
Participants 
34 learners of Russian were recruited for the study via e-mail, listservs, and social networking sites 
between June and September of 2014. Participants included students enrolled in language programs both 
in the US and abroad, independent learners of Russian, and people working in Russia. Takahashi (2010) 
encouraged the study of a single pragmatic intervention with learners of varying proficiencies in order to 
better understand the relationship between proficiency and pragmatic learnability, as the majority of 
studies focus on learners of the same level. Thus, the study was open to learners with intermediate and 
advanced oral proficiency, as measured by the Computer Assisted Screening Tool (CAST). Since the 
pre-, post-, and delayed post-tests as well as the instructional website contained unedited language drawn 
directly from corpus data that would likely be incomprehensible to beginners, novice learners of Russian 
were excluded from participation. Table 1 gives information on the makeup of the control (n = 16) and 
experimental (n = 18) group participants. Within the control group, learners were enrolled in regular (6) 
or intensive (1) university classes, a domestic summer immersion program (5), or were not enrolled in 
Russian language classes at all (4). Among the experimental group, participants were enrolled in regular 
university classes (2), a domestic summer immersion program (10), a study abroad program (1), or were 
not enrolled in Russian language classes at all (5). 
The results of the post-test were not recorded correctly for one of the experimental group participants; 
thus, this participant was excluded from the quantitative analysis. However, this participant's feedback on 
the website has been included in the discussion of the second research question. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
Table 1. Participant Information 
 Control Group (n = 16) Experimental Group (n = 18) 
Gender (male:female) 5:11 9:9 
Average age (range) 23.8 (19–32) 25.5 (19–38) 
Time studying Russian 4.35 years 3.98 years 
Age study of Russian began 18.1 18.9 
Oral proficiency rating 8 advanced; 8 not advanced 6 advanced; 12 not advanced 
Native language(s) 14 English; 1 Vietnamese & 
English; 1 Ukrainian & Russian* 
16 English; 2 Spanish & English 
Total intensity of 
engagement score 
11.94 10.72 
Note. * This participant was born in Ukraine and studied Russian from age 6 to age 11, when her family immigrated to Canada. 
She was enrolled in a second-year Russian course while participating in this study. Inclusion of this participant was justified by 
an inspection of the boxplots for control group scores on each test, which confirmed that she was not an outlier. 
Procedure 
Participants electronically signed a consent form informing them of the nature of the study and the 
compensation offered (an online gift card). It was predicted that not all volunteers for the study might 
have enough time to dedicate to the lengthier experimental group tasks, so participants were also asked to 
indicate how much time they would be able to commit to the study: approximately 1.5–2 hours (time 
required of the control group), or approximately 6.5 hours (time required of the experimental group). 
When assigning participants to the experimental and control groups, the preference of participants who 
could only commit to a smaller amount of time was honored. Those participants who volunteered for a 
larger time commitment were placed where needed for balance. 
Instructional Website 
Experimental participants were given two weeks to complete the instructional modules after completing 
the pre-test. The website was designed in a way that would allow for users to notice the functions of a set 
of routine formulas in authentic usage situations. Selection was based on the principles of a corpus-
referred approach to materials development. According to Timmis (2013), this approach “allows an 
honourable place for intuition, experience, local need, cultural appropriacy and pedagogical convenience 
in determining syllabus content and the order in which items are taught” (p. 470). A list of the nine 
routine formulas with their approximate English idiomatic translations is given in Table 2.  
Selection was informed in part by an analysis of a small corpus of Soviet and Russian film subtitles, the 
rationale being that film is reflective of authentic conversation. Films have been used often in 
instructional pragmatics interventions (for an overview, see Ishihara & Cohen, 2010). The computer 
program AntConc (Anthony, 2014) was used to retrieve the most frequent bigrams and trigrams in those 
texts. Strings with potential instructional value as pragmatic routines were isolated. Next, popular 
beginning and intermediate textbooks of Russian were examined in order to exclude any routine formulas 
commonly addressed in teaching materials, thus better ensuring that participants were being exposed to 
them in an instructional setting for the first time. Finally, the researcher's intuition as both an advanced 
learner and an instructor of Russian guided the selection of routines that are frequent in informal Russian 
conversation but difficult to acquire. Nine targeted formulas were selected in order to provide learners 
with a manageable amount of material. Additionally, the targeted phrases, while multifunctional, have 
only one or two main functions. 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
Table 2. Targeted Routine Formulas with English Translations 
Routine formula English translation 
В чём дело? What's the problem? 
Да нет! Nah! 
Да ты что! You're kidding! 
Надо же! You don't say! 
Ничего себе! Wow! 
Ничего страшного. No big deal. 
Ну и как? So how was it? 
Ну и что? So what? 
...что ли? ...is it? 
The website builder Weebly was used to create the instructional site, called Надо же! The website 
contains nine modules (one for each formula), a review page, and a feedback page. Each module contains 
4–6 exercises that users complete by filling out embedded submission forms. Corpus excerpts were used 
throughout each module in both instructional presentations and interactive exercises. In order to obtain 
excerpts featuring the formulas under instruction, the oral and multimedia subcorpora of the Russian 
National Corpus were queried. Excerpts were chosen according to their comprehensibility, pedagogical 
usefulness, and prototypicality, in terms of the function of the contained routine formula under study. 
Non-essential turns were removed, turns were formatted to be more distinct, and speaker information was 
deleted. Video excerpts from the multimedia subcorpus were selected on the basis of their potential to 
engage learners, and by their representativeness of popular Russian and Soviet films. Source information 
accompanied each excerpt included on the website, as per Russian National Corpus guidelines. 
Judd (1999) proposed a model for teaching pragmatic competence that consists of the following 
components: “(1) teacher analysis of speech acts, (2) cognitive awareness skills, (3) receptive/integrative 
skills, (4) controlled productive skills, and (5) free, integrated practice” (p. 162). He was referring to 
speech acts in particular, but the model is applicable to routine formulas as well. The instructional website 
contained a variety of exercises addressing all of these components:  
• background knowledge activation (e.g., “Have you heard the phrase Ну и как? before? What do 
you think is the function of Ну и как?”) 
• dictionary definitions and descriptions from reference materials 
• translation activities 
• data-driven learning with the microblogging site Twitter (e.g., “Click here to look at the latest 
tweets on Twitter featuring the phrase Ничего себе! Find a tweet you understand and think about 
what emotion is being expressed. Copy and paste the tweet and the emotion being expressed in 
the box below.”) 
• description of the formula's function(s) with illustrative examples of usage from the Russian 
National Corpus (see Appendix A for a sample with translation) 
• cloze activities 
• dialogue turn matching activities 
• film excerpts with partial transcript (for practice imitating prosodic features) 
• dialogue writing 
The functional descriptions of each formula were based on the researcher's analysis of corpus excerpts, 
with a particular focus on form, function, prosodic features, and typical contexts. Per Judd's (1999) 
recommendation, natural media—in this case, film clips—were included to assist students in 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
understanding the formulas. The modules integrate both implicit instruction, in which “the pragmatic 
feature is included in contexts of use and practised in various activities,” and explicit instruction, in which 
“the targeted pragmatic feature is made the object of metapragmatic treatment through description, 
explanation, or discussion” (Kasper, 2001, p. 515). The goal was to include a variety of exercise types 
that would appeal to a range of user preferences. 
The instructional website was tested for functionality by the researcher, and examined for accuracy by a 
native speaker and instructor of Russian. 
Computer Assisted Screening Tool (CAST) 
After returning their consent forms, participants completed the CAST, a free Web-based assessment of 
spoken language proficiency developed for a range of languages by the San Diego State University 
Language Acquisition Resource Center. The test is used to estimate performance on an official oral 
proficiency interview (OPI). It was selected for the current study in order to ascertain the spoken abilities 
of participants and thus determine whether the effectiveness of the instructional intervention might be 
mitigated by spoken proficiency level. 
Test-takers selected their predicted level of performance (intermediate or advanced), then responded to 
five prompts similar to questions and scenarios used in OPIs. Results were rated by two independent 
raters (the author and a native speaker instructor of Russian) and participants were funneled into two 
categories: Advanced (those who received a rating of pass on the Advanced CAST), and Not Advanced 
(those who received not pass or approaching on the Advanced CAST, or any rating on the Intermediate 
CAST). Interrater reliability was 0.90, calculated with Cronbach’s alpha. 
Background Questionnaire 
Upon completing the CAST, participants filled out a background questionnaire, created with Google 
Forms. The questionnaire was developed in order to elicit demographic data from participants as well as 
information about their experience learning and using Russian. The final question addressed engagement 
with the language (e.g., watching television or reading in Russian) in order to gauge each participant's 
“intensity of engagement” and thus investigate whether participants' exposure (or lack thereof) to the 
routine formulas under analysis could be attributed to their level of experience with certain activities. In 
their study of the acquisition of conventional expressions (similar to routine formulas), Bardovi-Harlig 
and Bastos (2011) distributed a background questionnaire addressing contact variables, such as time spent 
watching TV in the target language. This was done in order to examine the effects of patterns of contact 
on learners’ acquisition of the conventional expressions under study. Using a matrix-style question type, 
respondents in the present study were given a choice of how much time they engaged in a list of activities 
in Russian: not at all (0 points); less than 1 hour per week (1 points); 1-2 hours per week (2 points); 2-4 
hours per week (3 points); 4-6 hours per week (4 points); more than 6 hours per week (5 points). Each 
category was awarded points in order to enable the researcher to compare sums across participants. The 
average intensity of engagement score for the control group and the experimental group is included in 
Table 1. Intensity of engagement was also correlated with Learner Recognition Scores (LRS), discussed 
in the Results section. 
Pre-, Post-, and Delayed Post-test 
A test of comprehension and production of the targeted routine formulas, distributed via Survey Monkey, 
was developed for use as a pre-, post-, and delayed post-test data collection instrument (Appendix B). The 
test was evaluated by three native speakers of Russian, who completed the test, pointed out problems, and 
gave suggestions on improving the instrument; their feedback was incorporated into the final version. The 
delayed post-test was included in order to obtain data on the durability of the instructional intervention. 
Takahashi (2010) recommended this measure be included in studies on pragmatic learnability in order to 
obtain more robust results on the effectiveness of an intervention.  
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
The instrument developed by Bardovi-Harlig and Bastos (2011) in their study of the recognition and 
production of conventional expressions by ESL learners was used as a model for portions of the current 
study's test, which consists of four sections assessing comprehension and production of the targeted 
routine formulas. A range of tasks was used in order to assess participants’ ability to produce (albeit in 
written, not spoken form) and choose from several options a routine formula pragmatically appropriate to 
a given conversation, aurally recognize targeted formulas, and determine a formula’s function. In order to 
minimize fatigue and increase the likelihood that participants would complete the tests, not every targeted 
formula was tested in each task, and two of the targeted formulas were not tested at all. 
The first section contains two DCTs in which test takers type in the missing phrase from corpus dialogues 
retrieved from the Russian National Corpus. The corpus excerpts were selected on the basis of their 
intelligibility and the relative simplicity of their grammatical and lexical elements. This represents a 
different approach to the traditional DCT; by using authentic language extracted from corpus data, 
respondents are forced to select from a narrow range of possible responses. Thus, the DCT endeavors to 
elicit a word or phrase appropriate to that very specific situation. It requires the ability to infer pragmatic 
meaning from context and to choose from one's pragmalinguistic resources the most appropriate response. 
Due to insufficient technological resources, this task does not assess oral production, but rather simulates 
spoken ability. Since the routine formulas being targeted in these DCTs appeared in the other sections, 
test-takers were presented with this section first to prevent exposure to potential responses. 
The next section contains an aural recognition task. Participants listened to eighteen phrases, recorded by 
a native speaker of Russian, and rated their familiarity with each phrase. This section was ordered before 
the two MC DCT tasks in order to prevent aural recognition of the routine formulas after exposure to their 
written forms. The phrases included the nine routine formulas addressed in the instructional module, as 
well as nine distractors/nonce phrases (Appendix C). As in the Bardovi-Harlig and Bastos (2011) study, 
the distractors were modified versions of the formulas in which a lexical or grammatical element was 
altered, resulting in a phrase without pragmatic meaning.  
After listening to a phrase, respondents chose from one of three options, following Bardovi-Harlig and 
Bastos (2011): I often hear this (2 points), I sometimes hear this (1 point), I never hear this (0 points). 
Points were given for responses in order to calculate the LRS, which was used to ascertain whether or not 
the instructional website resulted in gains in familiarity of targeted routine formulas. 
In the next section, participants completed four MC DCTs similar to the two in the first section. Each of 
the dialogues in this section was followed by four options that included the formula that originally 
appeared in the corpus excerpt, along with three pragmatically inappropriate formulas. In the final section 
of the test, learners read two intact corpus excerpts, selecting the emotion that the speaker is expressing 
with the underlined routine formula. Results on the first, third, and fourth sections were combined to 
determine the test score, as those tasks required participants to demonstrate their comprehension and 
production of the routine formulas being tested, while responses to the second section were used to 
calculate the LRS and were not included in the overall test score. 
The pre-test was sent to participants after they had completed the background questionnaire. Two weeks 
after taking the pre-test, they were sent the post-test; four weeks after completing the post-test, they were 
sent the delayed post-test. There was no time limit for taking the test. 
Feedback Form 
Experimental group participants completed a feedback form on the instructional website. It addresses 
technical difficulties and the usefulness of the website's components, and provides the opportunity to 
suggest improvements and give comments on the formulas themselves (when and how learners heard and 
used them, and in what contexts). This form was used to inform the qualitative analysis, as well as to 
gather data on the website’s functionality. A summary of responses to the open-ended questions on the 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
feedback form is presented in the Results section. 
RESULTS 
RQ 1: Does the corpus-referred instructional website increase users’ understanding and use of 
routine formulas, as measured by pre-, post-, and delayed post-tests?  
Comprehension and Use of Routine Formulas 
Table 3 shows the means and standard deviations for the test scores of the experimental and control 
groups; the graph in Figure 1 displays the mean scores for each test, separated by treatment group. The 
maximum possible points were 10 (one point each for six MC questions; two points each for two DCTs). 
Table 3. Pre-, Post-, and Delayed Post-Test Scores 
Group Pre-Test Post-Test Delayed Post-Test 
 M SD M SD M SD 
Experimental (n = 17) 6.71 1.45 7.35 2.15 7.94 1.82 
Control (n = 16) 6.06 1.48 5.88 1.45 6.38 1.67 
 
 
Figure 1. Mean test scores 
Responses on the two open-ended questions were randomized and rated by two independent raters using 
the scale in Table 4, based on Taguchi (2013). Interrater reliability was 0.84, calculated using Cronbach’s 
alpha. 
Normality assumptions were met for the scores on the pre-test for both the control and experimental 
groups. However, distribution of experimental group scores on the post- and delayed post-tests was 
skewed, necessitating the use of non-parametric statistics to analyze the difference between those tests. 
An independent samples t-test was performed on the pre-test; it was found that there was not a 
statistically significant difference between the experimental and control groups (p = 0.22). A Mann-
Whitney U test showed a significant difference between groups on both the post- (U = 70.5, p = 0.02) and 
delayed post-tests (U = 63, p = 0.01). An independent samples t-test was done in order to determine if 
there was any difference on the pre-test between participants who were classified as Advanced or Not 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
Advanced, according to the CAST results. The results showed no significant difference between those 
two groups (p = 0.70), indicating that proficiency was not related to performance on the pre-test. 
Table 4. DCT Rating Scale 
Rating Description 
2 = Pragmatically appropriate & 
native-like 
The utterance is pragmatically appropriate. This is what a native speaker 
would usually say in the situation. 
1 = Pragmatically appropriate & 
not native-like 
The utterance is pragmatically appropriate. However, it is not native-like. 
0 = Pragmatically inappropriate The utterance is not appropriate for the context, or it is unintelligible. 
In order to determine whether or not the difference between control group performance on pre-, post-, and 
delayed post-tests was significant, a Friedman test was used. The difference was not significant (chi-
square = 2.22, df = 2, p = 0.33). This eliminates the possibility of a practice effect. A Friedman test was 
also performed on the experimental group test scores; there was a significant difference between tests 
(chi-square = 8.63, df = 2, p = 0.01). A Wilcoxon signed rank test showed that the differences between 
pre- and post-test, and between post- and delayed post-test were not significant. However, the 
improvement from pre- to delayed post-test was statistically significant (Z = -2.21, p = 0.03). Cohen’s d 
was 0.75, indicating a medium effect size. 
Recognition of Routine Formulas 
Aural comprehension ratings are shown in Table 5; mean total LRS is given for all routine formulas and 
all nonce phrases. The graph in Figure 2 displays the mean total LRS for each test, separated by treatment 
group and type of phrase (routine formulas and nonce phrases). 
Table 5. Learner Recognition Score 
Group  Pre-Test  Post-Test  Delayed Post-Test 
  M SD  M SD  M SD 
Experimental: 
Routine Formulas 
12.00 4.61 12.88 5.35 13.35 3.95 
Control: Routine 
Formulas 
13.06 4.57 13.75 4.17 13.69 4.08 
Experimental: 
Nonce Phrases 
7.53 2.63 5.65 2.69 6.59 4.00 
Control: Nonce 
Phrases 
6.75 2.91 7.31 4.85 6.38 4.08 
 
 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
 
Figure 2. Learner recognition score 
Familiarity with routine formulas on the pre-test was positively correlated with intensity of engagement (r 
= 0.45, p < 0.01); it was also positively correlated with the amount of time the participant had studied 
Russian (r = 0.6, p = 0.00). Independent samples t-tests were performed on pre-, post-, and delayed post-
test scores for both formulas and nonce phrases; the results indicated there was not a significant difference 
between the experimental and control groups. Friedman tests showed no significant difference between 
tests for recognition of formulas in the experimental group (chi-square = 4.84, df = 2, p = 0.09), and in the 
control group (chi-square = 2.95, df = 2, p = 0.23). However, a Friedman test did find a significant 
difference between LRS of nonce phrases in the experimental group (chi-square = 6.35, df = 2, p = 0.04). 
The Wilcoxon test showed that the difference lay between the pre- and post-tests (Z = -2.76, p < 0.01), 
meaning that the decrease in the experimental group from pre- to post-test for the nonce phrase LRS was 
statistically significant. A Cohen’s d of 0.71 indicates a medium effect size. 
RQ 2: How did experimental group participants respond to the corpus-referred instructional 
website? 
17 of the 18 experimental group participants filled out the post-intervention feedback form. Due to space 
limitations, only responses to the open-ended feedback form questions are summarized here. 
Comments on the Website 
Participants were asked to include any comments (suggestions for improvement, complaints, etc.) about 
the website. One praised the interactivity; another, the Twitter exercises: 
“I can't emphasize enough how useful I found Twitter, since it was totally natural, colloquial 
Russian - which is something that is so hard to come by as part of language learning classes.” 
There were criticisms about the modules being too short, repetitive, and lacking variety; occasionally 
being overwhelming because too many functions were included for a particular phrase; and having too 
many dictionary examples. One respondent suggested that a glossary for difficult words in the usage 
examples be included. Two users found the order of activities in each module deficient. Another 
mentioned that the instructions were unclear (but that this lack of specificity makes the modules more 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
appealing to self-study learners). Some of the descriptions were found to be inadequate: 
“For some reason, maybe because I've encountered this particular phrase decidedly less often in 
conversational situations, I found the explanation of the phrase 'надо же' somewhat lacking. I still 
don't feel like I have a full command of it.” 
Finally, users indicated that they wanted feedback on their answers, although they seemed to find the 
website useful regardless: 
“Feedback would, of course, be helpful, but not strictly necessary. I can imagine these modules 
being a fine resource for self-study or review (they were in my case!), though they might also be 
easily adapted to an academic setting by enabling feedback, etc.” 
Using the Routine Formulas 
Users were asked to comment on the way using the routine formulas made them feel. Five respondents 
mentioned that they felt awkward or strange using them, as they were still unsure of their meanings. 
However, five respondents said they felt more fluent or natural when using the phrases in their spoken 
Russian:  
“More fluent, but at times I wasn't sure if I was using them correctly. Regardless, I have been 
more aware of them when other speakers say them, which in turn makes me understand the 
appropriate contexts in which these phrases can be used.” 
Another participant commented on the value of learning the routine formulas: 
“I think these types of phrases are really important in everyday speech. It would be frustrating to 
not understand them in English, and once I learned them I realized how much I needed them. I 
don't know why these aren't a big part of learning Russian in college.” 
One participant reported not using the phrases because they are too difficult to use and because he or she 
feels uncomfortable when using them; another because he or she felt they can communicate well enough 
without them. 
Experience with Routine Formulas in Other Contexts 
11 of the participants responded to an open-ended question about where they had encountered the phrases 
from the website. Five wrote that they heard them frequently in conversation with Russian speakers; four 
mentioned they had come across the routine formulas on the Internet (Twitter, YouTube comments). 
Respondents also noted they encountered the phrases in movies, in the target country, and from 
instructors. 
“I tend to hear Ничего себе и Ничего страшного frequently in conversations and in colloquial 
online forums, Twitter, etc. By frequently I mean literally all the time. They are very heavily used 
and I think that the modules really helped me to feel comfortable with these phrases.” 
One user recounted how he or she maintains colloquial Russian with the help of the phrases: 
“I am a mentor for prospective study abroad students at [my university]. Since beginning this 
module, I have been corresponding with a former mentoree via email in Russian. We have both 
been using many of the phrases covered in this module since our aim is to teach each other (not 
explicitly, but through context) the slang expressions used in the different regions of Eastern 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
Europe where we studied abroad. All the expressions covered in this module are common and 
relevant!” 
DISCUSSION 
Results indicate that the instructional intervention improved learners' awareness of the targeted routine 
formulas, and resulted in lower LRS for nonce phrases. Both the experimental and control groups were 
comparable at the outset. However, only the experimental group showed significant improvement in their 
test scores. Interestingly, there was not a significant difference on pre-test scores between groups based 
on oral proficiency ratings. This indicates that general speaking ability is not correlated with routine 
formula awareness, thereby confirming the need for explicit instruction of this element of pragmatic 
competence at all levels of proficiency. 
Since one form was used for all three assessments, there was a possibility that improvement in test-takers' 
scores over time was due to a practice effect. In designing the experiment, this effect was hoped to be 
minimal as test administration was separated by several weeks. Furthermore, if there were a practice 
effect, the control group would have shown significant improvement over time, which they did not. 
The statistical analysis only showed a significant change between the experimental group's pre- and 
delayed post-test scores, indicating that participants' learning matured over time. This could be 
attributable to their increased awareness of the routine formulas as they encountered them after 
completing the modules As noted in their feedback form responses, experimental group members came 
across the phrases in conversation and on the Internet. 
Control group participants had a higher average LRS for formulas in the pre-test than experimental group 
members, but this difference was not found to be statistically significant. Intensity of engagement and 
length of time spent studying Russian were both correlated with increased aural familiarity with the 
routine formulas at the outset, which would be expected, as more extensive contact with the language 
would allow learners to encounter such phrases more frequently. However, neither the experimental nor 
the control group showed a statistically significant increase in recognition of formulas. This might be an 
effect of the wording of the ratings on that portion of the instrument—while learners might recognize a 
phrase as formulaic, they may rarely encounter it and rate it I never hear this. Regarding the nonce 
phrases, the LRS were much lower on average than for the formulas, which would be expected. The 
intervention appears to have had an effect on these scores, as experimental group participants rated the 
nonce phrases significantly lower on the post-test than on the pre-test, while the control group did not. 
However, this effect was not durable. 
Responses to the website within the experimental group were overall very positive. Users found the 
material useful and fun, and agreed that it helped to raise their awareness of the functions of the targeted 
formulas. Many participants noted the importance of such language in successful and fluent spoken 
communication. 
Limitations 
One of the major limitations of the current study is the small sample size. Although many learners of 
Russian responded to the researcher's call for participants, attrition was rampant. This is likely due to the 
fact that experiment administration was done completely virtually, via e-mail. Participation required 
completing many tasks over approximately two months. Even though compensation was provided and the 
actual time commitment was small, many volunteers dropped out early on in the study (before being 
given the instructional website). While the sample used in the current study represents a fairly diverse 
range of learners, larger numbers of participants could be acquired using convenience samples (e.g., 
students in classes taught by the researcher). This would ensure timely and thorough completion of the 
tasks as well. Furthermore, because the population tested here was self-selected, it is possible that they are 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
more motivated than the average learner, given their willingness to complete the tasks for only a small 
monetary reward. However, even though the sample size was small, effect sizes indicate a medium effect 
of the intervention. 
Another limitation concerns the design of the website itself. The modules did not require users to produce 
any spoken output; activities focused on awareness-raising, comprehension of transcribed conversations, 
and written output. Since the targeted formulas are essential to conversation, practice in real contexts with 
live interlocutors, perhaps in the form of role-plays, would likely be valuable. Also, sociopragmatic 
considerations were not integrated into the website, as the routine formulas, while colloquial, are still 
fairly neutral and can be used appropriately in most informal contexts. Additionally, the targeted formulas 
represent only a small selection of useful conversational phrases. Future development of similar materials 
could include a more rigorous selection process that relies on extensive corpus research and the 
recommendations of instructors, learners, and native speakers of Russian. 
Oral production exercises were not included due to the investment of time necessary for rating and the 
provision of feedback. Feedback in general was not integrated, as the primary goal of the website was to 
promote noticing among learners. While the website appears to succeed in this goal to some extent, it 
would likely be improved by the inclusion of mechanisms for providing feedback. In the feedback form, 
the majority of users indicated that the website would be best used in a Russian language class, where an 
instructor would be able to provide individualized feedback on students' performance. However, for self-
study purposes, feedback would be helpful, as several respondents noted that even after completing the 
modules they were still unclear on whether or not they were using the routine formulas appropriately. 
Since the tests administered to all participants did not measure their actual oral production, experimental 
group members may have only increased their metapragmatic knowledge without a corresponding 
improvement in spoken production. The assessment instrument represents another limitation in the study 
as not all the targeted formulas were included in the test, and each section tested only a fraction of the 
selected formulas. Additional items and overall fine-tuning would result in a more robust data collection 
instrument that could reliably measure different types of pragmatic knowledge (e.g., awareness, 
comprehension, production). 
Finally, a more intensive and time-consuming intervention might result in larger gains in pragmatic 
competence. Experimental group participants spent, on average, two hours and fifteen minutes using the 
website over the course of two weeks. On one hand, this indicates that even minimal instruction on 
routine formulas is beneficial; on the other hand, the benefits may not be durable beyond the delayed 
post-test, or improvement may solely be on metapragmatic knowledge. Future studies in this area could 
investigate the effects of more intensive interventions that incorporate feedback and oral production 
activities, including role-plays. 
CONCLUSION 
This study provides further evidence to support the noticing hypothesis, as the experimental group 
displayed improved awareness of the routine formulas they were encouraged to notice in the instructional 
intervention. Furthermore, it has demonstrated that CALL applications have potential for teaching L2 
pragmatics. Technology holds great promise in the instruction of LCTLs like Russian, as there are limited 
pedagogical resources for these languages. Blyth (2013) and Godwin-Jones (2013) addressed the special 
significance of technology for LCTLs: since the market for commercially produced textbooks and 
references is much smaller for these languages, there are fewer high-quality resources for specific skills 
and for advanced proficiency learners. Technological innovations provide a low-cost and accessible 
solution to this problem, particularly in areas that are typically poorly integrated in foreign language 
curricula, such as pragmatics (Roever, 2009). Taguchi (2011) recognized that technology is well suited to 
“cultural comparisons, explicit pragmatic information, awareness-raising of pragmalinguistic forms and 
their situational variations, focused practice, and feedback” (p. 297). It allows for learners to engage with 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
pragmatics autonomously, in accordance with their own learning style and at their own pace. Still, more 
research in ILP on LCTLs is needed in order to ensure that materials and CALL programs are accurate 
and pedagogically sound. Corpus research can shed light on the pragmatic elements of authentic 
conversation; these insights, as well as excerpts from spoken corpora, can be harnessed in the creation of 
instructional interventions. Direct corpus applications (e.g., learners’ use of Twitter to investigate routine 
formulas in the present study) can also be an effective element of these interventions. 
The body of scholarship on CALL and pragmatics instruction has been slowly growing over the past 
decade. However, further research is needed on a diversity of technological tools, on a variety of L2s, and 
for a greater range of types of pragmatic competence. Investigating the effectiveness of technology within 
ILP will lead to higher quality resources for learners, thus better preparing them for successful 
communication in their L2. 
 
APPENDIX A. Sample Usage Description with Corpus Extract 
…что ли occurs frequently at the end of a question as a tag that the speaker uses to emphasize that s/he 
is asking a question: 
О магнитофоне 
―Дай посмотреть!  
―Только не выключай! 
―Записываешь что ли? 
―Да. 
Праздный разговор молодых людей, Московская область // практиканты, 2005 
 
About a tape player 
―Let me see it! 
―Just don't turn it off! 
―You're recording chto li? 
―Yes. 
Holiday conversation between young people, Moscow region // trainees, 2005 
 
APPENDIX B. Pre-/Post-/Delayed Post-Test 
Please fill in the blanks in the following authentic Russian conversations. Your response may be a single 
word or a phrase. More than one correct response is possible. 
You may use a dictionary to look up any unfamiliar words in the conversations. 
Click this link for an on-screen Cyrillic keyboard, if you need it. 
 
Fill in the blank. 
Саша: А где праздновать будете? 
Таня: У Олега дома. 
Саша: Сколько народу будет? 
Таня: Двенадцать человек. 
Саша: ___________________! А как вы 
Sasha: Where are you going to celebrate? 
Tania: At Oleg’s house. 
Sasha: How many people are gonna be there? 
Tania: Twelve people. 
Sasha: ___________________! How will you all 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
поместитесь? 
Таня: А у Олега особняк, места много. Не 
хочешь с нами? 
fit? 
Tania: Oh, Oleg has a house, there’s a lot of room. 
Wanna come with? 
___________________ [Ничего себе! Nichego sebe!] 
 
Fill in the blank. 
Олеся: Как субботу провела? 
Таня: Отлично, мы с девчонками в клуб ходили. 
Олеся:_____________? 
Таня: Здорово было, знакомых много встретила. 
Олеся: Ясно. 
Olesya: How was your Saturday? 
Tania: Excellent, the girls and I went to a club. 
Olesia: _____________? 
Tania: It was great, I saw a lot of friends. 
Olesia: Gotcha. 
___________________ [Ну и как? Nu i kak?] 
 
Click each link to hear the phrase, then check the box corresponding to your familiarity with each phrase. 
 I often hear this I sometimes hear this I never hear this 
Phrase 1    
Phrase 2    
Phrase 3    
Phrase 4    
Phrase 5    
Phrase 6    
Phrase 7    
Phrase 8    
Phrase 9    
Phrase 10    
Phrase 11    
Phrase 12    
Phrase 13    
Phrase 14    
Phrase 15    
Phrase 16    
Phrase 17    
Phrase 18    
 
Please select the best-sounding response for the blanks in the following authentic Russian conversations. 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
 
5. Choose the best phrase to fill in the blank. 
Мама: Ты сегодня поможешь, а то я устала 
очень… 
Дочь: Я не хочу сегодня!! 
Мама: Мало ли что ты не хочешь, я вот тоже не 
хочу работать, а работаю. 
Дочь: ___________! Я не буду тебе помогать 
вообще, если сегодня не пойду гулять! 
Мать: И не надо, неблагодарная! 
Mom: You'll help me today, I'm really tired... 
Daughter: I don't want to today! 
Mom: It doesn't matter if you don't want to, I also 
don't want to work but I do. 
Daughter: ___________! If I don’t go out today I'm 
not going to help you at all! 
Mom: Then don't, you ungrateful girl! 
 
 К чёрту [Go to hell] 
 Да ты что [Da ty chto] 
 Ну и что [Nu i chto] 
 Очень жаль [Too bad] 
 
6. 
Сергей: (рассматривает подарок) А чё такие 
тяжелые? Серебряные ___________________? 
Вера: Не знаю. 
Sergei: (looking at the gift) Why are they so heavy? 
Silver ___________________? 
Vera: I don’t know. 
 
 конечно [of course] 
 вот это да [wow] 
 может быть [maybe] 
 что ли [chto li] 
 
7. 
Даша: А у тебя какой размер? 
Алена: Сорок два. 
Даша: ___________________? 
Алена: Да, я вообще похудела. 
Dasha: What size are you? 
Alyona: Forty-two. 
Dasha: ______________? 
Alyona: Yeah, I definitely lost weight. 
 
 А как же [Of course] 
 Что такое [What is it] 
 В чём дело [V chem delo] 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
 Да ты что [Da ty chto] 
 
8. 
Вадим: Я творческий человек по натуре. Я 
пишу музыку, играю в нескольких группах.  
Лия: В нескольких?! ___________________! 
Vadim: I’m a creative person by nature. I write 
music, play in a few bands.  
Liya: In a few?! ___________________! 
 
 Да нет [Da net] 
 Честное слово [Honest] 
 Надо же [Nado zhe] 
 Что ли [Chto li] 
 
Please select the emotion that the speaker is expressing with the underlined word/phrase in the following 
authentic Russian conversations. 
 
9. 
А.: Общий какой-то ужин, он подарил ей перед 
этим шубу.  
Д.: Ничего себе!  
А.: И она говорит «холодно». «Холодно», 
говорит она, «принеси шубу». 
A.: Some kind of public dinner, he gave her a fur 
coat right before it. 
D.: Nichego sebe! 
A.: And she says “it’s cold.” “It’s cold” she says, 
“bring the fur coat.” 
 
 delight 
 surprise 
 disapproval 
 embarrassment 
 
10.  
Саша: Привет! Идешь сегодня в «Пятое»?  
Максим: Да нет. А ты собрался, что ли?  
Саша: Конечно! 
Sasha: Hi! Are you going to “The Fifth” today? 
Maksim: Da net. Were you planning to? 
Sasha: Of course! 
 
 uncertainty 
 surprise 
 disgust 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
 strong agreement 
 
APPENDIX C. Phrases in Aural Comprehension Section of Pre-, Post-, Delayed Post-test 
Routine formula Nonce phrases 
В чём дело? В каком деле? 
Да нет! Не да! 
Да ты что! А ты как! 
Надо же! Нужно же! 
Ничего себе! Чего себе! 
Ничего страшного. Ничего странного.  
Ну и как? Ну и какой? 
Ну и что? Вот и что?  
...что ли? ... как ли? 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research was made possible with support from a Penn State Research & Graduate Studies Office 
Dissertation Support Grant and a Gilbert R. Watz Graduate Fellowship in Languages & Linguistics. 
Thank you very much to all the participants, without whom this research would not have been possible; to 
my colleagues who gave feedback and helped with rating; and to my dissertation committee for their 
expertise and mentorship. I am also grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Edie Furniss is Director of the Language Acquisition Center and Instructional Assistant Professor in the 
Department of Hispanic Studies and the Department of Modern and Classical Languages at the University 
of Houston. Her research interests include interlanguage pragmatics, corpus linguistics, foreign language 
materials development, and computer-assisted language learning. 
E-mail: eafurniss@uh.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Aijmer, K., & Fetzer, A. (2014). Discourse linguistics: Theory and practice. Functions of Language, 
21(1), 1–5. 
Anthony, L. (2014). AntConc (Version 3.4.3) [Computer software]. Tokyo, Japan: Waseda University. 
Bardovi-Harlig, K. (2012). Formulas, routines, and conversational expressions in pragmatics research. 
Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 32, 206–227. 
Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Bastos, M. T. (2011). Proficiency, length of stay, and intensity of interaction and 
the acquisition of conventional expressions in L2 pragmatics. Intercultural Pragmatics, 8(3), 347–384. 
 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Vellenga, H. E. (2012). The effect of instruction on conventional expressions in L2 
pragmatics. System, 40(1), 77–89. 
Barron, A. (2012). Interlanguage pragmatics: From use to acquisition to second language pedagogy. 
Language Teaching, 45(1), 44–63. 
Barron, A., & Warga, M. (2007). Acquisitional pragmatics: Focus on foreign language learners. 
Intercultural Pragmatics, 4(2), 113–127. 
Belz, J. A., & Vyatkina, N. (2005). Learner corpus analysis and the development of L2 pragmatic 
competence in networked intercultural language study: The case of German modal particles. Canadian 
Modern Language Review, 62(1), 17–48. 
Blyth, C. (2013). LCTLs and technology: The promise of open education. Language Learning & 
Technology, 17(1), 1–6. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2013/blythcommentary.pdf  
Boulton, A., & Pérez-Paredes, P. (Eds.). (2014). Researching uses of corpora for language teaching and 
learning [Special issue]. ReCALL: The Journal of EUROCALL, 26(2). 
Coulmas, F. (1979). On the sociolinguistic relevance of routine formulae. Journal of Pragmatics, 3, 
239–266. 
Flowerdew, L. (2012). Corpora and language education. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Furniss, E. (2013). Using a corpus-based approach to Russian as a foreign language materials 
development. Russian Language Journal, 63, 195–212. 
Garrett, N. (2009). Computer-assisted language learning trends and issues revisited: Integrating 
innovation. Modern Language Journal, 93, 719–740. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2013). The technological imperative in teaching and learning less commonly taught 
languages. Language Learning & Technology, 17(1), 7–19. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2013/emerging.pdf  
Ishihara, N. (2007). Web-based curriculum for pragmatics instruction in Japanese as a foreign language: 
An explicit awareness-raising approach. Language Awareness, 16(1), 21–40. 
Ishihara, N. (2010). Instructional pragmatics: Bridging teaching, research, and teacher education. 
Language and Linguistics Compass, 4(10), 938–953. 
Ishihara, N., & Cohen, A. D. (2010). Teaching and learning pragmatics: Where language and culture 
meet. Harlow, UK: Pearson Longman. 
Judd, E. (1999). Some issues in the teaching of pragmatic competence. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Culture in 
second language teaching and learning (pp. 152–166). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Kasper, G. (1997). Can pragmatic competence be taught? Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i, Second 
Language Teaching & Curriculum Center. Retrieved from http://www.nflrc.hawaii.edu/NetWorks/NW06/ 
Kasper, G. (2001). Four perspectives on L2 pragmatic development. Applied Linguistics, 22(4), 502–530. 
Kasper, G., & Roever, C. (2005). Pragmatics in second language learning. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Handbook 
of research in second language teaching and learning (pp. 317–334). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Kasper, G., & Schmidt, R. (1996). Developmental issues in interlanguage pragmatics. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 18(2), 149–169. 
Li, S. (2013). Amount of practice and pragmatic development of request-making in L2 Chinese. In N. 
Taguchi & J. M. Sykes (Eds.), Technology in interlanguage pragmatics research and teaching 
(pp. 43–69). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
McCarten, J., & McCarthy, M. (2010). Bridging the gap between corpus and course book: The case of 
conversation strategies. In F. Mishan & A. Chambers (Eds.), Perspectives on language learning materials 
development (pp. 11–32). Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Möllering, M. (2001). Teaching German modal particles: A corpus-based approach. Language Learning 
& Technology, 5(3), 130–151. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num3/pdf/mollering.pdf 
Narita, R. (2012). The effects of pragmatic consciousness-raising activity on the development of 
pragmatic awareness and use of hearsay evidential markers for learners of Japanese as a foreign language. 
Journal of Pragmatics, 44(1), 1–29. 
Nattinger, J. R., & DeCarrico, J. S. (1992). Lexical phrases and language teaching. Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press. 
Nunan, D. (Ed.). (2005). Technology and oral language development [Special issue]. Language Learning 
& Technology, 9(3). Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/ 
Robin, R. (2006). Computers and pedagogy in Russian: Where have we been? Where are we going? The 
Slavic and East European Journal, 50(1), 65–81. 
Roever, C. (2009). Teaching and testing pragmatics. In M. H. Long & C. J. Doughty (Eds.), The 
handbook of language teaching (pp. 560–577). Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Roever, C. (2012). What learners get for free: Learning of routine formulae in ESL and EFL 
environments. ELT Journal, 66(1), 10–21. 
Römer, U. (2011). Corpus research applications in second language teaching. Annual Review of Applied 
Linguistics, 31, 205–225. 
Rose, K. R. (2005). On the effects of instruction in second language pragmatics. System, 33, 385–399. 
Russell, V., & Vasquez, C. (2011). A web-based tutorial for the instruction of Spanish pragmatics. IALLT 
Journal of Language Learning Technologies, 41(2), 27–55. 
Schmidt, R. W. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 
11(2), 129–158. 
Schmidt, R. W. (1993). Awareness and second language acquisition. Annual Review of Applied 
Linguistics, 13(1), 206–226. 
Schmidt, R. W. (2001). Attention. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language instruction 
(pp. 3–32). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Sykes, J. M., & Cohen, A. D. (2008). Observed learner behavior, reported use, and evaluation of a 
website for learning Spanish pragmatics. In M. Bowles, R. Foote, & S. Perpiñán (Eds.), Second language 
acquisition and research: Focus on form and function (pp. 144–157). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla. 
Taguchi, N. (2011). Teaching pragmatics: Trends and issues. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 31, 
289–310. 
Taguchi, N. (2013). Production of routines in L2 English: Effect of proficiency and study-abroad 
experience. System, 41(1), 109–121. 
Taguchi, N., & Sykes, J. M. (Eds.). (2013). Technology in interlanguage pragmatics research and 
teaching. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Takahashi, S. (2010). Assessing learnability in second language pragmatics. In A. Trosborg (Ed.), 
Pragmatics across languages and cultures (pp. 391–422). Berlin, Germany: De Gruyter. 
 
Edie Furniss Teaching the Pragmatics of Russian Conversation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
Timmis, I. (2013). Developing materials for the speaking skill. In B. Tomlinson (Ed.), Developing 
materials for language teaching (pp. 461–474). London, UK: Bloomsbury. 
Usó-Juan, E. (2008). The presentation and practice of the communicative act of requesting in textbooks: 
Focusing on modifiers. In E. Alcón Soler & M. P. Safont Jordà (Eds.), Intercultural language use and 
language learning (pp. 223–243). Berlin, Germany: Springer. 
Utashiro, T., & Kawai, G. (2009). Blended learning for Japanese reactive tokens: Effects of computer-led, 
instructor-led, and peer-based instruction. In N. Taguchi (Ed.), Pragmatic competence (pp. 275–300). 
Berlin, Germany: De Gruyter. 
Waugh, E. (2013). Teaching pragmatics and intercultural communication online. TESL Canada Journal, 
30(7), 98–107. 
 
 
