Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/liu.pdf 
October 2016, Volume 20, Number 3 
pp. 128–141 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 128 
MOBILE ENGLISH VOCABULARY LEARNING BASED ON 
CONCEPT-MAPPING STRATEGY 
Pei-Lin Liu, National Chia-Yi University 
Numerous researchers in education recognize that vocabulary is essential in foreign 
language learning. However, students often encounter vocabulary that is difficult to 
remember. Providing effective vocabulary learning strategies is therefore more valuable 
than teaching students a large amount of vocabulary. The purpose of this study was to 
encourage teachers to apply these strategies by using mobile phones and technology to 
facilitate vocabulary learning. Participants were divided into learner-constructed concept-
mapping and text-only strategy groups. The concept-mapping group received the 
vocabulary instruction according to the concept maps constructed by the students 
themselves while the other group received the vocabulary in a random order. The research 
question was as follows: Does mobile English vocabulary learning based on concept-
mapping strategy have a significant effect on EFL learners’ vocabulary performance? For 
vocabulary learning acquisition and retention, the concept-mapping group performed 
significantly superior to the text-only group. 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English 
Keywords: Concept Mapping, Computer-assisted Language Learning 
APA Citation: Liu, P. L. (2016). Mobile English vocabulary learning based on concept-
mapping strategy. Language Learning & Technology, 20(1), 128–140. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/liu.pdf 
Received: September 11, 2014; Accepted: July 24, 2015; Published: October 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Pei-Lin Liu 
INTRODUCTION 
Vocabulary knowledge is one of the most crucial elements in foreign language performance, particularly 
in academic settings (Chen & Chung, 2008; Huckin, Haynes, & Coady, 1993). Most language learners 
feel that learning vocabulary is not an easy task, and many of them have trouble memorizing large 
amounts of vocabulary or applying it appropriately (Oxford, 1990; Schmitt, 2010). Therefore, English as 
a Foreign Language (EFL) learners could use effective learning tools and memorizing strategies to 
facilitate their vocabulary learning. 
Using mobile technology as learning tools has been proven effective for self-learning nearly anytime and 
anywhere; this is known as ubiquitous learning (Chinnery, 2006; Hwang & Chang, 2011; Hwang & Tsai, 
2011; Hwang, Chu, Lin, & Tsai, 2011; Hwang, Shi, & Chu, 2011). Research has suggested that mobile 
phones are useful learning tools which can support language learning and teaching (Cavus & Ibrahim, 
2009; Chinnery, 2006; Liu & Chen, 2014). In traditional language teaching, it is difficult for students to 
learn language anytime and anywhere. Mobile phones are optimal for students to learn language 
ubiquitously. 
Learning strategies are steps taken by students to enhance their own learning. Appropriate language 
learning strategies result in improved proficiency and substantial motivation (Oxford, 1990). To transform 
pure data into useful knowledge systematically, concept mapping is an effective strategy for language 
learning (Brown, 2001). Novak (1972) developed a concept-mapping strategy to help learners organize 
their memorization by storing and retrieving information effectively. Concept-mapping strategies are 
crucial for enhancing recall because people seemingly organize words into groups unconsciously (Cohen, 
Pei-Lin Liu Mobile English Vocabulary Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology  129 
1998; Schmitt & McCarthy, 1997). Concept mapping features a primary concept in the center of the map 
and involves using arrows to connect keywords, forming a graph (Oxford, 2013), thus supporting 
learners’ organization of information through visual aids, such as by depictions of relationships among 
concepts or groups of words in a diagram. In information processing, concept mapping can stimulate 
learners’ metacognitive awareness, which helps them to monitor their learning and retrieve knowledge 
(Chen & Chang, 1997; Li, 1998; Liu, 2010, 2011; Liu, Chen, & Chang, 2010; Novak & Musonda, 1991). 
In addition to a purely verbal approach, combining concept mapping and ubiquitous technology provides 
a visual and innovative approach to learning. Numerous studies have examined the effects of using instant 
messaging (IM) in language education (Bowman, Levine, Waite, & Gendron, 2010; Cavus & Ibrahim, 
2009; Collins, 2005; Sandberg, Maris, & de Geus, 2011), whereas other studies have investigated the 
effects of concept mapping in language learning (Hall, Dansereau, & Skaggs, 1992; Liu, 2014a, 2014b; 
Liu et al., 2010; Scevak, Moore, & Kirby, 1993). However, no research has examined the effects of 
incorporating concept mapping with IM as a learning strategy for EFL learners to memorize English 
vocabulary. This study focused on meaningful learning by associating IM with the concept-mapping 
strategy. 
The primary goal of this study was to examine the effects of integrating concept mapping with IM on 
memory retention by using mobile phones for EFL college students. The main research question was as 
follows: Does mobile English vocabulary learning based on concept-mapping strategy have a significant 
effect on EFL learners’ vocabulary performance? The hypothesis was that mobile English vocabulary 
learning based on concept-mapping strategy would have a significant and positive effect on students’ 
vocabulary learning performance. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The most effective solution for overcoming EFL learners’ difficulty in memorizing new vocabulary is to 
learn appropriate instruction, or rich instruction (Beck, McKeown, & Omanson, 1987; McWilliam, 
1998). This involves paying elaborate attention to a word and extending the immediate demands of a 
particular context of occurrence (Nation, 2001). EFL learners should apply a mnemonic technique, such 
as the concept-mapping strategy, which facilitates linking a word with its meaning. In the following 
sections, the researcher first summarizes research on vocabulary learning and then presents the concept-
mapping strategy applied in vocabulary instruction. The applications of IM in language learning are also 
addressed. 
Vocabulary Learning 
Past studies on reading considered vocabulary knowledge crucial for variation in the reading process, 
particularly because it affects high-level language processes such as grammatical processing and 
construction of schemata (August, Carlo, Dressler, & Snow, 2005), and also for overall academic success 
(Harris, Schumaker, & Deshler, 2011). Learners who experience slow vocabulary development may have 
higher risk for encountering difficulties in oral or text communication when compared with their peers. 
Studies have confirmed the high correlation between vocabulary knowledge and reading comprehension 
(Dalton & Grisham, 2011). 
The multistore model by Atkinson and Shiffrin (1971) may explain the vocabulary information 
processing procedure. The researchers proposed that the human memory system could be divided into 
three components: sensory memory, working memory, and long-term memory. Information from the 
environment that people acquire through their senses enters the system through the sensory memory, 
which receives information from the environment and stores it fleetingly. The working memory is a 
mental processing unit in which information may be stored temporarily. The working memory is also a 
work space where a decision must be made either to discard information or to transfer it to permanent 
storage. The long-term memory is a unit in which information may be stored permanently and from which 
Pei-Lin Liu Mobile English Vocabulary Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology  130 
it may be later retrieved. To assist learners in storing information in their long-term memory for 
vocabulary acquisition, the use of learning strategies is recommended.
In Taiwan, most students learn language primarily by reading and copying definitions. Some teachers use 
this strategy by listing vocabulary words and definitions on the board from the textbook glossary and then 
requiring students to copy them. Other teachers may require students to look up definitions in the 
dictionary. Yet many learners still have trouble memorizing the large amounts of vocabulary (Weng, 2010).
Teaching and Learning Vocabulary with Concept Maps 
Concept mapping is a vocabulary learning strategy. The strategy involves arranging words into a picture 
with a core concept at the center or at the top and related words linked with the key concept by lines 
(Oxford, 2013). The visual display of a concept map emphasizes the connections between words 
(Baumann & Kame’enui, 2004). 
Different theoretical frameworks have been used to explain how concept maps are linked to textual 
information in comprehension. Concept maps provide guidance in converting information into a structure. 
Another theoretical framework was described in Paivio’s (1986) dual-coding model, which processes 
maps visually and processes texts verbally, thereby mobilizing all the available resources in working 
memory. Cognitive load theory refers to the total amount of mental effort being used in the working 
memory. According to the implication of cognitivism, concept maps can reduce cognitive load and 
promote direct attention on learning. All of these models share the principle of limited working memory 
resources. Concept maps mobilize increased resources in working memory, enabling learners to construct 
a mental model that supports learning processes (Amadieu & Salmerón, 2014). 
Adopting concept mapping in vocabulary learning provides a framework for organizing conceptual 
information in the process of defining a word. A typical concept map or graphic organizer places the 
vocabulary word at the center and includes additional links or concepts connected to the central word. 
Before reading a text, it is advantageous to become acquainted with key vocabulary terms that will guide 
the reading and analysis of the text. The meta-analysis of Dexter and Hughes (2011) reviewed 
experimental and quasi-experimental studies of students with learning disabilities who learned using 
graphic organizers. The findings indicated that use of concept maps was associated with increases in 
vocabulary knowledge, comprehension, and inferential knowledge. 
Palmer, Boon, and Spencer (2014) compared a dictionary approach with a learner-constructed concept-
mapping model in the learning of vocabulary words of four seventh-graders with mild disabilities. For the 
dictionary instruction approach, each student looked up a vocabulary word in the dictionary, and then 
wrote the word in a sentence on notebook paper. In the concept-mapping approach, the students 
completed a concept map that displays the definition of a word, and then wrote the word in a sentence. 
Results revealed significant improvements for all students in their vocabulary learning associated with the 
use of the concept-mapping model compared with the dictionary approach. Another study on using the 
learner-constructed concept-mapping strategy and its effects on vocabulary learning is the work of 
Jackson, Tripp, and Cox (2011). To support vocabulary development in science, they used interactive 
science word walls that resembled concept maps, strategically targeted academic vocabulary, and were 
student generated. The mapping strategy was useful to students not only in unifying related terms and 
concepts, but also in assisting them to visualize connections between vocabulary and their own interests 
and experiences (Shirzadeh, Soleimani, & Lotfi, 2014). 
The expert-constructed concept map is used to train learners in comprehension of a text and to save 
instructors time in teaching (Liu, 2010). Margosein, Pascarella, and Pflaum (1982) randomly assigned 
junior high school students to two vocabulary instruction treatments. One involved using context-rich 
passages as sources for target word definitions, whereas the other involved applying concept-mapping 
treatment, which entailed learning new words by identifying the similarities and differences in related 
Pei-Lin Liu Mobile English Vocabulary Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology  131 
words. The results indicated substantial effects favoring the concept-mapping strategy on general 
vocabulary knowledge. The findings suggest that focusing on the connections of a word with related, 
known words may be an effective instructional method for learning new vocabulary. 
Concept maps facilitate logical thinking (Ritchhart, Turner, & Hadar, 2009). They serve as visual 
organizers to promote learning (Dunston, 1992) and are especially effective in teaching technical 
vocabulary (Readence, Bean, & Baldwin, 1989). In addition, concept mapping promotes other skills such 
as reflection, a self-regulatory process that is related to motivation, self-control, and self-efficacy. In other 
words, concept mapping increases learners’ motivation in the classroom (Soleimani & Nabizadeh, 2012). 
The overall attitudes of learners toward concept mapping were positive. Additional research has revealed 
that concept mapping may be more useful when the organizers are constructed by the students rather than 
by the teacher (Moore & Readence, 1984; Phillips, Foote, & Harper, 2008). 
IM as Support for Foreign Language Learning 
IM technology enables the creation of a variety of content, ranging from text-only to multimedia content 
(including audio and visual content) that can be delivered electronically to mobile phones (Collins, 2005; 
Lu, 2008). The difference between IM and other delivery mechanisms on mobile devices is that users are 
engaged in quasi-synchronous communication (Verma, 2013). Mitchell, Heppel, and Kadirire (2002) 
indicated that the primary reason for the high sending rate of IM is low price (relatively inexpensive 
compared with voice communication) and asynchronous communication (when to read and reply to 
messages is at the user’s discretion). Short message service (SMS) is the most rudimentary, allowing the 
transmission of simple text messages. Multimedia message service (MMS) allows the integration of 
visual, audio, and text. Consequently, numerous studies have used SMS and MMS with mobile phones to 
facilitate learning. Research has largely concentrated on English reading (e.g., Ng, 2012; Zhang, Shan, & 
Wang, 2012), understanding the context of an English sentence (e.g., Ng, 2012; Simon, Razak, & Lee, 
2012), and English vocabulary learning (e.g., Cavus & Ibrahim, 2009; Chen & Chung, 2008; Lu, 2008; 
Sandberg et al., 2011). The results of these studies have indicated that using IM as a learning tool yields 
positive effects on learning, particularly for optimizing time spent learning English through reading. 
Therefore, IM is a useful tool in assisting students to recall English vocabulary. 
Thornton and Houser (2005) used mobile phones to teach English at a Japanese university and compared 
the differences between web-based learning and SMS-based learning. Three times a day, students 
received short lessons through e-mails that divided large lessons into chunks which could be read easily 
on small screens. The lessons defined five words per week, recycled previous vocabulary, and involved 
using the words in various contexts including episodic stories. The results indicated that students who 
learned using SMS remembered more than twice the number of vocabulary words than students who 
learned through the web interface. The authors concluded that their lessons were effective because SMS is 
a push medium for promoting frequent rehearsal and spaced study that enhances the retention of recycled 
vocabulary (see Chinnery, 2006). 
Lu (2008) examined the effectiveness of SMS vocabulary lessons of limited lexical information provided 
through the small screens of mobile phones. 30 Taiwanese high school students were randomly divided 
into two groups and given two sets of English words either on paper or through SMS messages over two 
weeks. The post-test results revealed that students recognized more vocabulary after reading the brief 
SMS lessons than they did after reading the more detailed printed material. 
Levy and Kennedy (2005) created a program for learning Italian through mobile SMS in an Australian 
university context. Vocabulary words and idioms, definitions, and example sentences were sent to the 
mobile phones of students between course lessons and tutorials. Feedback was requested in the form of 
quizzes and follow-up questions. The same authors reported similar findings on this topic in a later study 
(Kennedy & Levy, 2008) that entailed sending SMS messages at a substantially lower frequency and with 
higher-information content. Although they noted improved results, they found that each user had different 
Pei-Lin Liu Mobile English Vocabulary Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology  132 
preferences related to the rate and information content of the messages. 
A similar SMS-based program called a mobile learning tool, developed by Cavus and Ibrahim (2009), 
entails using wireless technologies in education, particularly for learning technical English vocabulary by 
using text messaging. Spaced repetitions of the same messages were sent on different days to test 45 
Turkish undergraduate students. Outside the regular classroom environment, students completed daily 
activities and learned new technical words. 
Chen, Hsieh, and Kinshuk (2008) used SMS and MMS messages for learning English vocabulary. 
Because of the limited screen size of mobile phones, they presented materials by using various learning-
content representation types. The researchers experimented with four types of annotation: words only, 
words with written annotation, words with pictorial annotation, and words with both written and pictorial 
annotations. The findings showed that providing learning content with pictorial annotation in a mobile 
language learning environment helps learners with low verbal but high visual ability to learn content 
presented in a visual rather than a verbal form. Providing learning content with both written and pictorial 
annotation can also help learners with both high verbal and high visual abilities. Furthermore, the study 
demonstrated the validity of both dual coding and cognitive load theories (i.e., using more than one 
modality is more effective than using a single modality). 
Cell phones provide an active environment of language learning for students to learn English 
independently. The aforementioned studies refer to authors who have conducted experimental studies 
related to IM for vocabulary learning. Although learners in each study had different preferences related to 
the rate and information content of instant messages (Kennedy & Levy, 2008; Levy & Kennedy, 2005), 
most of the findings showed positive effects. The findings described that IM is an effective application for 
expanding learners’ vocabulary (Cavus & Ibrahim, 2009), facilitating users’ vocabulary retention 
(Chinnery, 2006; Thornton & Houser, 2005), reducing students’ learning difficulties (Chen et al., 2008), 
and enhancing learners’ performance when compared with traditional teaching strategies (Lu, 2008). SMS 
served as a reminder to acquire new English vocabulary words. 
METHODOLOGY 
Experimental Design 
The researcher used a quasi-experimental design in this study. Participants (N = 100) were randomly 
assigned to two groups, and both groups received vocabulary lessons via IM. The difference between the 
treatment groups was the IM learning strategies, which were the concept-mapping strategy (n = 50) and 
text-only strategy (n = 50). Because research has revealed that concept maps are more useful if the 
organizers are constructed by the learners rather than by the instructor (Moore & Readence, 1984; Phillips 
et al., 2008), the researcher used the learner-constructed concept map approach as the concept-mapping 
strategy. 
1. Concept-mapping group: To learn the 32 target vocabulary words, students in the concept-
mapping group were instructed with a concept-mapping strategy and asked to construct their own 
vocabulary maps that were to be used in conjunction with the MMS messages they received. 
2. Text-only group: For the text-only group, the instructor used traditional instruction (e.g., 
vocabulary meaning explanation and sentence example) with the SMS messages that the students 
received to learn the 32 target vocabulary words. 
Participants 
Two classes of 100 freshmen consisting of 48 men and 52 women were invited to join the study. The 
mean age of participants was 19.37 years, ranging from 18 to 22 years. They had been learning English 
for six years on average. They studied in different fields such as architecture, management, and 
Pei-Lin Liu Mobile English Vocabulary Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology  133 
engineering. Their English proficiency level was intermediate according to their scores on the General 
English Proficiency Test (GEPT). The GEPT was administered by the Language Training and Testing 
Center in Taiwan. This test corresponds to Taiwan's English education framework, and provides 
institutions and schools with a reference for evaluating the English proficiency levels of their job 
applicants, employees, or students. A participant with intermediate level based on the test is regarded as 
able to use basic English to communicate in daily life. The average English proficiency of each class was 
supposedly equal. 
Reading Material 
The researcher used nine papers in the high-intermediate level of a learning English magazine as the 
reading materials in the study. The magazine was used as the reading material because it was designed 
specifically to help learners improve their English conversation skills. It also prepared students for 
academic success in college life through practical and interesting content. Readings included textbook 
passages, essays, letters, and website articles. Vocabulary was presented before each reading and was 
used throughout the article. This magazine was the most popular English-teaching magazine in Taiwan. 
Test 
The preliminary test was used to collect information on participants’ vocabulary proficiency in the 
English reading material. It adopted 100 vocabulary words of the nine articles in the form of a word-
definition fill-in format. For each tested word, participants were required to write down their first 
language (Chinese) translations. After conducting the preliminary test, 32 target vocabulary items were 
retained, whereas 68 were filtered out. The results of the paired t-test confirmed no significant difference 
in the preliminary test of the two groups. 
One week after receiving IM vocabulary lessons, a post-test was administered, followed by a delayed 
post-test after another week. The purpose of the post-test was to determine the learners’ vocabulary 
acquisition, and the delayed post-test was conducted to evaluate vocabulary retention. The test content 
consisted the same 32 translation items for the post-test and delayed post-test. The total score of each test 
was 32 points. 
Concept Mapping 
A concept map is a diagram showing the relationships among groups of words, and concept maps were 
used in this study to support learners’ organization of information through visual aids. The learners were 
taught how to draw a concept map by themselves by using the Inspiration software, and constructed their 
maps by using computers. After completing the maps, the students submitted their maps, the explanations 
of the maps, and the sending schedules to the instructor online (for sample maps and a sending schedule, 
see Figure 1). Having learners construct concept maps allowed them to show their teachers how they 
linked vocabulary together, a learning strategy not possible when learners have to simply memorize facts 
in a linear method. There are several methods to constructing concept maps. Most include the following 
steps: 
 Identify the major concepts regarding a selection of vocabulary words. 
 Organize the ideas into categories. Remind students that the organization may change as they 
continue to read and add information. 
 Use lines or arrows on the map to represent how vocabulary words are connected to one another, 
a particular category, or the main concept. 
 After students have finished the map, encourage them to explain their decisions of where they 
placed each word and the relationship between words. 
 Encourage students to use the concept map to memorize the vocabulary. 
Pei-Lin Liu Mobile English Vocabulary Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology  134 
 
 
Sending Day Main categories Subcategory Related vocabulary 
Week 1 Mon. Emotion (1) fatigue (2) turn into (3) annoying 
 Tues.  (4) resend (5) turn to (6) turn down 
 Wed.  (7) frustration (8) turn in (9) melancholy 
 Thur. Emotion (10) toss and turn (11) slumber  
 Fri.  (12) guilt (13) shame (14) grateful 
 Sat.  (15) gratitude (16) accountable  
Week 2 Mon. Staff (17) intervention (18) commissioner  
 Tues.  (19) negotiation (20) congressman  
 Wed.  (21) recipient (22) sponsor  
   (23) cope (24) colleague  
 Thur. Scenery (25) stunning (26) spectacle (27) thankful 
 Fri.  (28) fantastic (29) fascinate  
 Sat.  (30) idyllic (31) favorable (32) turn up 
Note. Each student may have different concept maps and sending schedule. 
Figure 1. Concept maps developed by one of the students and the MMS sending schedule. 
Instant Messages 
The concept-mapping group and text-only group received the same 32 target vocabulary items sent by IM 
once per day during the two-week experiment. For the concept-mapping group, the vocabulary items were 
sent according to participants’ sending schedule. Students received two or three vocabulary items per day 
on average. Students created their own concept maps and explanations in the concept-mapping group 
during Weeks 2 and 3, and they were instructed to refer to concept maps in conjunction with the MMS 
messages they received regarding the target vocabulary. 
The vocabulary delivered by SMS to the text-only group was composed of English vocabulary by their 
syntactic categories, Chinese translations, and example sentences. The new vocabulary was also provided 
Pei-Lin Liu Mobile English Vocabulary Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology  135 
at the onset to the text-only group to ensure that they had the same amount of time for preparation and 
review as the concept-mapping group had. 
Procedure 
A preliminary test was administered in the first week, and the results confirmed that there was no 
significant difference in vocabulary comprehension between the two groups. In the following two weeks, 
participants in the experimental group received MMS messages regarding the 32 English words in the 
students’ concept map categories, at the rate of two to three words per day. The participants were able to 
see the overall structure of the concept map in each MMS by clicking on a “View” button. Participants in 
the text-only group received SMS messages regarding the same 32 English words without concept maps, 
at a similar rate as the experimental group. The messages were sent every day by using WhatsApp 
Messenger over a six-day period (from Monday to Saturday). All of the participants received the English 
vocabulary lessons once per day. 
In Week 4, after the final messages of English words were delivered, the post-test was administered to 
both groups. During the fifth week, the delayed post-test was administered to the participants. During the 
same week, group interviews were conducted. Each group consisted of five participants and they were 
interviewed for approximately 15 min about their feelings and opinions regarding the experiment. 
RESULTS 
To examine the effects of using the mobile-assisted concept-mapping vocabulary learning strategy on 
vocabulary performance of EFL learners, two independent-sample t-tests were conducted to compare 
memory for vocabulary in text-only and concept-mapping conditions (see Table 1). There was a 
significant difference in the post-test scores for text-only (M = 25.95, SD = 12.36) and concept-mapping 
(M = 31.69, SD = 10.76) treatments (t = -2.02, p = .04). For the delayed post-test, the differences in the 
learning strategies between the two groups were also significant (t = -3.32, p = .00). The concept-mapping 
group significantly outperformed the text-only group on both post-tests. These results suggest that the 
concept-mapping MMS learning strategy had a positive effect on memory for vocabulary. 
Table 1. Results of Independent t-tests of Two Groups on the Post- and Delayed Post-tests 
 Text-only group  Concept-mapping group     
 N M SD  N M SD  MD t p 
Post-test 50 25.95 12.36  50 31.69 10.76  -5.74 -2.02 .04* 
Delayed Post-test 50 20.68 13.28  50 29.90 13.06  -9.22 -3.32 .00* 
Note. * indicates p < .05 
To determine whether there was any statistically significant difference between students’ success rate  on 
vocabulary retention in the post-test and delayed post-test, a paired-samples t-test was performed and the 
results are shown in Table 2. Results clearly indicate that using the concept-mapping MMS learning 
strategy, students had lower decrease rates (MD = -1.79) than did students using the text-only SMS 
learning strategy (MD = -5.27). A paired-samples t-test based on post-test and delayed post-test results 
indicated a significant difference between the two tests (t = 2.05, p = .04) for the text-only group; 
however, no significant difference was found between the two tests (t = .96, p = .34) for the concept-
mapping group. Through the MMS concept-mapping learning process, learners were able to more easily 
recall vocabulary over a longer period of time. 
 
Pei-Lin Liu Mobile English Vocabulary Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology  136 
Table 2. Results of Paired t-test of Two Tests on the Text-only Group and Concept-mapping Group 
Tests  Post-test  Delayed post-test     
  N M SD  N M SD  MD t p 
Text-only group 50 25.95 12.36  50 20.68 13.28  -5.27 -2.05 .04* 
Concept-mapping group 50 31.69 10.76  50 29.90 13.06  -1.79 -0.96 .34 
Note. * indicates p < .05 
DISCUSSION 
Although several previous studies have reported the effectiveness of the concept-mapping approach, the 
effects of using mobile technologies with concept-mapping activities on students’ learning performance 
still required investigation. The experimental results show that the students who learned using both the 
MMS and the learner-constructed concept-mapping strategy revealed significantly superior performance 
in terms of their vocabulary acquisition and retention. These findings are consistent with those of Liu et 
al. (2010) and Liu (2011, 2014a, 2014b), in that applying the concept-mapping strategy had a direct 
influence on learners’ English learning ability. 
To investigate the factors affecting the performance of the students in the experimental group, an in-depth 
group interview was arranged. The interview results showed that most of the students in the mapping 
group thought that learning English words with the assistance of concept maps and the word association 
information enhanced their memorization. One participant mentioned, “I think that the words I learned are 
organized in a semantically related way and it really helps me. It is because I can know the relationships 
among the groups of words and then I can easily associate the words that have similar meanings. By 
learning new words through this way, the association helps me with comprehension.” Understanding how 
the words group together is useful for making the learning material easier to remember (Cohen, 1998; 
Schmitt & McCarthy, 1997). 
The interview responses showed that the concept-mapping approach attracted the attention of students 
with map diagrams. One comment was “I like to memorize words by the maps because the pictures 
enhance my memorization of words. When I forget the words that I read several days ago, I can refresh 
my memory by thinking of the words in the pictures.” Such findings are consistent with those reported by 
Paivio (1986) that both visual and verbal codes can be used when recalling information. The approach of 
concept mapping that presents words in two different forms (text and picture) increases the chance of 
remembering vocabulary compared with the approach that only presents words in one form. 
Compared with the text-only SMS strategy, the concept mapping with MMS strategy in this study was 
more learner-oriented. Students in the experimental group spent time drawing map diagrams to represent 
what they had learned in class. However, in the text-only approach, students were less involved because 
they received the word lessons from the teacher. Therefore, less time involved in organizing word 
knowledge could be a major reason why their learning achievement was less favorable than that of the 
students who learned with their own map. The result was consistent with those of Moore and Readence 
(1984) and Phillips et al. (2008), that the maps were more useful when learners were involved in 
productive mapping activities rather than in just receiving teachers’ mapping guidance. For example, one 
of the students stated, “Through the map-building process, I review the words many times for thinking the 
associations among those words. The process helps me familiarize with the new English words.”  
CONCLUSION 
This experimental study provided another intriguing result, indicating that the group of concept-mapping 
students retained what they learned for longer periods compared to the group of text-only students. 
Pei-Lin Liu Mobile English Vocabulary Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology  137 
Students who learned using the traditional instruction with the SMS text-only approach showed a 
significant decrease in the scores on their delayed post-test compared to those who learned through the 
MMS concept-mapping approach. Although students might be interested in using mobile devices to learn, 
mobile learning performance is not effective in the long term without effective strategies to assist student 
learning. 
Compared with the learning approach for the control group, the concept-mapping approach provided a 
more efficient memorization tool for the students to organize and represent vocabulary knowledge. Such 
findings correspond with those by Hwang, Kuo, Chen, & Ho (2014), who indicated that the computerized 
concept-map approach assists students in improving their learning achievements and promoting their 
learning interest. 
Providing example sentences for new vocabulary is a common method used by EFL instructors in 
teaching vocabulary. In this study, instead of using particular learning formula and schedule designed by 
instructors, different students had different approaches in clustering vocabulary and had their own mobile 
learning schedule for personalized learning. The overall goal of this study was to add value to the anytime 
and anyplace flexibility of mobile learning. One of the contributions of this study is elucidating the 
importance of providing concept maps and supplementary materials by IM for vocabulary memory 
retention. Another contribution is to demonstrate how the approach can be used in a specific learning 
activity to inspire others to attempt a similar approach for improving student learning achievements. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Dr. Pei-Lin Liu is an Associate Professor of the Department of Foreign Languages at National Chia-Yi 
University in Taiwan. Her research interests include computer-assisted language learning, concept 
mapping, and eye-tracking. 
E-mail: peilin@mail.ncyu.edu.tw 
 
REFERENCES 
Amadieu, F., & Salmerón, L. (2014). Concept maps for comprehension and navigation of hypertexts. In 
D. Ifenthaler & R. Hanewald (Eds.), Digital knowledge maps in education: Technology-enhanced support 
for teachers and learners (pp. 41–59). New York, NY: Springer. 
Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1971). The control of short-term memory. Scientific American, 
225(2), 82–90. 
August, D., Carlo, M., Dressler, C., & Snow, C. (2005). The critical role of vocabulary development for 
English language learners. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 20(1), 50–57. 
Baumann, J. F., & Kame’enui, E. J. (2004). Vocabulary instruction: Research to practice. New York, 
NY: Guilford. 
Beck, I. L., McKeown, M. G., & Omanson, R. C. (1987). The effects and uses of diverse vocabulary 
instructional techniques. In M. G. McKeown & M. E. Curtis (Eds.), The nature of vocabulary acquisition 
(pp. 147–163). New York, NY: Psychology Press. 
Bowman, L. L., Levine, L. E., Waite, B. W., & Gendron, M. (2010). Can students really multitask? An 
experimental study of instant messaging while reading. Computers & Education, 54, 927–931. 
 
Pei-Lin Liu Mobile English Vocabulary Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology  138 
Brown, H. D. (2001). Teaching by principles: An interactive approach to language pedagogy (2nd ed.). 
New York, NY: Longman, Inc. 
Cavus, N., & Ibrahim, D. (2009). M-Learning: An experiment in using SMS to support learning new 
English language words. British Journal of Educational Technology, 40(1), 78–91. 
Chen, C. M., & Chung, C. J. (2008). Personalized mobile English vocabulary learning system based on 
item response theory and learning memory cycle. Computers & Education, 51(2), 624–645. 
Chen, N. S., Hsieh, S. W., & Kinshuk, D. G. (2008). Effects of short-term memory and content 
representation type on mobile language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 12(3), 93–113. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/chenetal.pdf 
Chen, S. F., & Chang, K. N. (1997). Concept mapping-based learning system (Unpublished master’s 
thesis). National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan. 
Chinnery, G. M. (2006). Emerging technologies going to the MALL: Mobile assisted language learning. 
Language Learning & Technology, 10(1), 9–16. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/emerging/default.html 
Cohen, A. D. (1998). Strategies in learning and using a second language. Harlow, UK: Longman. 
Collins, T. G. (2005). English class on the air: Mobile language learning with cell phones. Paper 
presented at the Fifth IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan. 
Dalton, B., & Grisham, D. L. (2011). eVoc strategies: 10 ways to use technology to build vocabulary. The 
Reading Teacher, 64(5), 306–317. 
Dexter, D. D., & Hughes, C. A. (2011). Graphic organizers and students with learning disabilities: A 
meta-analysis. Learning Disability Quarterly, 34(1), 51–72. 
Dunston, P. J. (1992). A critique of graphic organizer research. Reading Research and Instruction, 31(2), 
57–65. 
Hall, R. H., Dansereau, D. F., & Skaggs, L. P. (1992). Knowledge maps and the presentation of related 
information domains. Journal of Experimental Education, 61, 5–18. 
Harris, M. L., Schumaker, J. B., & Deshler, D. D. (2011). The effects of strategic morphological analysis 
instruction on the vocabulary performance of secondary students with and without disabilities. Learning 
Disability Quarterly, 34(1), 17–33. 
Huckin, T., Haynes, M., & Coady, J. (1993). Second language reading and vocabulary learning. 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Hwang, G. J., & Chang, H. F. (2011). A formative assessment-based mobile learning approach to 
improving the learning attitudes and achievements of students. Computers & Education, 56(4), 1023–
1031. 
Hwang, G. J., & Tsai, C. C. (2011). Research trends in mobile and ubiquitous learning: A review of 
publications in selected journals from 2001 to 2010. British Journal of Educational Technology, 42(4), 
65–70. 
Hwang, G. J., Chu, H. C., Lin, Y. S., Tsai, C. C. (2011). A knowledge acquisition approach to developing 
Mindtools for organizing and sharing differentiating knowledge in a ubiquitous learning environment. 
Computers & Education, 57(1), 1368–1377. 
 
Pei-Lin Liu Mobile English Vocabulary Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology  139 
Hwang, G. J., Kuo, F. R., Chen, N. S., & Ho, H. J. (2014). Effects of an integrated concept mapping and 
web-based problem-solving approach on students’ learning achievements, perceptions, and cognitive 
loads. Computers & Education, 71, 77–86. 
Hwang, G. J., Shi, Y. R., & Chu, H. C. (2011). A concept map approach to developing collaborative 
Mindtools for context-aware ubiquitous learning. British Journal of Educational Technology, 42(5), 778–
789. 
Jackson, J., Tripp, S., & Cox, K. (2011). Interactive word walls. Science Scope, 35(3), 45–49. 
Kennedy, C., & Levy, M. (2008). L’italiano al telefonino: Using SMS to support beginners’ language 
learning. European Association for Computer Assisted Language Learning, 20(3), 315–330. 
Levy, M., & Kennedy, C. (2005). Learning Italian via mobile SMS. In A. Kukulska-Hulme & J. Traxler 
(Eds.), Mobile learning: A handbook for educators and trainers (pp. 76–83). London, UK: Taylor & 
Francis. 
Li, Y. Y. (1998). Cognitive teaching - Theory and strategy. Taipei, Taiwan: Psychology. 
Liu, P. L. (2010). Computer-assisted concept maps for English reading and summary writing . Taipei, 
Taiwan: Crane. 
Liu, P. L. (2011). A study on the use of computerized concept mapping to assist ESL learners’ writing. 
Computers & Education, 57(4), 2548–2558. 
Liu, P. L. (2014a). Collaborative work with digital knowledge maps on improving ESL learners’ reading 
skills. In D. Ifenthaler & R. Hanewald, (Eds.), Digital Knowledge Maps in Education (pp. 123–138). New 
York, NY: Springer. 
Liu, P. L. (2014b). Using eye tracking to understand learners’ reading process through the concept-
mapping learning strategy. Computers & Education, 78, 237–249. 
Liu, P. L., & Chen, C. J. (2014). Learning English phrase through actions: A study of mobile-assisted 
language learning. Interactive Learning Environments, 23(2), 158–171. doi: 
10.1080/10494820.2014.959976. 
Liu, P. L., Chen, C. J., & Chang, Y. J. (2010). Effects of a computer-assisted concept mapping learning 
strategy on EFL college students’ English reading comprehension. Computers & Education, 54, 436-445. 
Lu, M. (2008). Effectiveness of vocabulary learning via mobile phone. Journal of Computer Assisted 
Learning, 24(6), 515–525. 
Margosein, C., Pascarella, E., & Pflaum, S. (1982). The effects of instruction using semantic mapping on 
vocabulary and comprehension. Journal of Early Adolescence, 2(2), 185–194. 
McWilliam, N. (1998). What’s in a word? Vocabulary development in multilingual classrooms. Trent, 
UK: Trentham Books. 
Mitchell, A., Heppel, S., & Kadirire, J. (2002). Technology watch research report. Chelmsford, UK: 
UltraLab. 
Moore, D., & Readence, J. (1984). A quantitative and qualitative review of graphic organizer research. 
Journal of Educational Research, 78, 11–17. 
Nation, I. S. P. (2001). Learning vocabulary in another language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Ng, W. (2012). Can we teach digital natives digital literacy? Computers & Education, 59(3), 1065–1078. 
Novak, J. D. (1972). Facilities for secondary school science teaching. The Science Teacher, 39(3), 2–13. 
Pei-Lin Liu Mobile English Vocabulary Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology  140 
Novak, J. D., & Musonda, D. (1991). A twelve-year longitudinal study of science concept learning. 
American Educational Research Journal, 28(1), 117–153. 
Oxford, R. L. (1990). Language learning strategies: What every teacher should know. New York, NY: 
Newbury House. 
Oxford, R. L. (2013). Teaching & Researching: Language Learning Strategies. London, UK: Routledge. 
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representations: A dual coding approach. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press. 
Palmer, J., Boon, R. T., & Spencer, V. G. (2014). Effects of concept mapping instruction on the 
vocabulary acquisition skills of seventh-graders with mild disabilities: A replication study. Reading & 
Writing Quarterly, 30(2), 165–182. 
Phillips, D. C. K., Foote, C. J., Harper, L. J. (2008). Strategies for effective vocabulary instruction. 
Reading Improvement, 45, 62–68. 
Readence, J. E., Bean, T., & Baldwin, R. S. (1989). Content area reading: An integrated approach (3rd 
ed.). Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt. 
Ritchhart, R., Turner, T., & Hadar, L. (2009). Uncovering students’ thinking about thinking using concept 
maps. Metacognition and Learning, 4(2), 145–159. 
Sandberg, J., Maris, M, & de Geus, K. (2011). Mobile English learning: An evidence-based study with 
fifth graders. Computers & Education, 57(1), 1334–1347. 
Scevak, J. J., Moore, P. J., & Kirby, J. R. (1993). Training students to use maps to increase text recall. 
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 18, 401–413. 
Schmitt, N. (2010). Review article: Instructed second language vocabulary learning. Language Teaching 
Research, 14(4), 347–349. 
Schmitt, N., & McCarthy, M. (1997). Vocabulary: Description, acquisition, and pedagogy. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Shirzadeh, A., Soleimani, H., & Lotfi, A. T. (2014). The effect of multimedia learner-constructed concept 
mapping and brainstorming strategies on Iranian EFL learners’ reading comprehension. International 
Journal of Language Learning and Applied Linguistics World, 7(4), 1–16. 
Simon, S. K., Razak, S. F. A., & Lee, C. P. (2012). Personalized mobile system application: A case study. 
International Journal on Advanced Science Engineering Information Technology, 2(6), 9–13. 
Soleimani, H., & Nabizadeh, F. (2012). The effect of learner constructed, fill in the map concept map 
technique, and summarizing strategy on Iranian pre-university students’ reading comprehension. English 
Language Teaching, 5(9), 78–87. 
Thornton, P., & Houser, C. (2005). Using mobile phones in English education in Japan. Journal of 
Computer Assisted Learning, 21(3), 217–228. 
Verma, C. P. (2013). Intranet based messaging service on android smartphones and tablets. International 
Journal, 3(7), 1030–1032. 
Weng, M. L. (2010). The effects of vocabulary learning strategy instruction on vocational senior high 
school EFL students’ vocabulary acquisition and retention (Unpublished master’s thesis). National 
Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. 
 
 
Pei-Lin Liu Mobile English Vocabulary Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology  141 
Zhang, L., Shan, L., & Wang, J. (2012). The Design and Implementation of a SMS-Based Mobile 
Learning System. In Advances in Control and Communication (pp. 107–113). Heidelberg, Germany: 
Springer Verlag. 
