Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/lanetal.pdf 
October 2016, Volume 20, Number 3 
pp. 60–79 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 60 
ORAL-PERFORMANCE LANGUAGE TASKS FOR CSL BEGINNERS IN 
SECOND LIFE 
Yu-Ju Lan, National Taiwan Normal University 
Yu-Hsuan Kan, National Taiwan Normal University 
Yao-Ting Sung, National Taiwan Normal University 
Kuo-En Chang, National Taiwan Normal University 
The aim of this study was to determine the effects of different types of language tasks 
performed in Second Life (SL) on the oral performance of beginners of Chinese as a 
Second Language (CSL), focusing on oral accuracy. The 30 CSL beginners who 
participated in this study were randomly divided into two groups (n = 15 per group), 
required to perform two different types of language tasks: information-gap and reasoning-
gap. During the study, both the Mandarin oral accuracy and the learning motivation of 
both groups were measured and analyzed to determine to what extent performing the two 
different task types could contribute to the two dependent variables (i.e., accuracy and 
motivation). All the learners improved significantly in oral communication competence, 
with those performing the reasoning-gap task improving significantly more than those 
performing the information-gap task. It was also found that almost all the learners 
exhibited positive learning motivation and appreciated the task-based learning activities 
designed in SL. Both groups made significant improvement in the affective dimension. 
Furthermore, the reasoning-gap group received significantly higher scores in the 
educational-context-related dimension (attitude toward SL as the Mandarin Chinese 
learning environment) than the information-gap group did. 
Language(s) Learned in Current Study: Mandarin Chinese 
Keywords: Computer-mediated Communication, Speaking, Learner Attitudes, Task-based 
Learning and Teaching, Virtual Environments 
APA Citation: Lan, Y. J., Kan, Y. H., Sung, Y. T., & Chung, K. E. (2016). Oral-
performance language tasks for CSL beginners in Second Life. Language Learning & 
Technology, 20(3), 60–79. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/lanetal.pdf 
Received: November 7, 2013; Accepted: June 9, 2015; Published: October 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, & Kuo-En Chang 
INTRODUCTION 
Mandarin Chinese is one of the six official languages of the United Nations and is the most-used language 
worldwide (Lewis, Simons, & Fenning, 2013). Although the learning of Chinese as a Second Language 
(CSL) has increased in popularity (Ramzy, 2006), the Chinese language is considered to be one of the 
most complex and difficult languages to learn (Moser, 1991). Since linguistic knowledge is not the unique 
index of communicative competence, the ability to use the linguistic knowledge appropriately in a given 
sociocultural context is also important (American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages, 2012; 
Council of Europe, 2001). Thus, helping CSL learners effectively acquire the target language and 
sequentially be competent to use the language in real-world situations is important. 
Obviously, learning by rote, often employed in context-reduced or teacher-centered classes, is not an 
effective approach to helping CSL learners successfully overcome the language barrier (Ginsberg, 1992). 
On the contrary, the task-based approach (TBA) has been shown to be effective in enhancing CSL 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  61 
learners’ communicative competences (both form and fluency; e.g., Zeng, 2006). A form-focused output 
could especially force learners to move from semantic processing to syntactic processing and 
consequently ensure greater linguistic accuracy (see Loewen, 2005). Thus, the TBA is able to enhance 
inter-peer interactions (Yue, 2009) and consequently helps CSL learners improve their linguistic accuracy 
while they are engaged in the meaning-focused second language (L2) lessons (Lan, Kan, Hsiao, Yang, & 
Chang, 2013). Additionally, it is apparent that group collaboration is essential for successfully completing 
tasks using inter-peer interaction in the TBA. According to Donanto’s (2004) arguments, collaboration 
involves a meaningful core activity (such as completing the task goal in the current study) and the social 
relations that both view individuals as parts of a cooperative activity and value the contributions of 
individuals in pursuing the group goal. Given that the essential feature of social interaction in 
collaboration is especially important to L2 acquisition (Vygotsky, 1978), group collaboration was 
emphasized in the current study. 
Although the TBA has been a common topic of interest in CSL teaching and learning in recent years, 
some researchers have found that it is not easy for CSL teachers in face-to-face (F2F) classrooms to 
create authentic contexts for learners to immerse themselves into authentic linguistic environments and 
carry out language tasks (Zeng, 2006). The lack of real-life contexts not only lowers CSL learners’ level 
of performance, but also lowers their motivation (Lan & Lin, 2016). This obstacle to the creation of the 
needed contextual environments for implementing the TBA in CSL settings has drawn the attention of 
researchers to the possibility of using virtual worlds, such as Second Life (SL), in teaching and learning 
Mandarin Chinese (Grant & Huang, 2010). SL has been known as one of the most popular multiuser 
virtual environments (MUVEs). The authentically immersive environments provided by SL, where 
students are encouraged to collaboratively carry out language tasks, help increase task authenticity (Chen, 
2010). As argued by Lan et al. (2013), applying the TBA in SL is especially effective in motivating 
Mandarin beginners and improving their oral communication skills (including accuracy, fluency, and 
complexity) and social interactions. 
At the same time, although different types of tasks have been used and investigated in SL (e.g., Lan et al., 
2013), none of them has further examined the effects of various types of tasks carried out by CSL 
beginners in SL on their oral performance or motivation of CSL learning. Thus, research is needed to 
explore (a) whether tasks developed in SL would be beneficial to promoting CSL learners’ motivation 
and performance and (b) whether certain task types in SL are able to elicit more intra-group interaction 
than the others. In summary, this study aims to investigate the effects of different types of tasks 
completed by CSL learners in SL on their oral performance and motivation. 
REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE 
The Task-based Approach 
Long (1985) viewed a task  as something that people do in their everyday lives. In the context of foreign 
or second language (FL/L2) teaching and learning, it can be any activity that results in processing or 
understanding a language. Nunan (1989) argued that two essential elements should be included in a task: 
the settings and the conditions under which the task takes place. Pica, Kanagy, and Falodun (1993) 
emphasized the social interaction and meaning negotiation in performing a language task and defined a 
task as an activity that is oriented toward goals and that involves direct participation by the learners. 
Following the definitions of language tasks described above, three characteristics of tasks will be 
emphasized in this study: actual occurrence in daily life, the use of authentic contexts, and the 
incorporation of goal-oriented collaboration. 
Additionally, different task classification schemes, such as form- or meaning-focused (Ellis, 1994, 2003; 
Long, 1991; Pishghadam, Khodadady, & Rad, 2011), jigsaw or problem-solving (Meng, 2010), and 
decision making or opinion exchange (Pica et al., 1993), have been used in FL/L2 research. The current 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  62 
study will adopt the classification of task types given by Prabhu (1987), who proposed that language 
learning tasks can be classified as information-, reasoning-, and opinion-gap tasks, according to the 
differences in the approach used to acquire information as explained below. An information-gap task 
involves information exchange between participating learners. Each member in a learning group is 
provided with a part of the scenario and is asked to convey it verbally to others to get the whole picture. A 
reasoning-gap task involves deriving some new pieces of information and getting the final answer by 
comprehending and conveying the clues hidden in the contexts or the restrictions or conditions given by 
the teacher. There is a need to look for clues, negotiate for the answers, and discuss the task with all group 
members to accomplish it. An opinion-gap task involves thinking about and stating personal preferences, 
attitudes, or feelings in order to perform a given task. According to Pica et al. (1993) and Prabhu (1987), 
an opinion-gap task is the least effective and has too high a level of unpredictability. Thus, only 
information- and reasoning-gap tasks will be included in this study. 
In addition to the task types, both implementing tasks in FL/L2 instruction and evaluating FL/L2 learners’ 
learning outcomes are indispensable to the TBA. For the former, Willis (1996) suggested a three-stage 
procedure: (1) pre-task, focusing on the target language input and preparing FL/L2 learners for later 
execution of the assigned task; (2) task cycle, including planning, executing, and reporting; and (3) post-
task, focusing on form correction and focused practice. Moreover, Skehan (1998) proposed a three-
dimensional framework to evaluate the output of FL/L2 learners when they are performing the task-
executing process: accuracy, fluency, and complexity. The TBA takes accuracy, fluency, and complexity 
into account; hence, it is emphasized in FL/L2 settings, both in the conventional classroom (Skehan & 
Foster, 2001) and in SL (Collentine, 2011). 
The Task-based Approach to Teaching CSL 
Similar to general FL/L2 instruction, the TBA has also drawn the attention of CSL researchers (e.g., 
Zeng, 2006). There is evidence from numerous studies that the TBA promotes CSL learners’ motivation 
for learning Chinese (Zeng, 2006), their achievement (Huang, 2006), and oral production (Wong, 2012). 
However, despite these positive findings, the difficulties related to creating authentic contexts are a 
challenge to implementing the TBA in CSL teaching. In many cases, CSL learners are assigned language 
tasks that are executed via the discussion and exchange of opinions in a conventional F2F classroom (Lan 
& Lin, 2016), rather than accomplishing real-life tasks. The limited practice in a conventional classroom 
does not help students acquire L2 effectively, as argued by Donato and Brooks (2004). 
Furthermore, in a study by Lan and Lin (2016) in a conventional F2F classroom, CSL learners tended to 
thoughtlessly produce oral output without carefully thinking about whether what they said fitted the given 
contexts while carrying out an assigned task. The lack of real contextual information under these 
conditions may thus hinder subsequent retrieval of Chinese knowledge among CSL learners in the real-
world communication (Crestani & Ruthven, 2007) due to the failure in breaking down the boundaries of 
the classroom (Al-Shehri, 2011). Given the importance of well-designed instructional contexts to L2 
learners’ acquisition of the target language via performing language tasks (Byrnes, 2007), exploring the 
effects of implementing the TBA in SL can contribute to the knowledge pool of the TBA in CSL research 
and education. In other words, whether the tasks designed to follow the suggestions for F2F classrooms as 
described in the fore section will also produce similar results in SL is worthy of further investigation. 
SL for CSL Teaching and Learning 
SL is a MUVE possessing a unique and distinctive feature that fosters the realization of language 
education purposes (Lan, 2014). It combines network connectivity and virtual reality, provides users with 
a virtual yet real environment in which they can interact socially with others via resident avatars (James, 
2005). As remarked by Cooke-Plagwitz (2008), SL inspires language learners to reach learning goals 
without losing interest and motivation and allows users to speak various languages from different areas in 
order to orally or textually communicate with others through avatars without spatial or temporal 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  63 
limitations. These characteristics have turned SL into a notable platform for implementing the TBA in 
FL/L2 teaching and learning (e.g., Collentine, 2011). 
Among the relevant studies on the TBA in FL/L2 learning within SL environment, few of them focus on 
the learning of Mandarin Chinese. Although some of these studies took Mandarin Chinese as the target 
language (Grant & Huang, 2010), in-depth investigations on the effects of certain task types on CSL 
learners’ performance or motivation are still in progress. For example, Henderson, Huang, Grant, and 
Henderson (2012) have explored the effects of the TBA in SL on learning Chinese with few practical 
findings. They made some general suggestions on affective dimensions, though they did not provide any 
information on the benefits or effects of applying the TBA in SL on learners’ communicative competence. 
To uncover the potential of the TBA in SL for CSL learning and to provide global Chinese learners with 
more effective approaches to acquiring the target language, more practical evidence is needed to fill the 
research gap on the applications of the TBA in SL to enhance the communicative competence of CSL 
learners. 
Motivation for FL/L2 Learning 
Motivation shows the amount of willingness one person has towards taking an action. In FL/L2 learning, 
learners’ motivation has frequently been viewed as the most critical factor in successful language 
acquisition (Dörnyei, 1990, 1998; Gardner, 2000). Without sufficient motivation, learners cannot reach 
long-term learning goals despite having remarkable abilities. In other words, high motivation can make up 
for considerable deficiencies both in one’s language competence and learning conditions. According to 
Gardner (2000) and Dörnyei (1998), learners’ motivation is affected by different factors, including their 
attitudes toward the target language. Additionally, Nakanishi (2002) argued that motivation is influenced 
by two main factors: needs and attitudes. Learners are motivated if they need to learn the target language 
to achieve a goal or if they want to learn about the target culture and language and communicate with its 
speakers. Taking a broad view of the relevant research on learners’ attitudes toward learning a language 
in SL, the results are very diverse (e.g., Liang, 2012), with both positive and negative attitudes having 
been reported. The reason for the inconsistency is also worthy of further research. 
The dimensions of FL/L2 leaners’ motivation in specific sociocultural, ethnolinguistic, and educational 
contexts were not identical from study to study due to different measuring focuses. For example, as 
argued by Dörnyei (1990), motivation is indeed a multifaceted, rather than a uniform, factor and no 
available theory has yet covered its total complexity. Furthermore, most of the descriptions of learning 
context have concerned European environment (Dörnyei, 1998). Unfortunately, Mandarin Chinese has 
seldom been included in those studies; moreover, few studies have investigated the effects of different 
tasks in SL on CSL learners’ motivation. Thus, it is worthy of effort to develop a deeper understanding of 
the effects of different tasks on the learners’ motivation for learning Mandarin Chinese. 
In summary, SL technology has great potential to create a learning environment for CSL learners 
conducting interpersonal oral interaction in task-based learning. Nevertheless, there is still a large gap 
with respect to understanding its effects on the perception and performance of CSL learners. In order to 
bridge this gap, the present study focuses on both CSL learners’ motivation for learning Mandarin and the 
accuracy of Mandarin oral production, aiming to answer the following questions: 
1. What are the differences in the effects of performing different tasks (information- vs. reasoning-
gap) on CSL beginners’ Chinese oral communicative accuracy? 
2. What are the differences in the effects of performing different tasks (information- vs. reasoning-
gap) on CSL beginners’ motivation of Chinese learning? 
 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  64 
METHODOLOGY 
Participants 
Thirty CSL learners participated in this study (mean age = 19.46, SD = 2.25, range = 19–24); 26 of them 
were from Indonesia, 2 were from Vietnam, 1 was from the USA, and 1 was from South Africa. All the 
participants were randomly divided into two groups with 15 subjects each: the information-gap and the 
reasoning-gap task groups. 
The participants studied Chinese for a year to continue their education in Taiwanese universities. Based 
on the definition of competence provided by the Common European Framework of Reference for 
Languages: Learning, Teaching, Assessment (CEFR; Council of Europe, 2001), all of the participants 
were at level A1 (and are hereafter referred to as beginners). According to CEFR, foreign language 
learners in A1 level are able to (a) understand and use familiar everyday expressions and very basic 
phrases aimed at the satisfaction of needs of a concrete type; (b) introduce themselves and others and can 
ask and answer questions about personal details such as where they live, people they know, and things 
they have; and (c) interact in a simple way provided the other person talks slowly and clearly and is 
willing to help. Additionally, none of the participants in the current study had experience in digital 
language learning or using SL. 
Design and Data Analysis 
An experimental research design was adopted, with the independent variable being the task type 
(information-gap vs. reasoning-gap task), and the two dependent variables being oral accuracy in and 
motivation for learning Chinese. All of the collected data were analyzed by running a two-way mixed 
design ANOVA to determine how participants performing the information- and the reasoning-gap tasks 
differed. All the activities and group interactions in SL were also recorded via a type of screen shot 
software, Fraps, for further analysis. 
Instruments 
Teaching Packages 
Three teaching packages, with the themes of Where is the gift?, Who ate the cookies?, and Choosing gifts, 
were designed for CSL beginners. Each package consisted of two task types for each of the two groups. 
For the information-gap task group, the practical information needed to accomplish the task was divided 
into several parts, each part of which was given to different students. To accomplish the assigned task, all 
the pieces of information needed to be be combined through information exchange among the 
participants. In contrast, for the reasoning-gap task group, the clues for accomplishing the assigned task 
were given to all the members or hidden in the surroundings within the SL environment. All the team 
members had to observe their surroundings in order to collect the hidden clues and discuss them with one 
another to successfully accomplish the assigned task. One example of the teaching packages is available 
here. 
Virtual Contexts in SL 
Specific virtual contexts in SL were developed by the authors for each teaching package. In the virtual 
contexts, CSL learners could carry out a task just as what they would in the real world. Figure 1 shows 
the virtual context for Teaching Package 2, Who ate the cookies? 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  65 
 
Figure 1. The virtual context used in Teaching Package 2: (a) A house with three bedrooms and a living 
room; (b) the living room (1st Floor); (c) Daniel’s room (1st Floor); (d) Diane’s room (3rd Floor); and (e) 
David’s room (2nd Floor). 
Online Test of Chinese Oral Communicative Accuracy 
The test comprised two equivalent forms, the aim of which was to evaluate the CSL beginners’ oral 
communicative accuracy and their knowledge of the most misused syntactic forms of the Chinese 
language that were taught in the experiment: 
 The comparative structure: A比 B… (A is more…than B) 
 the把, or ba3, structure: 把字句, a grammatical construction, carrying the function word, 把, 
followed by an object and a verb, forming a subject-object-verb sentence as in 我把麵包吃了 (I 
ate the bread) 
The test items focused on listening and speaking: one category of the items asked the CSL beginners to 
listen to a word or a sentence and then choose the corresponding picture, while the other category 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  66 
required them to listen to a question and then record their answers orally. Both test forms were first 
evaluated and confirmed by three Chinese Mandarin experts and were then uploaded on an online testing 
system developed by the authors. The online test system was programed by PHP (a widely-used open 
source general-purpose scripting language), connected to a database programed by MySQL (a widely-
used relational database management system) to record all the test scores. The Appendix shows an 
example of the test items. 
Chinese Learning Motivation Questionnaire 
The questionnaire was adapted from Dörnyei (1990; 1998) with the aim of measuring both intrinsic and 
extrinsic motivation of CSL learners as well as their attitudes toward SL as a Mandarin Chinese learning 
environment. It comprises three dimensions. The first dimension is labeled as affective, including four 
sub-dimensions: pleasure experience, self-satisfaction, goal-related, and self-concept-related. The second 
dimension is labeled as pragmatic, focusing on evaluating the external factors of CSL learners’ purposes. 
The third dimension is labeled as educational-context-related. A complete version of the questionnaire 
along with some explanation can be found here. 
Procedure 
The study lasted for nine weeks, with a 1-hour session once a week, from March 1, 2013 to the end of 
May, 2013. Figure 2 shows a flow of the experimental procedure. A pre-test, including the online test of 
Chinese oral communicative accuracy and Chinese learning motivation questionnaire, was administered 
to all of the participants in the first week. In the second week, a training session on SL operations was 
held to ensure that all of the participants were familiar with the domain of SL. All the activities focused 
on using SL without introducing any target Mandarin learning-related contents to avoid the possible 
influences on the post-test. Then, from the third week, three teaching packages were taught by two CSL 
teachers over a period of six weeks, with each package lasting two weeks. All three teaching packages 
were provided in virtual forms in SL without any conventional instruction or printed materials. In 
addition, in the first week of each package (i.e., Weeks 3, 5, and 7 of the study), the basic language skills 
necessary for subsequent task accomplishment were taught, including Chinese words and sentence 
patterns. In the second week of each package (i.e., Weeks 4, 6, and 8 of the study), the participants had to 
perform the assigned task through collaborative learning with group members. To balance the possible 
effects caused by the teachers, the two CSL teachers regularly switched the teaching classes. 
Additionally, in order to keep all the participants more actively involved, the 15 participants in each group 
were further divided into three teams of five participants. Moreover, the tasks assigned to different groups 
(information-gap and reasoning-gap tasks) were similar, and had identical goals but with different 
information available. In the last week, after the 6-week treatment, a post-test was administered which 
was equivalent to the pre-test. 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  67 
 
Figure 2. The experimental procedure. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Comparison of Chinese Oral Communicative Accuracy 
Table 1 lists the descriptive statistical findings of the online test scores of Chinese oral communicative 
accuracy for the two task groups. Two-way (Test  Group) ANOVA revealed that the interaction between 
group and test was insignificant (F(1,1) = 1.98, p = .17). Thus, the magnitude of difference did not vary 
according to different levels. 
Table 1. Data for the Online Test of Chinese Oral Communicative Performance 
Group Pre-test  Post-test 
Mean SD  Mean SD 
Information-gap task (n = 15) 28.33 14.62  45.00 10.74 
Reasoning-gap task (n = 15) 30.40 12.24  53.13 8.12 
A main-effect analysis was conducted to compare the differences between the two groups and the two 
tests (pre- and post-test; see Table 2). There were no statistically significant differences between the two 
groups with respect to the Chinese oral communicative accuracy pre-test scores (F(1, 1) = 0.18, p = .678), 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  68 
but there were differences in the post-test scores (F(1, 1) = 5.47,  p = .027). Thus, the reasoning-gap 
group performed significantly better than the information-gap group in the post-test. Furthermore, the 
main-effect analysis revealed significant differences between the pre- and post-test scores for both groups 
(reasoning-gap group: F(1, 1) = 66.79, p = .000; information-gap group: F(1, 1) = 25.48, p = .001), 
suggesting that both groups benefited from carrying out tasks in SL and consequently both made 
significant improvement in the post-test. These findings indicate that, although both groups made 
significant progress from the pre- to post-test, the extent of that progress was greater for the reasoning-
gap group than of the information-gap group. 
Table 2. Main-Effect Analysis of Task Types and Chinese Oral Communicative Performance  
Factor SS MS F p 
Task group     
 Chinese oral communicative performance at pre-test 32.03 32.03 .18 .678 
 Chinese oral communicative performance at post-test 496.13 496.13 5.47 .027 
Oral performance test     
 Information-gap task 2083.33 2083.33 25.48 .001 
 Reasoning-gap task 3876.04 3876.04 66.79 .000 
The percentages of the teams that successfully performed the assigned tasks in the two different task 
groups were also examined. It was found that at the very most, only one third of the participants in the 
information-gap group successfully performed the assigned tasks of the three teaching packages 
(Teaching Package 1: 0 of 3 teams; Teaching Packages 2 and 3: 1 of 3 teams). In contrast, in Teaching 
Package 2, all the three teams in the reasoning-gap group successfully accomplished their missions 
(Package 1: 1 of 3 teams; Packages 2 and 3: 3 of 3 teams). 
While observing how CSL learners carried out the assigned tasks in SL, the authors found that although 
the teams in the information-gap group did exchange information during the task performing process, the 
communication purposes were not always successfully achieved. Each individual usually solely focused 
on exchanging the collected information with their team members, piece by piece, without making further 
efforts on integrating what they had observed, as shown in the transcript below. The transcript has been 
extracted from the talks during a practice task, aimed at preparing the participants for carrying out more 
difficult detective tasks in which they were asked to figure out who ate Watson’s cookies. Additionally, 
the goal of the practice task was to identify the difference between two rooms. 
One team in the information-gap task group:  
A: 我們有鞋子。 
 We’ve got some shoes. 
B: 你那裡有餅乾嗎? 
 Huineng, any cookies over there? 
A 我們有鞋子。 
 We’ve got some shoes. 
B SA你那裡有餅乾嗎? 
 Huineng, any cookies over there? 
A 我們有餅乾。 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  69 
 Yes, here’re some cookies. 
B SA! 你們那裡有兩本書嗎? 
 Any two books over there? 
A ??????? 看到，我們有四本書。 
 ??????? I saw them. We’ve got four books. 
B 我們有兩本書。诶, 四本. 
 We’ve got two books. Yes, four. 
A 那你們有沙發嗎? 
 What about sofa? 
B 沒有。我們有桌椅。 
 No. We’ve got some chairs and desks. 
A 你們有一個..木櫃嗎? 
 Did you see a …wooden cabinet? 
B 有一個..木櫃，然後木櫃上面有兩雙鞋子，一個藍色一個灰色的。 
 Yes, here’s one…wooden cabinet. And on top of the wooden cabinet are two pairs 
of shoes: one in blue and the other in gray. 
In contrast to the information-gap group, the reasoning-gap group successfully achieved the purpose of 
communication and figured out the answers to the problems through inter-peer information-exchange and 
meaning negotiation. They first observed each room individually and then integrated what they had 
observed while sharing the information with their team members. Some of them, moreover, repaired their 
output while sharing information with their peers, such as the first and the last descriptions listed below 
that were given by S1 about the comparison results of the shoes in different rooms (Room A and Room 
B). Additionally, some of them with lower ability even imitated their peers’ description to produce their 
own output, such as S3 in the example task group below. Some examples of collaboration in one team of 
the reasoning-gap group are as follows. 
One team in the reasoning-gap task group:  
S1 A的櫃子跟 B的不一樣， A的是書，還有A 的是～有放…鞋子的  
 The cabinet in A is different from the one in B. The one in A is a book. And in 
A…there is … shoes. 
S2 那個～哦～哦～，A、A、A房間的電電腦比～B 房間的電腦貴。 
 Well, oh, oh. The computer in room A, A, A, is more expensive than that in B.  
S1 還有，椅子，A的椅子比較小，比 B的，比B的椅子，A的椅子比較小比B
的椅子。 
 And, the chair. The one in A is smaller than that in B, the chair in B. The chair in A 
is smaller, compared to that in B. 
S3 哦，A房間的餅乾比 B房間的餅乾少。 
 Oh, the number of cookies in Room A is smaller than those in Room B.  
S2 哦那個 A房間電，哦電視，哦～電視放在前面，然後 B房間的電視放在～哦
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  70 
～哦～左邊。 
 Oh, the TV in A, the TV. The TV is in the front, and the TV in B is placed…oh, oh, 
on the left. 
S1 是 A的鞋子它放在櫃子，然後它是B的放在它椅子是放在地下。不是，鞋子
鞋子。A的鞋子它放在櫃子的裡面，然後 B的～鞋子它放在，地下。A、A
的鞋子有兩、兩雙然後B鞋子一雙、一雙 
 The shoes in A are placed in the cabinet, and those in B are placed on the chair, 
under the floor. No, the shoes, the shoes. The shoes in A are placed in the cabinet. 
And the…shoes in B are placed…under the floor. There are two, two pairs of shoes 
in A, A. And one pair, one pair in B. 
 
The results described above not only make up what Rahimpour (2008) argued about the effect of the TBA 
language teaching on learners’ accuracy, but also further support what Lan (2014) found about applying 
SL in Mandarin Chinese learning benefits CSL learners’ oral output in inter-peer interaction and 
communicative accuracy. Furthermore, the results listed in Table 2 answered the first research question 
and revealed that in terms of the improvement, the CSL beginners in the reasoning-gap group 
significantly outperformed those in the other group. Moreover, the inter-peer discussions allowed those 
with a lower oral level proficiency in Chinese to contribute to the group’s goal by producing meaningful 
oral output about the essential information for solving the assigned problem (like S3 in the transcript 
example of reasoning-gap task group listed above). Affable inter-peer interactions seemed to inspire CSL 
learners to think and interact in Chinese, as expressed by one of the CSL beginners, helping them to 
improve significantly. Eventually, it was revealed that the teams in the information-gap task group neither 
successfully accomplished all of the assigned tasks nor made as much improvement as their peers in the 
other task group did. 
Interestingly, the present findings conflict with the argument made by Pica et al. (1993), who proposed 
that the information-gap activity and Jigsaw are the two most effective tasks for L2 instruction and 
learning. This may be because their study was conducted in conventional L2 instruction settings rather 
than in a virtual word. In a conventional classroom, the task context is usually assumed to be real. That is, 
the learning partners usually see each other while performing a task even though they are supposed to be 
physically in different locations, such as in different rooms or buildings. In contrast, in SL, the CSL 
learners use their avatars to visit different locations for collecting information and could merely interact 
with others via text or oral chats without real F2F contact like in the real world. Based on the features of 
physical immersion and context realization, executing tasks in SL is more like doing so in the real world 
and it enables learners to deal with the obstacles of creating real authentic contexts in conventional 
classrooms (Lan & Lin, 2016). 
It is interesting that even though the context and the task types of this study are similar to those of the 
study conducted by Lin and her colleagues (Lin, Wang, Grant, Chien, & Lan, 2014), the results of the two 
studies are different. Lin et al. found that information-gap tasks inspired beginners of Chinese as a 
Foreign Language (CFL) from Australia toward more inter-peer interactions in SL than did reasoning-gap 
tasks. Again, there were some differences between the two studies of Lin and her colleagues and this 
study. First, although the participants in the two studies were all beginners, those in the study by Lin et al. 
(2014) were complete beginners, while those in the current study possessed higher Mandarin abilities. 
Second, the language context in study by Lin et al. was a CFL environment, while in this study, it was a 
CSL one. Third, the task complexity was different: the task information was divided into two sub-parts in 
the Lin et al. study while in the current study, it was distributed in four different rooms. In a word, the 
three components: the participants’ Mandarin Chinese abilities, the dominant languages outside the 
Chinese classroom, and the task complexity are different. Further, Lin et al. (2014) only observed the 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  71 
quantity of inter-peer interaction without comparing the differences in oral accuracy between the two 
different task groups. Therefore, the following should be further investigated in future studies in order to 
better understand how using the TBA in SL impacts both the oral interactions and accuracy of FL/L2 
learners: the context difference (FL vs. L2), as argued by Menard-Warwick (2009); differences in the 
language ability of learners as argued by Duran and Ramaut (2006); and differences in the task 
characteristics (e.g., complexity, difficulty, and production) as argued by Robinson (2001). 
Comparison of Chinese Learning Motivation 
The scores for both the entire questionnaire and for each dimension were analyzed and compared to 
investigate to what extent the TBA in SL contributed to the learning motivation of the CSL beginners. 
Table 3 lists the scores obtained before and after the treatment. 
Table 3. Scores for the Chinese Learning Attitude Questionnaire 
Group Pre-test  Post-test 
  Mean SD  Mean SD 
Whole questionnaire      
 Information-gap task 3.08 .27  3.26 .16 
 Reasoning-gap task 2.97 .32  3.17 .34 
Affective dimension      
 Information-gap task 3.08 .34  3.15 .45 
 Reasoning-gap task 3.15 .33  3.33 .23 
Pragmatic dimension      
 Information-gap task 3.25 .42  3.31 .29 
 Reasoning-gap task 3.31 .34  3.51 .45 
Educational-context-related dimension      
 Information-gap task 2.93 .28  2.78 .38 
 Reasoning-gap task 3.15 .37  3.25 .45 
For the entire questionnaire, the two-way (Test  Group) ANOVA revealed that the interaction between 
group and test was insignificant (F(1,1) = 0.01, p = .920), suggesting that the magnitude of the difference 
did not vary according to different levels. Additionally, the difference between the two task groups was 
not significant either (F(1,1) = 1.16, p = .299). However, a significant difference did exist between the 
pre- and post-tests (F(1,1) = 7.01, p = .011). Thus, a main-effects analysis was conducted. The Chinese 
learning motivation did not significantly differ between the two groups in the pre-test (F(1,1) = 0.98, p 
= .326) and the post-test (F(1,1) = 0.74, p = .393). Similarly, no significant difference was found in the 
intra-group comparison (pre- versus post-test in each group; information-gap group: F(1,1) = 3.67, p 
= .076; reasoning-gap group: F(1,1) = 4.28, p = .058). However, an improvement was found between the 
pre- and post-test in each group. 
With respect to each dimension, two-way (Test  Group) ANOVA showed no significant interactions for 
any of the three dimensions between group and test (affective dimension: F(1,1) = 0.00, p = .982; 
pragmatic dimension: F(1,1) = 0.59, p = .448; and educational-context-related dimension: F(1,1) = 1.40, p 
= .244). Thus, a main-effects analysis of all three dimensions was conducted, which demonstrated that 
there were no significant differences between the two groups at pre-test for all dimensions. However, the 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  72 
difference in the educational-context-related dimension between the two groups reached a significant 
level at the post-test (F(1,1) = 11.59, p = .001). The reasoning-gap group received significantly higher 
scores than the information-gap group did regarding their attitudes toward SL as a Mandarin learning 
environment. 
As to the comparison of the pre- and post-test in each dimension, both groups made significant 
improvements only in the affective dimension (information-gap group: F(1,1) = 75.12, p = .000; 
reasoning-gap group: F(1,1) = 79.25, p = .000). Table 4 displays the scores of each sub-affective 
dimension obtained before and after the treatment, while the results of the further analysis are listed in 
Table 5. As shown in Table 5, for the inter-group comparisons in each sub-dimension, there were no 
significant differences between the two groups at pre-test, but significant differences were found in the 
goal-related sub-dimension at post-test (F(1,1) = 6.51, p = .013). That is, in the goal-related sub-
dimension, the reasoning-gap group had significantly higher motivation than the information-gap group 
did. 
Table 4. Scores for the Chinese Learning Attitude Questionnaire: Affective Dimension 
Group Pre-test  Post-test 
  Mean SD  Mean SD 
Pleasure experience sub-dimension      
 Information-gap task 3.18 .48  3.22 .45 
 Reasoning-gap task 3.33 .38  3.49 .32 
Self-satisfaction sub-dimension      
 Information-gap task 3.06 .51  3.25 .42 
 Reasoning-gap task 3.17 .36  3.37 .33 
Goal-related sub-dimension       
 Information-gap task 3.01 .47  3.12 .40 
 Reasoning-gap task 3.21 .29  3.48 .39 
Self-concept-related sub-dimension      
 Information-gap task 2.80 .51  2.96 .42 
 Reasoning-gap task 2.63 .41  2.93 .26 
 
  
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  73 
Table 5. Main-effect Analysis for Task Types and Chinese Learning Attitude 
Factor SS MS F p 
Task group     
 Pleasure experience at pre-test .17 .17 1.00 .322 
 Pleasure experience at post-test .56 .56 3.29 .075 
Pleasure experience sub-dimension     
 Information-gap task .01 .01 .26 .620 
 Reasoning-gap task .18 .18 5.59 .033 
Task group     
 Self-satisfaction at pre-test .07 .07 .38 .541 
 Self-satisfaction at post-test .10 .10 .51 .476 
Self-satisfaction sub-dimension     
 Information-gap task .25 .25 2.43 .141 
 Reasoning-gap task .30 .30 2.89 .111 
Task group     
 Goal-related at pre-test .30 .30 2.01 .162 
 Goal-related at post-test .97 .97 6.51 .013 
Goal-related sub-dimension     
 Information-gap task .09 .09 .79 .388 
 Reasoning-gap task .53 .53 4.96 .043 
Task group     
 Self-concept-related at pre-test .10 .10 .58 .449 
 Self-concept-related at post-test .00 .00 .00 .965 
Self-concept-related sub-dimension     
 Information-gap task .19 .19 12.56 .003 
 Reasoning-gap task .02 .02 1.23 .287 
Regarding the intra-group comparison, both groups made significant improvements in some sub-
dimensions after the treatment. The reasoning-gap group made significant improvement at post-test in 
both sub-dimensions of pleasure experience (F(1,1) = 5.59, p = .033) and goal-related (F(1,1) = 4.96, p 
= .043), while the information-gap group did so only in the self-concept-related sub-dimension (F(1,1) = 
12.56, p = .003). 
To synthesize what is described above and to discuss the answer to the second research question, it was 
found that both groups improved in almost all the dimensions with respect to the influence of the TBA in 
SL on CSL beginners’ learning motivation. The positive results could be supported by Deutschmann, 
Panichi, and Molka-Danielsen (2009), who stated that motivation for the environment itself may 
influence the engagement and the participation. The findings are also consistent with the results of the 
previous studies on SL for language teaching and learning, such as those of Chen (2010) and Jee (2010). 
The attitudes of the students in the information-gap group toward SL as Mandarin Chinese learning 
environment and the activities run in SL (i.e., educational-context-related dimension) negatively changed 
after the treatment (see Table 3), due to the poor quality of the Internet connection and the computer 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  74 
equipment. These problems led to a different result for learners in the reasoning-gap task group. Their 
attitudes in this dimension positively changed from 3.15 to 3.25. The opposite results between the two 
groups seemed to be caused by the unsuccessful task execution experienced by learners in the 
information-task group. Since the experience of success usually provides students with more power to 
pursue a new goal and keeps them highly motivated (Alessi & Trollip, 2001; Ebata, 2008), the 
participants in the reasoning-gap group maintained higher motivation while performing the assigned 
tasks, being less influenced by the network problems. 
In summary, some possible reasons for the differences in CSL learners’ oral accuracy and motivation 
across the two task types were proposed in this study. However, further investigation on the effects of 
different task types on learners’ Mandarin Chinese learning is required due to the small sample size in 
order to obtain more practical evidence. The absence of a control group where the participants could learn 
the identical materials in the conventional F2F classroom also weakened the power to infer what results 
would have been obtained if the identical activities had been executed in F2F classroom settings. It is 
without doubt that further practical investigation is needed in the future studies. Some other topics for 
further research are suggested as follows: (a) the effects of task complexity on CSL beginners’ learning, 
(b) the correlation between the characteristics of language tasks (types and complexity) and CSL learners’ 
skills, (c) the effects of the language environment outside the classroom on CSL beginners’ performances 
and motivation using the TBA in virtual worlds, and (d) the correlation of CSL beginners’ learning styles 
and their TBA performance and motivation in virtual worlds. 
CONCLUSION 
This study took a step further in the research on SL for FL/L2 learning and teaching by investigating the 
differences in the impact of different task types on CSL beginners’ oral accuracy and motivation for 
learning. Some preliminary results were obtained: the TBA in SL benefited both CSL beginners’ oral 
communicative accuracy and their motivation for learning Madeiran Chinese (as far as the affective 
dimension is involved). However, the differences in the variables of this study (i.e., oral accuracy and 
motivation) across the two task types should be further investigated, although it was found that the 
reasoning-gap tasks helped CSL beginners outperform those who were assigned the information-gap 
tasks. Regarding the TBA in CSL learning and teaching, some important issues for future research were 
also discussed. 
Since task complexity seems to be a factor influencing CSL/CFL learners’ preference for SL as a 
language learning environment and their successful experiences, the language tasks should be tailored to 
meet the capability of the students in future studies, and practical implications should be provided as 
suggested by Hismanoglu (2012). Besides, an FL/L2 environment in which the students can learn the 
target language should also be taken into account because the learning processes in these environments 
can be the same or different (Ellis, 2008). 
In brief, we conclude that the TBA, especially the reasoning-gap task in SL, successfully improved the 
CSL beginners’ motivation and their oral communication accuracy. However, due to the small size of the 
participants, the limited treatment period, and the lack of control group in this study, further research 
evidence should be obtained in the future to better answer the questions raised in this study. 
 
 
 
 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  75 
APPENDIX. An Example of the Online Test 
Audio (without text): “哪裡不一樣?” (What are the differences between the two items?) 
 
 
The CSL beginners were required to orally record their answers after listening to the question. The 
answers could be “左邊的櫃子比右邊的高” (The cabinet on the left is taller than the one on the right) or 
“右邊的櫃子比左邊的矮” (The cabinet on the right is shorter than the one on the left). All the CSL 
beginners’ answers were stored in the system, allowing the teachers/researchers to grade them later. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to thank the reviewers and editors for their valuable comments and suggestions for 
improving this article. They would like to thank the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan, 
R.O.C., for financially supporting this research under Grant Nos. NSC 101-2511-S-003-031-MY3, MOST 
104-2911-I-003-301, and MOST 103-2628-S-003-002-MY3. They are also thankful that this research was 
partially supported by the Aim for the Top University Project and Center of Learning Technology for 
Chinese of National Taiwan Normal University (NTNU), sponsored by the Ministry of Education, 
Taiwan, R.O.C., and the International Research-Intensive Center of Excellence Program of NTNU. 
 
 
 
 
: Click the small picture to enlarge it. 
: Click the button to re-hear the questions. 
: Recording box 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  76 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Yu-Ju Lan is a Distinguished Professor in the Department of Applied Chinese Language and Culture at 
National Taiwan Normal University. Her research interests include technology enhanced foreign language 
learning, language learning in virtual worlds, mobile learning, and online synchronous teacher training. 
E-mail: yujulan@gmail.com 
Yu-Hsuan Kan received her B.S. degree from the Department of Teaching Chinese as Second Language 
and her master’s degree from the Graduate Institute of Information and Computer Education in National 
Taiwan Normal University. She is now an online Chinese teacher and her research interests include 
Second Life and technology assisted Chinese learning. 
E-mail: cathykan1211@gmail.com 
Yao-Ting Sung is a professor in the Department of Education and Psychology and Counseling at National 
Taiwan Normal University. His research interests include the psychology of learning and computer-
assisted instruction.  
E-mail: sungtc@ntnu.edu.tw 
Kuo-En Chang is a professor and the president of the Department of Information and Computer 
Education at National Taiwan Normal University. His research interests include intelligent tutoring 
systems, Web-based learning, and learning technology. His main research work is focused on the design 
of Web-based systems with applications to education. 
E-mail: kchang@ntnu.edu.tw 
 
REFERENCES 
Al-Shehri, S. (2011). Context in our pockets: Mobile phones and social networking as tools of 
contextualising language learning. Paper presented at the 10th World Conference on Mobile and 
Contextual Learning, Beijing, China. Retrieved from http://goo.gl/0gfDsj 
Alessi, S. M., & Trollip, S. R. (2001). Multimedia for learning: Methods and development (3rd ed.). 
Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon. 
American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages. (2012). ACTFL proficiency guidelines 2012. 
Alexandria, VA: ACTFL. Retrieved from 
http://www.actfl.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/public/ACTFLProficiencyGuidelines2012_FINAL.pdf 
Byrnes, H. (Ed.). (2007). Advanced language learning: The contribution of Halliday and Vygotsky. New 
York, NY: Continuum. 
Chen, D. (2010). Enhancing the learning of Chinese with Second Life. Journal of Technology and 
Chinese Learning Teaching, 1(1), 14–30. Retrieved from http://www.tclt.us/journal/2010v1n1/chen.pdf 
Collentine, K. (2011). Learner autonomy in a task-based 3D world and production. Language Learning & 
Technology, 15(3), 50–67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/collentine.pdf 
Cooke-Plagwitz, J. (2008). New directions in CALL: An objective introduction to Second Life. CALICO 
Journal, 25(3), 547–557. Retrieved from https://calico.org/html/article_716.pdf 
 
Council of Europe. (2001). Common European framework of reference for languages: Learning, 
teaching, assessment. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Retrieved from 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  77 
http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/linguistic/source/framework_en.pdf 
Crestani, F., & Ruthven, I. (2007). Introduction to special issue on contextual information retrieval 
systems. Information Retrieval, 10(2), 111–113. doi: 10.1007/s10791-007-9022-z 
Deutschmann, M., Panichi, L., & Molka-Danielsen, J. (2009). Designing oral participation in Second 
Life: A comparative study of two language proficiency courses. ReCALL, 21(2), 206–226. doi: 
10.1017/S0958 344009000196 
Donato, R. (2004). Aspects of collaboration in pedagogical discourse. Annual Review of Applied 
Linguistics, 24, 284–302. doi: 10.1017/S026719050400011X 
Donato, R., & Brooks, F. (2004). Literary discussions and advanced speaking functions: Researching the 
(dis)connection. Foreign Language Annals, 37(2), 183–199. doi: 10.1111/j.1944-9720.2004.tb02192.x 
Dörnyei, Z. (1990). Conceptualizing motivation in foreign-language learning. Language Learning, 40(1), 
45–78. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-1770.1990.tb00954.x 
Dörnyei, Z. (1998). Motivation in second and foreign language learning. Language Teaching, 31(3), 117–
135. doi: 10.1017/S026144480001315X 
Duran, G., & Ramaut, G. (2006). Tasks for absolute beginners and beyond: Developing and sequencing 
tasks at basic proficiency. In K. Van den Branden (Ed.), Task-based language education: From theory to 
practice (pp. 47–75). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Ebata, M. (2008). Motivation factors in language learning. The Internet TESL Journal, 14(4). Retrieved 
from http://iteslj.org/Articles/Ebata-MotivationFactors.html 
Ellis, R. (1994). The study of second language acquisition. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Ellis, R. (2003). Task-based language learning and teaching. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Ellis, R. (2008). The study of second language acquisition (2nd ed.). Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press. 
Gardner, R. C. (2000). Correlation, causation, motivation, and second language acquisition. Canadian 
Psychology, 41(1), 10–24. doi: 10.1037/h0086854 
Ginsberg, E. (1992). Not just a matter of English. HERDSA News, 14(1), 6–8. 
Grant, S., & Huang, H. (2010). The integration of an online 3D virtual learning environment into formal 
classroom-based undergraduate Chinese language and culture curriculum. Journal of Technology and 
Chinese Language Teaching, 1(1), 2–13. Retrieved from 
http://www.tclt.us/journal/2010v1n1/granthuang.pdf 
Henderson, M., Huang, H., Grant, S., & Henderson, L. (2012). The impact of Chinese language lessons in 
a virtual world on university students’ self-efficacy beliefs. Australasian Journal of Educational 
Technology, 28(3), 400–419. doi: 10.14742/ajet.842 
Hismanoglu, M. (2012). Integrating Second Life into an EFL classroom: A new dimension in foreign 
language learning and teaching. International Journal on New Trends in Education and Their 
Implications, 3(4), 100–111. Retrieved from http://ijonte.org/FileUpload/ks63207/File/09.hismanoglu.pdf 
Huang, Q. Y. (2006). The investigation of comparison between TBLT and PPP paradigm: Take basic 
Mandarin teaching for example (Unpublished master’s thesis). National Taiwan Normal University, 
Taipei, Taiwan. 
James, H. (2005). Finding meaning in the second half of life: How to finally, really grow up . New York, 
NY: Gotham Books. 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  78 
Jee, M. (2010). ESL students’ attitudes toward tasks in Second Life. The Society for Teaching English 
through Media Journal, 11(2), 183–205. Retrieved from https://goo.gl/LGFRvY 
Lan, Y. J. (2014). Does Second Life improve Mandarin learning by overseas Chinese students? Language 
Learning & Technology, 18(2), 36–56. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/action2.pdf 
Lan, Y. J., Kan, Y. H., Hsiao, I. Y. T., Yang, S. J. H., & Chang, K. E. (2013). Designing interaction tasks 
in Second Life for Chinese as a foreign language learners: A preliminary exploration. Australasian 
Journal of Educational Technology, 29(2), 184–202. doi: 10.14742/ajet.144 
Lan, Y. J., & Lin, Y. T. (2016). Mobile seamless technology enhanced CSL oral communication. 
Educational Technology & Society, 19(3), 335–350. 
Lewis, M. P., Simons, G. F., & Fennig, C. D. (Eds.). (2013). Ethnologue: Languages of the world (17th 
ed.). Dallas, TX: SIL International. Retrieved from 
http://www.ethnologue.com/show_language.asp?code=cmn 
Liang, M. Y. (2012). Reimagining communicative context: ELF interaction in Second Life to learn EFL. 
Journal of Language, Identity, and Education, 11(1), 16–34. doi: 10.1080/15348458.2012.644118 
Lin, T. J., Wang, S. Y., Grant, S., Chien, C. L., & Lan, Y. J. (2014). Education and learning perspectives: 
Educational use of virtual worlds. Procedia Technology, 13, 16–22. 
Loewen, S. (2005). Incidental focus on form and second language learning. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 27(3), 361–386. doi: 10.1017/S0272263105050163 
Long, M. H. (1985). A role for instruction in second language acquisition: Task-based language teaching. 
In K. Hyltenstam & M. Pienemann (Eds.), Modeling and assessing second language development (pp. 
77–99). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Long, M. H. (1991). Focus on form: A design feature in language teaching methodology. In K. de Bot, R. 
Ginsberg, & C. Kramsch (Eds.), Foreign language research in cross-cultural perspective (pp. 39-52). 
Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Menard-Warwick, J. (2009). Co-constructing representations of culture in ESL and EFL classrooms: Discursive 
faultlines in Chile and California. Modern Language Journal, 93(1), 30–45. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-
4781.2009.00826.x 
Meng, J. (2010). Jigsaw cooperative learning in English reading. Journal of Language Teaching and Research, 
1(4), 501–504. 
Moser, D. (1991). Why Chinese is so damn hard. In V. H. Mair (Ed.), Schriftfestschrift: Essays on writing 
and language in honor of John DeFrancis on his eightieth birthday (pp. 59–70). San Francisco, CA: 
Sino-Platonic Papers. 
Nakanishi, T. (2002). Critical literature review on motivation. Journal of Language and Linguistics, 1(3), 
278–287. Retrieved from http://webspace.buckingham.ac.uk/kbernhardt/journal/1_3/nakanishi1_3.html 
Nunan, D. (1989). Designing tasks for the communicative classroom. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Pica, T., Kanagy, R., Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second language 
instruction and research. In G. Crookes & S. M. Gass (Eds.), Tasks and language learning: Integrating 
theory and practice (pp. 9–34). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 
Pishghadam, R., Khodadady, E., & Rad, N. D. (2011). The effect of form versus meaning-focused tasks 
on the development of collocations among Iranian intermediate EFL learners. English Language 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yu-Hsuan Kan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang CSL Oral Tasks in a Virtual Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology  79 
Teaching, 4(2), 180–189. Retrieved from http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1080735.pdf 
Prabhu, N. S. (1987). Second language pedagogy. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Rahimpour, M. (2008). Implementation of task-based approaches to language teaching. Research on 
Foreign Languages Journal of Faculty of Letters and Humanities, 41, 45–61. Retrieved from 
https://jor.ut.ac.ir/article_19139_b12640a32c14a7b9e72eb5813d17c72b.pdf 
Ramzy, A. (2006). Get ahead, learn Mandarin: China's economic rise means the world has a new second 
language—and it isn't English. Retrieved from http://clta-gny.org/article/GetAhead.htm 
Robinson, P. (2001). Task complexity, task difficulty, and task production: Exploring interactions in a 
componential framework. Applied Linguistics, 22(1), 27–57. doi: 10.1093/applin/22.1.27 
Skehan, P. (1998). Task-based instruction. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 18, 268–286. doi: 
10.1017/S0267190500003585 
Skehan, P., & Foster, P. (2001). Cognition and tasks. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second 
language instruction (pp. 183–205). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological process. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
Willis, J. (1996). A framework for task-based learning. Harlow, UK: Longman. 
Wong, H. P. (2012). Use of formulaic sequences in task-based oral production of Chinese (Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation). Durham University, Durham, UK. Retrieved from 
http://etheses.dur.ac.uk/5947/1/Thesis_EdD_Wong_Ho-Put.pdf?DDD29+ 
Yue. D. W. (2009). The effectiveness of task-based language teaching in novice-mid Chinese classes 
(Unpublished master’s thesis). National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan. 
Zeng, W. C. (2006). Research on effects of applying task-based activities to Chinese learning and 
teaching (Unpublished master’s thesis). National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan. 
