Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/review3.pdf 
October 2016, Volume 20, Number 3 
pp. 33–36 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 33 
REVIEW OF THE INBOX: UNDERSTANDING AND MAXIMIZING 
STUDENT-INSTRUCTOR E-MAIL 
The Inbox: Understanding and Maximizing Student-
Instructor E-mail 
Jennifer D. Ewald 
2016 
ISBN: 978-1781791141 
US $27.95 
162 pp. 
Equinox Publishing 
Sheffield, UK 
 
 
Review by Lee B. Abraham, Columbia University 
Students frequently use technology-mediated tools to communicate with instructors outside of class to ask 
questions about course content or homework, to explain absences from class, and to submit assignments. 
Technology-mediated communication continues to be a critical component of student-faculty interactions 
before and after class (Dahlstrom, Christopher Brooks, Grajek, & Reeves, 2015). Moreover, a 
comprehensive understanding of the characteristics of student-faculty communication is particularly 
important since such interactions have been found to impact students’ learning and achievement (see Kuh, 
Kinzie, Schuh, & Whitt, 2010). However, to date, very few studies have analyzed students’ language use 
with instructors in language classes outside of the classroom using technology-mediated tools 
(Economidou-Kogetsidis, 2011). Ewald’s book addresses this gap in research by providing a thorough 
corpus-informed analysis of pragmatic features of students’ messages written in English and Spanish in 
authentic student-faculty email communication. 
The Inbox consists of eleven chapters, and each chapter includes useful and specific pedagogical 
recommendations for faculty and directions for future research. The first chapter provides an overview of 
student-teacher email use in higher education and in language learning and teaching. Chapter 2 describes 
the methodology and the corpus, comprised of naturalistic data (i.e., not elicited through the use of a data 
collection instrument), which is analyzed in subsequent chapters. The next chapter qualitatively analyzes 
students’ email messages from which Ewald reveals their beliefs about email etiquette and the extent of 
students’ awareness of norms governing email interactions with instructors. Chapter 4 examines student 
email messages that were sent in order to submit assignments. The next five chapters analyze students’ 
expression of requests, apologies, excuses, gratitude, and complaints. Chapter 10 investigates students’ 
use of English and Spanish in the corpus, and the last chapter summarizes the principal findings of the 
book and discusses implications for future research on student-instructor technology-mediated 
communication outside of the classroom. 
In Chapter 1, Ewald highlights previous research on linguistic features and characteristics of email. She 
also describes previous studies on faculty concerns about students’ informal language use in email and 
then she discusses research on technology-mediated student-faculty communication both in general and in 
Lee B. Abraham Review of The Inbox: Understanding and Maximizing Student-instructor E-mail 
 
Language Learning & Technology  34 
language learning and teaching. Ewald rightly concludes that there have been very few corpus-informed 
studies of authentic language in student-faculty technology-mediated communication beyond the 
language classroom. 
Chapter 2 describes in detail the methodology that resulted in a corpus of 1,403 email messages—based 
on actual emails and not elicited data—written by 338 students enrolled in beginning, intermediate, and 
advanced courses in Spanish and in linguistics courses taught either in English or in Spanish. Since emails 
could be written for more than one purpose, the corpus analyzed in The Inbox focuses on 1,478 speech 
acts produced by students. Ewald’s thorough explanation of the procedures for collecting and analyzing 
the data is useful for researchers using corpus-informed approaches to the study of language use in 
electronic discourse. 
In the next chapter, Ewald presents results from a qualitative analysis of the corpus in order to shed light 
on students’ email etiquette and the extent of their awareness of pragmatic norms. Overall, the analysis 
reveals that students recognize norms of email netiquette and that they understand pragmatically 
appropriate language for writing emails to instructors. However, students sometimes made requests too 
directly and they also wrote emails with overly informal language, which aligns with findings from 
previous studies of faculty concerns about students’ inappropriate language use that Ewald reviewed in 
Chapter 1. The last section of the chapter reports on the overall distribution of the pragmatic and linguistic 
features that resulted from the coding scheme briefly explained in Chapter 2. Throughout this chapter, 
Ewald makes useful recommendations to faculty for managing their email interactions with students.  
The fourth chapter investigates the pragmatic functions and forms of address of messages in the corpus 
whose primary purpose was the submission of an assignment by attachment (or copied and pasted into the 
same message) and in which students wrote to ask the instructor to acknowledge the receipt of an 
assignment previously submitted by email or as a hard copy. Ewald discusses several examples of 
students’ messages that indicate that they mitigated the imposition of submitting a late assignment in 
order to save face. In addition, the results indicated that students expressed gratitude (52%), apologized 
(28%), made requests (11%), and gave excuses (9%). Less than half (44%) of the messages had some 
form of polite opening or closing and 59% included some form of address. Ewald recommends that 
faculty explicitly teach politeness norms and strategies for writing email messages. She also suggests that 
faculty design assignments for which students analyze examples of actual email messages (with personal 
information redacted) for both pragmatically appropriate language use and cases of pragmatic failure. 
In Chapter 5, Ewald analyzes the topics and strategies in requests, which was the most frequently 
occurring pragmatic function in the corpus (50%, 745 of 1,478 uses). More than half (61%) of students’ 
request emails asked for advice, information, or help regarding assignments, tests, and quizzes. The 
second most frequently occurring category was to request a meeting (17%). Other categories included 
requests for teachers to send homework assignments (12%) and to postpone, change or reschedule exams, 
presentations, or other assignments (10%). Although students rarely included please, the analysis revealed 
that their messages still came across as polite because they used other politeness strategies, including 
lexical modifiers such as I was (just) wondering… to mitigate the imposition of their requests (see also 
Biesenbach-Lucas, 2007). 
The next two chapters, Repair Work: Apologies and Repair Work: Excuses, focus on speech act formulas 
and pragmatic strategies that students used to repair their image for different reasons (i.e., being absent 
from class, arriving late, submitting unacceptable work). In general, Ewald’s analysis of non-absence-
related email apologies indicates that students frequently offered reasons for their actions. They used 
strategies to save face by accepting blame for their actions and they offered to make up for them. In 
Chapter 7, Ewald investigates the extent of students’ pragmatic awareness in their absence excuse emails. 
She explains the strategies that they incorporated to account for lateness (past or future), missed 
assignments, assessment, and appointments. Although students were permitted to have a certain number 
Lee B. Abraham Review of The Inbox: Understanding and Maximizing Student-instructor E-mail 
 
Language Learning & Technology  35 
of absences for which they did not have to submit documentation, Ewald’s analysis reveals that students 
attempted to save face. Most (96%) of students’ absence emails included a reason or justification for not 
attending class. 
In Chapter 8, Ewald analyzes emails in which students expressed gratitude for areas for which instructors 
are generally responsible, such as helping with course material or advising, and for those actions for 
which they are not obligated to do so. As Ewald points out, thanking teachers in a sincere way is quite 
complex since their messages could be misinterpreted as unnecessary or only motivated by a concern for 
grades. Overall, the results reveal that students frequently used more than one expression of gratitude in a 
message and that they included a specific reason for doing so. 
Chapter 9 investigates students’ patterns of complaints, the least frequently occurring speech act in the 
corpus. Students used several pragmatic strategies to mitigate complaints such as expressing complaints 
with the modals could or should. In addition, students included first-person pronouns (I, my, me) with 
positive evaluations of themselves and their performance rather than addressing or accusing the instructor 
directly. Ewald provides a detailed rationale for distinguishing complaints from requests and excuses. She 
gives a thorough explanation of the coding scheme for such distinctions that could guide future research 
of these pragmatic functions in student-teacher email interactions. 
Chapter 10 examines students’ use of English, Spanish, or both languages and the communicative 
contexts in which they chose to write emails in Spanish. Although students composed their messages in 
Spanish much less often than in English, Ewald’s analysis shows that students did use Spanish 
successfully to make requests, provide excuses, and to apologize. In Chapter 11, the last chapter, Ewald 
summarizes the principal findings and pedagogical implications examined throughout the book. 
Although there have been studies of other pragmatic features such as openings and closings and forms of 
address in students’ emails, Ewald’s book is one of the first corpus-informed investigations of students’ 
expression of requests, apologies, excuses, and complaints in student-faculty communication outside of 
the classroom. The Inbox addresses an important gap in research in pragmatics and technology-mediated 
discourse, and the findings will serve as an important baseline for comparison with future studies. Ewald 
identifies several crucial directions for research that would shed further light on patterns of student-
faculty communication outside of class using email and other technologies. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Lee B. Abraham is a lecturer in Spanish and he currently serves as co-director of the Spanish Language 
Program in the Department of Latin American and Iberian Cultures at Columbia University. His research 
interests, closely aligned with his teaching and language program administration, focus on assessment, 
multiliteracies, linguistic landscape, concept-based instruction, and technology-mediated communication. 
E-mail: lba2133@columbia.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Biesenbach-Lucas, S. (2007). Students writing emails to faculty: An examination of e-politeness among 
native and non-native speakers of English. Language Learning & Technology, 11(2), 59–81. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num2/biesenbachlucas/ 
Dahlstrom, E., Christopher Brooks, D., Grajek, S., & Reeves, J. (2015). ECAR Study of undergraduate 
students and information technology, 2015. EDUCAUSE Center for Analysis and Research. Retrieved 
from https://library.educause.edu/resources/2015/8/2015-student-and-faculty-technology-research-studies 
Lee B. Abraham Review of The Inbox: Understanding and Maximizing Student-instructor E-mail 
 
Language Learning & Technology  36 
Economidou-Kogetsidis, M. (2011). “Please answer me as soon as possible”: Pragmatic failure in non-
native speakers’ e-mail requests to faculty. Journal of Pragmatics, 43(13), 3193–3215. 
Kuh, G. D., Kinzie, J., Schuh, J. H., & Whitt, E. J. (2010). Student success in college: Creating conditions 
that matter. San Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons. 
