Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/action.pdf 
February 2016, Volume 20, Number 1 
pp. 21–33 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 21 
ACTION RESEARCH 
IRISH IN A 3D WORLD: ENGAGING PRIMARY SCHOOL CHILDREN 
Gene Dalton, Trinity College Dublin 
Ann Devitt, Trinity College Dublin 
While the majority of people in Ireland speak English as a first language, the minority 
Irish language is spoken daily by approximately 3% of the population even though is a 
compulsory subject in Irish schools. Recent research has shown the language to be in 
crisis, with consistently declining standards of attainment in schools. This paper presents 
the first cycle of an Action Research project aiming to assess the potential of using a three-
dimensional virtual environment (3DVE) as a platform for task-based learning of Irish in 
the primary school. The action phase of the cycle consisted of an intensive pilot of a 
language learning intervention using a 3DVE (n=25 children aged 9-10 years). The 
reflection component was multiphase, involving analysis of pilot outputs, re-evaluation of 
the literature and an in-depth user consultation (n=15 children aged 10-11 years), inspired 
by Student Voice methodology. The user consultation findings indicated goal orientation 
as the primary driver for children learning in a 3DVE with social connectivity understood 
as a given in any such environment. This paper offers a novel classification of games and 
virtual worlds for language learning which serves to integrate the two research literatures 
in a meaningful way. 
Language(s) Learned in this study: Irish 
Keywords: Action Research, Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Virtual 
Environments, Game-Based Practice, Minority Languages. 
APA Citation: Dalton, G., & Devitt, A. (2016). Irish in a 3D World: Engaging Primary 
School Children. Language Learning & Technology, 20(1), 21–33. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/action.pdf 
Received: May 28, 2015; Accepted: November 19, 2015; Published: February 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Gene Dalton & Ann Devitt 
INTRODUCTION 
Re-energising Irish language learning and proficiency in Irish primary schools 
The Irish language is the first official language of the Irish state, but is spoken daily as a community 
language by only a fraction of the population. Since the foundation of the state, great efforts have been 
made to revive the language, primarily through the educational system. Most schools in Ireland are 
English-medium, with a growing minority of Irish-medium schooling, growth driven by demand. Irish is 
a compulsory subject in school in the Republic of Ireland between the ages of 4 and 18. Despite this 
substantial investment of time and resources, the Irish language is in crisis in English-medium schools, as 
demonstrated by the 2011 census figures which showed that almost one in three teenagers in the country 
claim to be unable to speak the language (CSO, 2011). There has been a dramatic decline in the standards 
of Irish in primary schools since the 1980s (Harris et al., 2006), a negative trend that a new 
communicative curriculum and teaching approach has failed to reverse. The challenges facing the Irish 
language are complex and diverse. Not least among them is the lack of context for using the language 
outside of school time. Most Irish children never use their Irish outside of school and do not participate in 
authentic language communities (Ó Laoire, 2005). Clearly, a new context is needed to give children an 
Gene Dalton and Ann Devitt Irish in a 3D World 
 
Language Learning & Technology 22 
experience of using the language in a meaningful way. This study aims to provide this context through 
applying task-based language learning and cooperative learning principles to a three-dimensional virtual 
environment (3DVE). 
3DVEs for language learning 
This study takes a sociocultural perspective on language learning which emphasises the importance of 
learner interactions. In sociocultural theory, interaction is considered as “an essential force rather than as 
merely a helpful condition for learning” (Saville-Troike, 2006, p. 111). This approach aligns with the 
affordances of 3DVEs. 
The term 3DVE encompasses a broad range of environments including virtual worlds and games. There is 
a wide range of definitions in 3DVE literature, some of which emphasise commonalities and others 
differences. Most of the literature does not use the umbrella term of 3DVE, but focuses on individual 
subcategories such as virtual worlds or games. For the purposes of this paper, we adopt the broader 
definition of 3DVE, which does not engage with the differences between games (such as World of 
Warcraft, The Sims, etc.) and virtual worlds (such as Second Life) and emphasises “[t]hree-
dimensionality, smooth temporal changes and interactivity” as “the most important features that 
distinguish 3D learning environments from other types of virtual learning environments” (Dalgarno, 
Hedberg, & Harper, 2002, p. 149). The primary language learning affordances of 3DVEs described in the 
literature are set out below. 
The opportunity to take part in an authentic language community is often listed as an important 
affordance of 3DVEs. This is connected to the communicative approach to language learning, which 
emphasises the importance of authentic, meaningful communication through the target language (Liou, 
2012; Peterson, 2010). The affordance of a sense of presence provided by avatars is described by Cooke-
Plagwitz (2008) as having the potential to enhance a users’ sense of belonging, helping them to interact. 
This facilitates immersion, which in turn can be an advantage for learning (Liou, 2012; O’Brien & Levy, 
2008). As language learning theory has moved towards a greater emphasis on the role of interaction in 
language acquisition, the creation of meaningful contexts for interaction which facilitate language 
learning must be a key goal in the use of technology. There are several different affordances of 3DVEs 
that centre on interaction (Peterson, 2011). A collaborative multi-user approach to a 3DVE can maximise 
opportunities for interaction (Ibáñez et al., 2011). This collaboration in a virtual environment aligns well 
with the cooperative model of learning championed by the Johnson brothers (Johnson, Johnson, & 
Holubec, 2008), and is commensurate with a cooperative approach to language teaching as part of the 
communicative approach. A further advantage of using a 3DVE for language learning is the possibility of 
using multiple modes of communication—for example, real time chat, group chat, email, or audio 
messaging (Peterson, 2010). 
As mentioned above, this paper reports part of a research project which aims to leverage these 
affordances and apply them to the context of children learning Irish as a second language. In the broader 
project, two cycles of research are planned according to Action Research (AR) principles. The first cycle 
explored the suitability of the environment and the language teaching approach for primary school 
children learning Irish. Building on this insight and experience, the second cycle will optimise the 
environment and teaching approach accordingly and apply it to a wider group of children. 
METHODOLOGY 
Action Research 
This study takes an AR approach that assumes four core principles to guide the conduct of the study (Liu, 
2014). Firstly, the study is dual in nature, linking “action and research in a cycle that drives and reflects 
upon change” (Riggall, 2009, p. vi) to generate theory from practice. Secondly, it is an emergent, cyclic 
Gene Dalton and Ann Devitt Irish in a 3D World 
 
Language Learning & Technology 23 
process to ensure rigour and enhance participant understanding. Thirdly, AR is contextualized, 
responding to a specific enquiry in context but with the potential for transferability through transparent 
and considered accounts of AR studies. Finally, AR is values-oriented looking to improved practice in the 
everyday contexts of people’s lives through participation and democracy. This aspect has different 
emphases in different AR models but underlies the ontological and epistemological standpoint of many 
AR researchers. 
This paper reports one action-reflection cycle where the action involves engaging children with Irish 
language learning in a virtual world and the reflection component is multi-phase as represented in Figure 
1. The initial phase of reflection on the action undertaken led to adoption of a design-led user consultation 
phase and a deep engagement with the literature on game-based and virtual world learning in order to 
derive new theory from the participants’ experiences and feedback. This in turn led to a reconceptualised 
model of action to move into future action-reflection cycles. This study is rooted very firmly in an Irish 
context where, as noted above, individuals have a somewhat problematic relationship with the teaching 
and learning of Irish and in the specific context of a primary school class. It does however seek to theorise 
from the action-reflection cycle through a close observation and listening to the voices of the participant 
children coupled with a deep engagement with the research literature. 
 
Figure 1. Study Action Research Cycle (adapted from McNiff, 2002, p. 40) 
Participants 
The sample selection for this study was opportunistic: a group of 25 children (15 girls and 10 boys) aged 
9-10 years. These children had been studying Irish in an English-medium school for 5 years, 
approximately 30 minutes every day. The observations and reflections deriving from this phase led to an 
in-depth user consultation as part of the reflection phase. A subset of 15 children volunteered to take part 
in the user consultation 5 months later when the children were 10-11 years old. An issue of gender 
imbalance arose during the sampling for the user consultation, with two boys and 13 girls volunteering, 
not inconsistent with gender imbalances in language learning classrooms (Carr & Pauwels, 2009). This 
will be addressed in the data analysis below. In addition to adhering to standard requirements for parental 
and personal consent, the study aligned with the principles of student voice—all materials and procedures 
Gene Dalton and Ann Devitt Irish in a 3D World 
 
Language Learning & Technology 24 
were carefully designed with age appropriate language to emphasise that the research was being carried 
out with the children, not on them (Hendrick, 2008) and that their voices would directly impact 
implementation choices for the 3DVE under development. 
Action Phase: Virtual World Environment, Approach and Instruments 
As the participants are minors, Open Sim was chosen as the virtual world platform. The Sim on a Stick 
version enabled the development of a private, secure virtual world which could be configured for access 
by multiple users. Figure 2 shows one of the virtual world spaces with an avatar. 
 
Figure 2. Irish language virtual world space. 
Using a task-based language teaching approach (Ellis, 2003), a collaborative storytelling task was 
developed for the intensive, half-day pilot study. The task emphasised using language for meaning but did 
include a metalinguistic element of raising awareness of the form of the language. In order to maximise 
the potential for interaction and activity in the lesson, a cooperative learning model was adopted. The 
children were divided into cooperative teams of mixed ability to take part in language learning activities, 
such as vocabulary treasure hunts, with well-defined roles and responsibilities for each child (Johnson & 
Johnson, 1999). 
Pre- and post-motivational questionnaires were used to investigate child attitudes towards learning Irish 
and towards their experience of the pilot. Pre- and post-language tests were also used to test for any 
language gains, although this was largely a test of the instruments, as language gains would not be 
expected after such a short intervention. 
Observation Phase 
All 25 children reported that they found the experience fun and interesting. All but one of the 9-10 year 
old children said they would like to learn Irish this way more often. A selection of their comments on 
different elements of the day is given in Figure 3. The results from the Attitude/Motivation Test Battery 
(AMTB) were broadly in line with previous research in this area, showing that children value the Irish 
language and believe it to be a significant part of Irish culture. There was no evidence of language gains 
Gene Dalton and Ann Devitt Irish in a 3D World 
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
from the post-test. The very positive response from the children was encouraging, and indicated that this 
combination of virtual world platform and task-based language learning may indeed hold potential in the 
ongoing challenge of finding meaningful and effective ways to teach Irish. Interestingly, children reacted 
positively not only to the virtual world itself but also to the tasks they had to carry out in-world. A 
number of issues arose from this pilot. The suitability of the virtual world platform was in doubt, 
necessitating a search for a more child-friendly environment and interface. The need for a longer 
intervention was also evident, as language gains cannot be realistically measured after such a short 
intervention. 
 
Figure 3. Feedback from the children on what they enjoyed about the pilot 
Reflection Phase 
Initial Reflections 
An interesting question was derived from the children’s engagement with the platform: is it a virtual 
world or a game? In the preparation for the intervention, the principal researcher had exclusively referred 
to the platform as a virtual world. However, during the pilot, the children spontaneously called it a game, 
talking about “playing the game” when referring to completing the tasks in the virtual world. Given the 
fact that virtual worlds and gaming are two distinct fields of language learning research, this response 
from the children highlighted the need to more clearly classify the type of platform being used, and its 
relationship to virtual world or gaming research, or both. 
Furthermore, it became clear that the children were the best advocates for their own language learning 
needs. Their perspective on possible environments was essential in order to discover and optimise the best 
platform for their language learning. The theoretical exploration of the platform classification is outlined 
in the next section, followed by a description of a user consultation study carried out with the children 
regarding these platforms. 
Theorising the experience 
Reflection on the data forced a reconsideration of the classification of the environment. Research into the 
use of virtual worlds and games for learning has developed in two parallel fields, which at times can 
 
Gene Dalton and Ann Devitt Irish in a 3D World 
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
overlap or diverge. The term virtual world, in its strictest sense, refers to an open-ended, social, three-
dimensional virtual environment, where there is no goal orientation, and the learning affordances centre 
around interaction and constructivist learning. A game, on the other hand, is understood to have a 
narrative and clearly defined goals. Goal orientation has emerged as a clear criterion which can 
distinguish between the two. Cornillie, Thorne, and Desmet (2012) separated Digital Game-based 
Language Learning (DGBLL) from Virtual World Language Learning (VWLL) in their categorisation of 
games and virtual environments according to goal orientation. In their classification, goal orientation is a 
binary variable, its presence given as an indicator of the DGBLL category. Virtual worlds are excluded 
from DGBLL because of their lack of goal orientation in line with Prensky’s (2001) categorisation of a 
virtual world as a toy. This is a strict interpretation of the broader literature on learning in immersive 
environments where goals are a characteristic of the overall environment, combining the environment and 
the learning task (De Freitas, 2014). 
The reflection phase of this cycle highlighted a number of anomalies within this classification. When a 
virtual world is used as a platform for task-based language teaching, does it remain a virtual world? There 
may not be intrinsic goal orientation in the platform, but now there is extrinsic goal-orientation in the 
language learning design. When a game is used without specific language learning goals, does playing it 
classify as DGBLL? In this case the intrinsic goal orientation is there, but there is no goal orientation in 
the language learning design. Berns, Gonzalez-Pardo, and Camacho demonstrated this anomaly in their 
2013 study where they described game-like applications in a 3DVE. The platform they used was more 
like a virtual world, but they used goal orientation in the tasks, therefore making the experience game-
like. 
The fuzzy classification (Zadeh, 1965) presented here builds on the classification by Cornillie et al. 
(2012), taking the useful binary distinction of learning objectives and gaming goals. However, it makes 
two key adaptations: 
1. Goal orientation is represented as a continuum that combines two classification features. 
2. The two classification features represent two realisations of goal orientation, one intrinsic (in the 
platform) and one extrinsic (in the language learning design), but both impact learner motivation 
and interaction within the learning experience. 
In the continuum (Figure 4), 3DVEs are situated according to their net goal orientation, a fuzzy relation 
between intrinsic and extrinsic goal orientation. The nature of the relation is unspecified here as this 
would require empirical investigation of user experiences of goal orientation in different environment 
types. This reconceptualization allows the extension of DGBLL theory to a broader range of 3DVEs, 
uniting the fields of research, and enabling the affordance of goal orientation to be exploited more 
broadly. In that case, individual researchers and language teachers could decide what degree and type of 
goal orientation on this continuum is most appropriate for their own language teaching needs. 
Gene Dalton and Ann Devitt Irish in a 3D World 
 
Language Learning & Technology 27 
 
 
 
 
 Virtual world 
without extrinsic 
LL goals 
Virtual world 
with extrinsic 
LL goals 
Game without 
extrinsic LL 
goals 
Game with 
extrinsic LL 
goals 
Custom-built 
LL game 
Intrinsic goal 
orientation 
(game design) 
 
— 
 
— 
 
√ 
 
√ 
 
√ 
Extrinsic goal 
orientation 
(LL design) 
 
— 
 
√ 
 
— 
 
√ 
 
√ 
Example — Second Life 
(Wehner, 
Gump, & 
Downey, 
2011) 
World of 
Warcraft 
(Rama, Black, 
van Es, & 
Warschauer, 
2012) 
The Sims 
(Ranalli, 
2008) 
Croquelandia 
(Sykes, 
Oskoz, & 
Thorne, 
2008) 
 
Figure 4. 3DVE Fuzzy Taxonomy  
User Consultation 
In line with student voice methodology and design-based research, having defined a fuzzy taxonomy for 
3DVEs, we returned to the users, the children, to investigate the alignment of child interests and learning 
with the goal orientation continuum in Figure 4. The children were interviewed for 30 minutes in three 
groups of five, the groups assigned at random. Guidelines for focus groups for children were used to 
ensure best practice in the groups (Vaughn, Schumm, & Sinagub, 1996). The children directed the 
conversation with the facilitation of the researcher exploring paths opened by the children themselves. 
The open-ended questions focused on the children’s personal experience of learning Irish in school and 
the games and virtual worlds they engage with outside of school. 
Data Analysis 
The focus groups were recorded and transcribed (for findings on classroom observations, see Dalton & 
Devitt, 2013). A thematic analysis was undertaken using a combination of qualitative and quantitative 
methods (Braun & Clarke, 2006; Ryan & Bernard, 2003). This was a somewhat novel approach where 
quantitative corpus analysis methods were applied to the qualitative data in order to support and enhance 
the qualitative data analysis process. Two a priori themes, goal orientation and social interaction, were 
derived from the 3DVE literature and the pilot intervention (Dalton & Devitt, 2013), while other themes 
were identified through careful reading and re-reading of the transcriptions to identify keywords related to 
themes (see Appendix for keywords and themes). KHCoder, corpus analyser, was then used to calculate 
keyword frequencies within themes (# sentences containing keyword / # sentences coded). 
FINDINGS 
The themes identified in the data along with some examples of keywords associated with each theme are 
listed below. These themes are distinct, not embedded and have minimal overlap of keywords. Overall 
and group theme frequencies are set out in Figure 5. 
 
Low                    Goal Orientation Continuum                      High 
Gene Dalton and Ann Devitt Irish in a 3D World 
 
Language Learning & Technology 28 
• Caring: pet, feed, look after 
• Construction: make, build, block 
• Consumerism: buy, shop, money 
• Creativity: customise, dress up 
• Goal orientation: mission, mini game, earn, have to,  
• Help: hint, clue, help 
• Ownership: your own, your design, your person 
• Violence: kill, shoot, steal, guns 
• Security: private, block user, bully 
• Social interaction: friend, talk, group 
• Travel: explore, fly, portal 
 
 
Figure 5. Graph demonstrating the percentage occurrence of 11 main themes across all three groups 
The most frequently occurring theme is seen to be that of goal orientation, followed by construction, 
consumerism, travel, violence and social interaction. These trends are similar across individual groups, 
however, the variation between groups is statistically significant and will be described in more detail 
below. 
3DVEs: The Children’s Themes 
The specific theme of goal orientation was the most commonly occurring theme overall, coming first in 
two of the three groups, and narrowly outstripped by construction in the other. This theme related to the 
Gene Dalton and Ann Devitt Irish in a 3D World 
 
Language Learning & Technology 29 
overall purpose of the 3DVE, as in the following extracts from the data: 
G1. Well, you could do … really … fun and missions. Like missions to … get … a trophy or 
something. … find … something Irish and then .. you have to go to … climb up trees and … go 
on a boat if there's a river. 
G2. I think [the main thing is] the missions because otherwise some people just go, 'It's Irish. I don't 
care.' Like they just have no respect for it or something. 
G3. Yes, and you get to unlock things and it … nice and fun. You start off with the most of it, like 
half of it Irish, half of it English and then it starts to get harder and harder as you get to the better 
stuff and you get money and all that. And hopefully you'd learn. 
G4. If you earn points, you can unlock new jobs that you want. …you might unlock a new job, but the 
highest jobs which get much money and they're more fun, they're like the hardest to get to. But 
everyone wants to get to them, so they keep going… 
In the context of learner autonomy, it is interesting to note that these children have a strong awareness of 
the value of motivation for their learning. 
Construction was the second most frequently occurring theme, its focus being on building and making, 
referencing Minecraft extensively. The consumerism theme related mainly to clothes shopping, possibly a 
very gendered theme among girl participants. The theme of violence in two out of three groups related to 
shooting, killing, guns and zombies, making reference to some violent games, such as Call of Duty and 
Grand Theft Auto, along with the survival mode of Minecraft. Three children, two boys and one girl, 
were responsible for initiating these discussions, suggesting that gender may influence the types of game 
enjoyed by children. The gender imbalance in the sample, with boys under-represented, may have skewed 
the relative importance of the violence theme in the data. The low incidence of the social interaction 
theme (15% of coded sentences) was unexpected. An analysis of the extracts related to social interaction 
however suggest that the children may not have commented on interaction as they assumed that 
multimodal communication would be available and was therefore intrinsic to platform, as in the extracts 
below: 
S1. You could have a click…like a kind of, you know that thing that people sign and you talk? You'd 
have that at the top of the screen, you could click it and then you could type what you want and 
then you could go write to everyone who was playing. 
S2. And you could get the headphones and talk to people, but you have to talk in Irish. 
S3. And like your friend can be in front of you. You could be talking to him across the thing. 
S4. And then you can text your friend as well saying… 
A number of themes (e.g., ownership, creativity, and security) relate to learner autonomy and identity 
within the world. Upon closer examination, it is clear that several other themes may actually be seen as 
different forms of goal orientation—making, buying, shooting, feeding a pet, travelling, and so forth, in 
addition to the discrete theme of goal orientation, as illustrated in Figure 6. This demonstrates the 
pervasiveness of goal orientation throughout the children’s interviews. It also suggests that goal 
orientation has many realisations that move away from pure competition alone and aligns with the fuzzy 
taxonomy above with goal orientation as a continuous, rather than discrete, variable. 
Gene Dalton and Ann Devitt Irish in a 3D World 
 
Language Learning & Technology 30 
 
Figure 6. Goal-oriented themes 
CONCLUSION 
The findings demonstrate the centrality of goal orientation in a child’s experience of and attitudes toward 
3DVEs, especially when the goal orientation subthemes are taken into account. In the domain of virtual 
world research, one of the key affordances of this type of environment is its open-ended nature where the 
users are free to decide what they want to do themselves and are not subject to the type of narrative and 
goal-oriented constraints that are typical of a game (see De Freitas et al., 2010). 
However, these findings suggest that children may prefer a more game-like environment with clearly 
defined tasks and goals. This could have important implications for researchers designing a 3DVE for 
children and aligns with the literature on task-based language learning where tasks with specific 
parameters structure and drive language learning (Nunan, 2004) The proposed new classification of 
3DVEs according to a goal-orientation continuum offers greater flexibility for those looking to apply 
3DVEs to their specific language learning contexts, and may also serve to unite the divergent fields of 
virtual world and gaming research. 
While the research reported here was carried out with a small number of children in the specific context 
of learning Irish at primary school in Ireland, there may be broader implications beyond this context. The 
strong preference that these children showed for different types of goal orientation in 3DVEs may 
indicate a trend among children to gravitate towards clearly defined tasks and goals in the language 
classroom, rather than open-ended activities. Furthermore, it is important to note the wide variety of goals 
mentioned by the children—building, buying, making, and so forth—showing that goal orientation is not 
limited to a competitive model where children are trying to win. The student voice methodology used in 
the user consultation phase of this cycle proved an effective strategy to bring children into the design 
process. This was hugely valuable in this research project, and could be applied on a wider scale to 
enhance sense of ownership and learner autonomy of children in the language classroom. Finally, this 
research shows the potential of using 3DVEs for minority language learning, as in this research they 
provided a much needed environment for meaningful and authentic language use. 
 
APPENDIX 
goal 
orientation 
social construction consumerism rough play travel 
mission 
quest 
follow 
friend  
talk  
text headphone 
make  
build  
own  
buy  
shop  
earn  
kill  
die  
shoot  
travel  
explore  
run  
Gene Dalton and Ann Devitt Irish in a 3D World 
 
Language Learning & Technology 31 
solve 
mystery 
riddle 
secret 
figure out 
missing 
adventure mini 
game 
job  
levels  
earn  
harder  
catch  
trying to  
try and  
find  
trophy  
get* 
collect  
go* 
have to  
unlock  
win  
points  
stars  
complete 
headset 
people* 
join  
group  
invite  
write  
social  
chat 
 
house  
block  
brick  
coin  
money 
arrow  
bow  
guns  
zombies  
steal  
TNT  
creeper 
explode  
bam  
destroy 
around  
go  
portal  
drive  
car  
boat  
enter  
jump  
fly  
go 
underground 
go underwater 
security caring creativity help ownership 
private chat 
private  
report  
mean* 
annoying* 
bully  
social bullying 
code  
lying  
block user 
random people 
pet  
feed  
health  
look after 
energy  
gym 
clothes  
dress up 
customise 
design  
make your 
character 
need to learn 
help  
hint  
clue 
your own  
your name 
your person 
your mind your 
design their 
own  
your shop 
make your 
character 
*refers to words which were initially included in the keywords, but had to be removed due to being used in other 
contexts and potentially falsely inflating results.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
In addition to the participants of the study for their very valuable contributions, we would like to 
acknowledge the Irish Research Council for funding this project.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Gene Dalton has spent several years working as a primary teacher in Dublin and is currently undertaking 
her PhD research at the School of Education, Trinity College Dublin funded by the Irish Research 
Council. 
E-mail: daltonge@tcd.ie 
Dr Ann Devitt is Assistant Professor in Modern Languages at the School of Education, Trinity College 
Dublin. Her research interests include second language teaching and learning, technology aided learning, 
in particular Computer Aided Language Learning, and applying computational linguistic and corpus 
methodologies in educational research. 
E-mail: Ann.Devitt@tcd.ie 
 
Gene Dalton and Ann Devitt Irish in a 3D World 
 
Language Learning & Technology 32 
REFERENCES 
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in 
Psychology, 3(2), 77–101. 
Carr, J., & Pauwels, A. (2009). Boys and Foreign Language Learning. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Cooke-Plagwitz, J. (2008). New directions in CALL: An objective introduction to Second Life. CALICo 
Journal, 25(3), 547–557. 
Cornillie, F., Thorne, S. L., & Desmet, P. (2012). Digital games for language learning: from hype to 
insight? ReCALL: Journal of Eurocall, 24(3), 243–256. 
CSO. (2011). Census 2011 Profile 9 What We Know - Education, skills and the Irish language. (Central 
Statistics Office). Retrieved from 
http://www.cso.ie/en/census/census2011reports/census2011profile9whatweknow-
educationskillsandtheirishlanguage/ 
Dalgarno, B., Hedberg, J., & Harper, B. (2002). The contribution of 3D environments to conceptual 
understanding. In O. J. McKerrow (Ed.), Winds of Change in the Sea of Learning: Proceedings of the 
19th Annual Conference of the Australasian Society for Computers in Learning in Tertiary Education 
(Vol. 1, pp. 149–158). Auckland, New Zealand: UNITEC, Institute of Technology. 
Dalton, G., & Devitt, A. (2013). Focus on form in a virtual world: Unlocking communicative competence 
in children learning Irish as a second language. Presented at the Conference of the Computer Assisted 
Language Instruction Consortium (CALICO), 2013, Hawaii, USA. 
De Freitas, S. (2014). Education in Computer Generated Environments. London: Routledge. 
De Freitas, S., Rebolledo-Mendez, G., Liarokapis, F., Magoulas, G., & Poulovassilis, A. (2010). Learning 
as immersive experiences: Using the four-dimensional framework for designing and evaluating 
immersive learning experiences in a virtual world. British Journal of Educational Technology, 41(1), 69–
85. 
Ellis, R. (2003). Task-based language learning and teaching. Oxford, U.K.; New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Harris, J., Forde, P., Archer, P., Nic Fhearaile, S., & O’Gorman, M. (2006). Irish in primary schools: 
long-term national trends in achievement. Dublin: Stationery Office. 
Hendrick, H. (2008). The Child as a Social Actor in Historical Sources. In P. M. Christensen & A. James 
(Eds.), Research with children: perspectives and practices (2nd ed). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Ibanez, M. B., Jesus Garcia, J., Galan, S., Maroto, D., Morillo, D., & Delgado Kloos, C. (2011). Design 
and Implementation of a 3D Multi-User Virtual World for Language Learning. Educational Technology 
& Society, 14(4), 2–10. 
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson R. T. (1999). Learning together and alone: cooperative, competitive, and 
individualistic learning. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 
Johnson, D. W., Johnson, R. T., & Holubec, E. J. (2008). Cooperation in the Classroom (Eighth edition). 
Edina, Minn.: Interaction Book Co. 
Liou, H.-C. (2012). The roles of Second Life in a college computer-assisted language learning (CALL) 
course in Taiwan, ROC. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 25(4), 365–382. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2011.597766 
Liu, W. (2014). The Exploration of Reciprocal Peer Coteaching in a Chinese Course: an Action Research 
Project on Language Teacher Education (PhD). Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland. 
Gene Dalton and Ann Devitt Irish in a 3D World 
 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
McNiff, J. (2002). Action Research: Principles and Practice (2nd ed.). London: Routledge. 
Nunan, D. (2004). Task-based language teaching. Cambridge, UK; New York, NY, USA: Cambridge 
University Press. 
O’Brien, M. G., & Levy, R. M. (2008). Exploration through virtual reality: Encounters with the target 
culture. Canadian Modern Language Review-Revue Canadienne Des Langues Vivantes, 64(4), 663–691. 
http://doi.org/10.3138/cmlr.64.4.663 
Ó Laoire, M. (2005). Bilingualism in school settings in Ireland: Perspectives on the L2 curriculum. In J. 
Cohen, T. McAllister, K. Rolstad, & J. MacSwan (Eds.), Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium 
on Bilingualism. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press. 
Peterson, M. (2010). Massively multiplayer online role-playing games as arenas for second language 
learning. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 23(5), 429–439. 
Peterson, M. (2011). Towards a research agenda for the use of three-dimensional virtual worlds in 
language learning. Calico Journal, 29(1), 67–80. 
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital Game-Based Learning. St Paul: Paragon House. 
Rama, P. S., Black, R. W., van Es, E., & Warschauer, M. (2012). Affordances for second language 
learning in World of Warcraft. Recall, 24, 322–338. http://doi.org/10.1017/S0958344012000171 
Ranalli, J. (2008). Learning English with The Sims: exploiting authentic computer simulation games for 
L2 learning. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(5), 441–455. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/09588220802447859 
Riggall, A. (2009). Action Research: What is it, who does it and why? In Action Research: Making a 
Difference in Education (Vol. I). Slough: NFER. 
Ryan, G. W., & Bernard, H. R. (2003). Techniques to identify themes. Field Methods, 15(1), 85–109. 
Saville-Troike, M. (2006). Introducing second language acquisition. Cambridge, UK ; New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Sykes, J. M., Oskoz, A., & Thorne, S. L. (2008). Web 2.0, synthetic immersive environments, and mobile 
resources for language education. Calico Journal, 25(3), 528–546. 
Vaughn, S. R., Schumm, J. S., & Sinagub, J. M. (1996). Focus group interviews in education and 
psychology. Sage Publications. 
Wehner, A. K., Gump, A. W., & Downey, S. (2011). The effects of Second Life on the motivation of 
undergraduate students learning a foreign language. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 24(3), 277–
289. http://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2010.551757 
Zadeh, L. A. (1965). Fuzzy sets. Information and Control, 8(3), 338–353. http://doi.org/10.1016/S0019-
9958(65)90241-X 
 
