Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/call.pdf 
October 2016, Volume 20, Number 3 
p. 200 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 200 
 
Call for Papers for Language Learning & Technology Special Issue 
Qualitative Research in CALL 
 
Special Issue Editors: Mike Levy and Paul Moore 
Qualitative research encompasses a range of approaches and methods, and it is diverse in its scope and 
ambition (Hammersley, 2013). Still, in spite of its range and diversity, qualitative research frequently has 
a number of recurring themes or features: 
 It emphasises what happens in natural settings, including the classroom, rather than what occurs 
under experimental conditions. 
 It predominantly involves verbal rather that numerical data and analysis. 
 It focuses on the individual experience. 
 It attends to the particular attributes and parameters of the context. 
 It uses a flexible, inductive, data-driven approach. 
Research approaches include case study, interview, narrative enquiry, ethnography, phenomenology, and 
grounded theory. Data collection methods include observations, interviews, verbal reports, diaries, and 
interaction analyses of different kinds. 
In a recent paper on the role of qualitative approaches to research in CALL, Levy (2015) emphasised the 
importance of understanding the language learner’s experience online as it is shaped and constrained by 
the attributes of the learning environment. Along similar lines, O’Rourke (2008, 2012), highlighted the 
value of seeking out alternative data and analytical techniques, such as collecting attentional focus data 
moment-by-moment in an online interaction, or analyzing interactional tempo data related to online turn-
taking. Here qualitative research can help further our understanding of the ways in which the technology 
mediates interaction and thereby online learning. 
This special issue of Language Learning & Technology seeks to provide a variety of qualitative research 
studies in CALL with a particular focus on how a qualitative perspective can serve to provide new 
insights and approaches and also, potentially, new or extended research agendas for the field. Mixed 
methods studies are welcome, provided that the qualitative component is not subordinated to the 
quantitative component either in the data set or in the analysis and discussion. Finally, in order to be 
considered for this special issue, proposals must present rigorous, empirical studies and report on actual 
language learning processes or outcomes. 
Please consult the LLT website for general guidelines on submissions. Send a title and a 250- to 300-word 
abstract to llt@hawaii.edu by December 1, 2016. 
Publication Schedule: 
December 1, 2016: Submission deadline for abstracts 
January 1, 2017: Invitation for authors to submit a manuscript 
May 1, 2017: Submission deadline for first draft of manuscripts 
March 23, 2018: Submission deadline for final draft of manuscripts 
June 1, 2018: Publication of special issue 
For Further Information: 
If you have any questions, please contact the Managing Editor at llt@hawaii.edu. 
