Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2016/chun.pdf 
June 2016, Volume 20, Number 2 
pp. 98–115 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 98 
THE ROLE OF TECHNOLOGY IN SLA RESEARCH 
Dorothy M. Chun, University of California, Santa Barbara 
In this review article for the 20th Anniversary Issue, I look back at research from the last 
two decades on the role of computer technology in understanding and facilitating second 
language acquisition (SLA) and forward to what future research might investigate. To be 
discussed are both how technology has been used to conduct research on SLA processes 
and what the impacts of technology have been as a mediator of those processes. As we 
progress into the 21st century, I suggest that technology in SLA research will assume an 
increasingly greater role, approaching Bax’s (2003, 2011) notion of normalization for the 
field of computer-assisted language learning, namely that technology is gradually being 
fully integrated into second language teaching, learning, and research. In addition, I 
propose that SLA research investigate not only the traditional aspects of linguistic and 
communicative competence but newer types of symbolic competence (e.g., Kramsch, 
2011) and intercultural communicative competence (e.g., Byram, 1997), which include 
integral technological components, and which are a part of general digital literacies or 
multiliteracies. 
Language(s) Learned in this study: Various 
Keywords: Digital Literacies, Meta-Analysis 
APA Citation: Chun, D. M. (2016). The role of technology in SLA research. Language 
Learning & Technology, 20(2), 98–115. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2016/chun.pdf 
Received: July 20, 2015; Accepted: September 15, 2015; Published: June 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Dorothy Chun 
INTRODUCTION 
In the inaugural issue of Language Learning & Technology (LLT), which intended to define the research 
agenda for the journal, all four articles addressed the question of how SLA research and CALL research 
could be fruitfully combined. Chapelle (1997) applied research methods for instructed SLA to CALL, 
focusing on the interactionist approach and discourse analysis to investigate CALL activities. She 
emphasized observing learners’ linguistic and nonlinguistic interactions in such activities, particularly 
those aspects of interactions that advance SLA. 
Based on theories of both L2 reading and learning with multimedia, Chun and Plass (1997) suggested a 
research agenda that focuses on investigating the cognitive processes involved in L2 reading. Of 
particular interest is how readers integrate the verbal and visual information presented when they are 
provided with multimedia aids for text comprehension More generally, Chun and Plass proposed that “the 
primary research question is not whether multimedia instruction is effective, but rather under what 
conditions and for whom” (p. 72). This means that research should take individual differences into 
account in order to determine the effectiveness of specific features of computer-based materials for 
specific types of L2 learners, specific learning tasks, and specific cognitive processes. 
The article by Ortega (1997) presented a research agenda for L2 computer-assisted classroom discussion 
(CACD) connected to SLA theory. She suggested that a multiplicity of data sources be used in order to 
document the processes learners actually engage in when carrying out CACD tasks in addition to 
analyzing language outcomes. Her proposal for a process- and task-driven research agenda sought to 
ascertain which features of CACD may or may not be relevant to the processes involved in SLA. She 
Dorothy Chun Technology in SLA Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 99 
noted that at least two aspects of production need to be separately investigated: first, the interlanguage 
produced over time in electronic discussions (using quantitative measures of syntactic complexity, lexical 
range, accuracy, and writing fluency), and second, interactional features of CACD discourse that are 
thought to be relevant in SLA processes (employing both qualitative and quantitative analyses). 
Brown (1997) examined computer-assisted language testing and focused in particular on computerized-
adaptive language testing (CALT), delineating the issues that CALT research needed to address as well as 
emerging related areas such as intelligent teaching systems, speech recognition, analysis and scoring of 
compositions, and alternative psychometric models for analyzing more complex computer-assisted 
responses. 
Although the four inaugural articles were not intended to cover the entire scope of CALL, they form the 
starting point for this review article, which will explore how the ideas that were suggested have (or have 
not) been taken up in subsequent CALL research. The next section will summarize the ways in which 
technology has been used (a) to research SLA processes and (b) as a tool or mediator to facilitate SLA. It 
is followed by a presentation of what has been learned from selected seminal studies in CALL—
particularly those from the last 20 years and those that have appeared in LLT. The final section suggests 
avenues and questions for future research. 
TECHNOLOGY: BOTH A RESEARCH TOOL AND A MEDIUM FOR TEACHING AND 
LEARNING 
One hallmark of the articles in LLT is that most of them address both the issue of how technology can be 
used to conduct SLA research and how technology serves as a tool or mediator of various types of SLA 
processes. This reflects what is one of the most compelling affordances of technology for SLA and CALL 
research, namely that computers (or any device containing a processor that does calculations and executes 
code, e.g., tablets and smartphones) inherently have the capacity to record user actions, input, and 
behaviors. Although computers may need to be programmed to sort and organize this information into a 
form that is accessible and usable to a researcher, the ability to keep records of what users write, say, and 
do while using technology provides researchers with data of both SLA processes and products. The next 
two sub-sections discuss these two different uses of technology, namely technology as a research tool and 
as a learning tool. 
Use of Technology to Research and Understand SLA Processes 
SLA research encompasses many different theoretical as well as methodological perspectives. Hubbard 
(2008), in reviewing 25 years of CALL research, specifically with regard to the term theory, determined 
that references to SLA theories were the most numerous in his corpus. Among SLA theories, 10 
contemporary theories were presented by VanPatten and Williams (2015), and broadly speaking, much, 
but certainly not all, of CALL research can be positioned among four of the most commonly recognized 
theories and approaches: usage-based approaches, the interaction approach, Skill Acquisition Theory, and 
Sociocultural Theory. What these theories and approaches have in common is the importance of input and 
exposure to language and communicative contexts (the linguistic environment), as well as the focus on the 
cognitive and socio-cognitive processes of L2 learners (e.g., noticing and negotiation for meaning), as 
they interact in social environments. Technologies such as the Internet provide unprecedented access to 
world languages, and learners have exposure to a myriad of input types. Different technologies and 
programs can document the communicative processes such as various types of computer-mediated 
communication (CMC), eye-tracking, and Intelligent CALL (ICALL). 
The capacity to track learner actions and behaviors is evident in the entire range of CALL research, from 
studies of how learners noticed or attended more carefully to information when using electronic 
dictionaries for vocabulary learning (Laufer & Hill, 2000) to studies of which types of multimedia glosses 
promoted noticing and led to better vocabulary acquisition or reading comprehension (Al Seghayer, 2001; 
Dorothy Chun Technology in SLA Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 100 
Chun & Plass, 1996; Yanguas, 2009). Computer tracking of user-behavior can provide insight into the 
construction of grammatical knowledge (Collentine, 2000). In a longitudinal study by Heift (2010), 
program logs of learner behavior were compiled over the course of three semesters as learners used a 
parser-based program that provided two different kinds of feedback. Results showed significant 
differences in learner uptake at the advanced level of proficiency, depending on the specificity of the 
feedback. 
One of the most widely researched uses of technology, CMC, exists in different forms (asynchronous 
[ACMC] and synchronous [SCMC]), in different modes (text-based, audio-based, video-based, or some 
combination thereof), and for different purposes (from academic forums to purely social networks). Early 
CMC studies of computer assisted classroom discussion documented the development of interactive 
competence and compared CACD with face-to-face (FTF) conversations (Chun, 1994; Kern, 1995; 
Warschauer, 1996), while later studies of intercultural exchanges across continents focused on 
sociocultural aspects of telecollaboration (Belz, 2002; Chun, 2014; Furstenberg et al., 2001; Thorne, 
2003). 
The recording and storage capacities of different technologies allow researchers to analyze how students 
use various technological resources, whether to develop oral proficiency (Lys, 2013), to negotiate 
meaning using text-based SCMC (e.g., Blake, 2000) or using video and audio SCMC (e.g., Yanguas, 
2010), to provide peer feedback (Ware & O’Dowd, 2008), or to develop e-politeness (Biesenbach-Lucas, 
2007). 
Text-based chat transcripts were found to be insufficient for documenting the entirety of what learners do 
or produce, leading Smith (2008) to propose an innovative methodology of using video-enhanced 
chatscripts. He demonstrated that by simply using the finished “product” of chat log files, much 
information about the “process” of chatting is neglected or ignored. His results are persuasive that 
fundamental differences in interpretation and conclusions are reached from the video-enhanced 
chatscripts. Similarly, Sauro (2012) compared L2 performance in text-chat and spoken discourse by 
analyzing both chat transcripts and video-enhanced chatscripts and found no significant differences in 
either lexical or syntactic complexity of the narratives in the two modalities. Instead, there was evidence 
that some learners generated more complex language predominantly in text-chat while others showed 
greater complexity in spoken discourse. Park and Kinginger (2010) employed digital video (screen 
recordings) to capture an L2 writer’s composing process, including corpus search queries, and provided 
an explicit representation of the learner’s cognitive processes. 
A technology that is gaining influence in SLA research is eye-tracking technology. It has been used, for 
example, by Smith (2012) to study the construct of noticing by recording participants’ eye gaze while 
they were engaged in a short chat interaction task. Noticing events, specifically noticing corrective 
feedback provided by a native speaker in a SCMC setting, was operationalized by increased visual 
attention as shown in “heat maps” of the learner’s eye gaze. The heat map data was compared with the 
data from stimulated recall and both were highly and positively correlated with one another, leading 
Smith to conclude that the two methodological techniques used in conjunction with each other may help 
SLA researchers better understand the construct of noticing. 
Other technologies, such as an Intelligent Language Tutoring System, can provide detailed, error-specific, 
and individualized feedback to learners. The empirical data of learner-controlled practice and error 
correction inform us about the impact of learner control on error correction (Heift, 2002). Technologies 
that compile corpora of native speaker and learner language can be used for SLA research, and 
collocation software or websites allow researchers to study how learners acquire collocations (Chambers, 
2005). Recordings, either audio or video, of think aloud protocols can be used to study learner strategies 
or metacognitive processes (Yoon & Jo, 2014). An important learner variable, working memory, was 
measured using online tests of working memory in order to show the relationship between speaking tasks 
Dorothy Chun Technology in SLA Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 101 
and working memory (Payne & Ross, 2005). 
Appendix A shows examples of different SLA theories and constructs, the technologies that were used to 
conduct the research, and sample research studies. The next section discusses how technology can be a 
tool or mediator in SLA itself. 
The Impact of Technology as Mediator of SLA Processes 
As seen in the section above, the SLA construct of the linguistic environment is critical for several SLA 
theories, especially the interaction approach and usage-based approaches. Technology, through the World 
Wide Web or Internet, allows for exposure to authentic target language input, in the form of multimodal 
websites that contain text-based, audio, and video information about both language and culture. In 
addition, the many different types of CMC, often classified as Web 1.0 and Web 2.0 technologies (e.g., 
email, forums, chats, blogs, wikis, podcasts, videos, social networking sites, virtual worlds, massively 
multiplayer online games) enable various kinds of communication, interaction, and collaboration, whether 
it be between learner and computer or between or among people (i.e., learners in and outside of the 
classroom or speakers of the target language anywhere in the world). 
Golonka, Bowles, Frank, Richardson, and Freynik (2014) reviewed over 350 studies of the effectiveness 
of technology use in foreign language (FL) learning and teaching, focusing on empirical studies that 
compared the use of technologies with more traditional methods or materials. Despite the abundance of 
available publications, evidence of efficacy was found to be limited. Technology was found to have made 
a strong impact on FL learning in two areas: the use of automatic speech recognition (ASR) for 
pronunciation training and the use of chat for increasing language production and language complexity. 
Moderate support was found for technology providing intelligent feedback and enhancing learners’ 
noticing, focus on form, output and interaction, vocabulary learning, speaking proficiency, and affect and 
motivation. 
Technology allows for unlimited input and repetition (e.g., vocabulary tutors, see Groot, 2000), as well as 
for modifying input (e.g., slowing speech to aid listening comprehension, see McBride, 2011). For the 
development of grammar, mobile-assisted grammar exercises and their effect on self-editing in L2 writing 
have been studied (Li & Hegelheimer, 2013). Other studies of grammar examined student-initiated 
attention to form in wiki-based collaborative writing (Kessler, 2009) and focus on form in expert-to-
novice CMC interaction (Lee, 2008). ICALL and corpus linguistic analysis were found to produce “a 
lasting improvement in L2 learners’ ability to edit persistent grammatical errors from their writing” 
(Cowan, Choo, & Lee, 2014, p. 193). 
According to the interaction approach, opportunities for interaction and negotiation of meaning are 
important for SLA. Blake (2000) documented how synchronous chat used with jigsaw, information-gap, 
and decision-making tasks promoted negotiations between dyad partners. Toyoda and Harrison (2002) 
examined different triggers for the negotiation of meaning during chat conversations, and Bower and 
Kawaguchi (2011) investigated the negotiation of meaning and corrective feedback in eTandem 
interactions. 
Technology can be used to facilitate various SLA processes and skills. For example, ASR has been 
effective for pronunciation training (Hirata, 2004), as have multimedia displays that provide visual 
feedback of pitch curves (Hardison, 2004; Olson, 2014). For listening comprehension, captioned videos 
(Winke, Gass & Sydorenko, 2010) and subtitles and transcripts (Grgurović & Hegelheimer, 2007) have 
been helpful. L2 reading software with multimedia annotations have been shown to aid reading 
comprehension (Lomicka, 1998; Yanguas, 2009). 
Technologies can enable new methods and approaches to learning and teaching. For example, they offer 
the possibility for reading to be a social (rather than an individual) process. Blyth (2014) explored the 
affordances of social reading for L2 literacy, and Jalkanen and Vaarala (2013) examined the literacy 
Dorothy Chun Technology in SLA Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 102 
practices of L2 learners when reading and writing blogs. 
As Ortega (1997) suggested, many researchers have analyzed learner output in CMC based on SLA 
principles. For example, Sotillo (2000) examined discourse functions and syntactic complexity in two 
different modes of CMC—synchronous and asynchronous—finding that the quantity and types of 
discourse functions deemed necessary for SLA in SCMC were similar to those found in FTF 
conversations. In ACMC, discourse functions were more constrained than in SCMC, though the delayed 
nature of ACMC provided learners more opportunities to produce syntactically complex language. Sauro 
and Smith (2010) used video enhanced chatscripts of CMC to provide evidence of online planning and 
monitoring that led to greater linguistic complexity and lexical diversity. 
For studies that investigated writing, Kessler, Bikowski, and Boggs (2012) found that students focused 
more on meaning than on form in collaborative writing for academic purposes. As Brown (1997) 
proposed, automated analysis of compositions has been studied (see Lavolette, Polio, & Kahng, 2015), 
and automated spoken response grading was investigated (see Crossley & McNamara, 2013). 
In addition to using CMC for grammar development, writing and speaking, various forms of CMC have 
been used for the development of intercultural competence (Liaw, 2006) and pragmatics (Belz, 2003). But 
CMC is not a panacea for eradicating misunderstanding and preconceived notions about another culture, 
as Ware (2005) discovered. 
Technology can help with the development of one’s identity. For example, Kramsch, A’Ness, and Lam 
(2000) found that the electronic medium allows for the development of agency and identity. Klimanova 
and Dembovskaya (2013) investigated the development of identity using social networking tools, and 
Pasfield-Neofitou (2011) explored identity construction and what it means to be foreign. 
A special issue of LLT on game-informed L2 teaching and learning positioned game and play as part of 
complex ecologies of practice (Reinhardt & Sykes, 2014). In Chik’s (2014) contribution on autonomy and 
community, she analyzed rich data from gaming sessions, stimulated recall, focus group discussion, 
individual interviews, and online discussion forums. Allen, Crossley, Snow, and McNamara (2014) 
presented an intelligent tutoring system that provides students with explicit writing strategy instruction 
and practice, including a suite of educational games. They posited game enjoyment as key to engagement. 
Similarly, Thorne, Black, and Sykes (2009) revealed how freely chosen digital engagement in out-of-
school settings, specifically, in Internet interest communities such as fan fiction sites, and in virtual 
environments and online games, allows for language socialization and sophisticated communicative 
practices. 
Finally, when using technology as a tool or medium for SLA, research on individual differences and 
learner variables has indicated, for example, that not only can communication technologies increase direct 
access to language and literacy among deaf individuals, but that deaf adolescents who emailed or chatted 
more frequently exhibited higher reading comprehension skills in subsequent years (Garberoglio, 
Dickson, Cawthon, & Bond, 2015). Research by Plass, Chun, Leutner, and Mayer (1998) discussed how 
multimedia learning tools can accommodate visualizer-verbalizer differences. 
Appendix B shows examples of specific SLA outcomes, the technologies that were used in the research, 
and sample studies. The next section discusses in greater detail the results of selected seminal studies. 
SELECTED SEMINAL STUDIES 
Based on the four-volume collection edited by Hubbard (2009) of seminal CALL studies published 
between 1988 and 2007 and on the most cited articles in the CALICO Journal and in LLT (excluding the 
ones featured in this special issue), excellent research has clearly flourished. I have taken the liberty of 
selecting a few seminal studies and meta-analyses that have caught my attention over the last 20 years. 
Dorothy Chun Technology in SLA Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 103 
These studies are by no means an exhaustive or comprehensive list but each of them demonstrates a 
particular principle that I would like to highlight in this review article. 
In returning to the research agenda delineated in the inaugural issue of LLT, although technologies have 
changed, advanced, and evolved, many CALL researchers have grounded their investigations in SLA 
theories, with the interaction approach favored by Chapelle (1997) being one of the most commonly 
employed with a variety of research methodologies. For example, the study by Smith (2003) was 
grounded in the interaction approach. He found negotiation patterns in his CMC study that were similar to 
those observed in FTF communication (as in the model from Varonis & Gass, 1985). But he proposed 
that the model be expanded in order to be able to allow for a delay—sometimes a long delay—between 
the initial trigger and the indicator. This seminal study suggested that in CMC, turn-taking is different in 
that turns are not always adjacent to each other as they are in FTF conversation. 
Multimedia learning has been a widely researched area, often following cognitive theories of learning 
with verbal and visual modalities (Chun & Plass, 1997). Many studies (e.g., Yoshii, 2006) showed that 
input in multiple modalities improved vocabulary acquisition while reading. Sydorenko (2010) examined 
the effect of input modality (video, audio, and captions) on vocabulary learning while listening, finding 
that the two groups that saw video accompanied by either audio + captions or captions alone learned more 
words than the group that only saw video with audio, but had no captions. However, the non-captioned 
video tended to improve listening comprehension. Similarly, Winke, Gass, and Sydorenko (2010) studied 
the effects of captioning during video-based listening activities for L2 learners of four different language 
and also found captioning to be more effective than no captioning. 
In researching the use of multimedia for pronunciation training, Hardison (2004) conducted experiments 
using a pretest–posttest design to determine whether computer-based training that permits visual displays 
of pitch contours in real time would help in the acquisition of French prosody by American speakers. She 
supplemented the quantitative results with qualitative results of anonymous learner questionnaires, and 
both convincingly indicated the effectiveness of computer-assisted speech training. 
In line with Ortega’s (1997) proposal to research interlanguage produced over time and the interactional 
features of (text-based) CACD discourse that are relevant in SLA processes, Abrams (2003) studied the 
effect of SCMC and ACMC on oral performance, measuring lexical richness and diversity, syntactic 
complexity, and the number of idea units and words produced by L2 learners, finding that the SCMC 
group produced a greater increase in quantity of language than the ACMC and the control groups. 
However, in terms of quality of language, there were no significant differences among the three groups 
either lexically or syntactically. This study is notable because it represents CALL results that do not 
always demonstrate the superiority of technology-based tools but rather show that CALL is as good as 
(and in some ways better or worse) than “traditional” pedagogical mediators. 
Newer technologies such as audio- and video-CMC have also been studied. Yanguas (2010) explored 
task-based, synchronous CMC and found that oral CMC groups do negotiate for meaning when speakers 
do not understand each other. However, there were differences in the way audio and video groups carried 
out the negotiations, due mainly to the lack of visual contact in the audio group. In addition, oral CMC 
turn-taking patterns were shown to be very similar to FTF patterns but opposite to those found in written 
SCMC. 
An example of a study from a sociocultural perspective is one by Elola and Oskoz (2010) on collaborative 
writing in wikis and chats. Analysis of their data revealed that although statistically significant differences 
were not evident in terms of fluency, accuracy, and complexity when comparing individual and 
collaborative assignments, there were trends in how learners interacted while using the social tools of 
Dorothy Chun Technology in SLA Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 104 
wikis and chats. 
Seminal studies on telecollaboration include those of Belz (2003) and O’Dowd (2003). Belz (2003) 
employed a case study approach to study linguistic perspectives on the development of intercultural 
competence in telecollaboration. Like many others, she based her analyses on Byram’s (1997) model of 
intercultural communicative competence (ICC), examining the key moments in a seven-week email 
correspondence between German and American learners. In particular, she analyzed the linguistic features 
and patterns with respect to learner behaviors that Byram associates with the attitudes component of his 
model of ICC. In reporting on a year-long email exchange between Spanish and English university 
language learners, O’Dowd (2003) used qualitative methods to identify key characteristics of the 
exchanges that helped to develop learners’ ICC. A variety of ethnographic techniques were used, such as 
participant observation, reviewing actual email data as well as emails from students containing feedback 
on the exchange, questionnaires and interviews with students, a researcher’s reflexive journal, and 
feedback from a partner teacher. 
A longitudinal study of L2 pragmatic development in study abroad by Shively (2011) is noteworthy 
because it employed technology and allowed a methodology beyond the traditional discourse completion 
tasks or role plays, typical of earlier pragmatics research. Participants in the study made naturalistic audio 
recordings of themselves as they visited shops, banks and other establishments and interacted with the 
native speakers. The data showed that students’ pragmatic choices shifted over time, in part due to the 
process of language socialization and in part to explicit pragmatics instruction. 
In summary, CALL research has expanded to include intercultural awareness and pragmatics learning in 
addition to the focus on linguistic interaction and development. The field is moving in the direction of 
considering language and culture learning in their broadest conception, namely as part of digital literacies 
or multiliteracies (Chun, Kern, & Smith, 2015; Hafner, Chik, & Jones, 2015; Kern, Ware, & Warschauer, 
2004). 
META-ANALYSES AND META-SYNTHESES 
One indication that a research area has arrived at a critical mass is that meta-analyses are conducted in 
order to look systematically at studies, identify patterns among the study results, and develop a more 
conclusive estimate of the magnitude of the effect of a particular variable. To date, a variety of meta-
analyses have been conducted for CALL research. For example, Grgurović, Chapelle, and Shelley (2013) 
considered empirical research for a 36-year period from 1970-2006 on the effectiveness of pedagogies 
supported with technology for language outcomes versus pedagogies not supported with technology. In 
order to be included in their meta-analysis, studies had to measure performance on language tests, use an 
experimental or quasi-experimental design, and employ a pretest-posttest design or posttest design only. 
Overall results favored the technology-supported pedagogy, with a small but positive effect size. In other 
words, L2 instruction supported by technology was at least as effective as instruction without technology. 
Felix (2008) reported on substantial data drawn from extensive studies of CALL effectiveness covering 
the period 1981-2005. She found that there was too much variety in terms of variables, settings, methods 
and technologies used to be able to ascertain overall effect sizes, but narrative reviews supported the 
findings that on the whole, there are positive effects of the use of technology in L1 and L2 learning. 
Specifically, technologies have the potential to engage students and create opportunities. Dedicated 
programs, such as glossing and visual annotations for word-learning, have been shown to be useful. 
Additionally, multimedia appeals to different learning styles, and “the use of technologies can have a 
positive effect on student attitudes and participation (although not reflected in higher achievement)” (p. 
154). With regard to L2 writing, a positive impact on revision strategies was found, as well as the ability 
to switch between formal and informal language. On the negative side are concerns about technical 
Dorothy Chun Technology in SLA Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 105 
difficulties interfering with the learning process and the need for training in computer literacy for both 
students and teachers. 
Similar to Felix’s (2008) finding that glossing and visual annotations for L2 word learning are effective, 
Abraham (2008) determined in his meta-analysis that computer-mediated glosses had an overall medium 
effect on L2 reading comprehension and a large effect on incidental vocabulary learning. A meta-analysis 
by Yun (2011) found that text + visual hypertext glosses were moderately effective for L2 vocabulary 
acquisition when learners were assigned to text-only or text + visual hypertext glosses. In addition, 
multiple hypertext glosses are more helpful for vocabulary learning for beginning learners than for other 
proficiency levels. Other meta-analyses of the effect of glossing on reading comprehension revealed that 
computer-provided L1 glosses helped learners comprehend significantly more text than paper-based 
glossing aids, with a large average weighted effect size (Taylor, 2006, 2009). 
In a meta-analysis of studies published between 1990 and 2012 of the effects of text-based SCMC on 
SLA, Lin, Huang, and Liou (2013) found a small but positive effect, indicating that text-based SCMC 
could be more effective for SLA than other means of communication. In addition, their findings 
suggested that intermediate learners might benefit from SCMC tasks if they are grouped in small groups 
or pairs and engage in weekly interactions. The meta-analyses of Lin (2014) and Lin (2015) also 
concerned CMC and SLA. The 2014 analysis of studies between 2000 and 2012 found a medium effect of 
CMC on SLA over FTF or no communication. Two variables were not found to be significant 
moderators: CMC mode (asynchronous vs. synchronous) and CMC modality (text-based vs. voice-based). 
The 2015 meta-synthesis reported on 59 studies between 2000 and 2012 and showed (a) a positive and 
medium overall effect for CMC when used for instructional purposes in SLA, (b) the largest effect for 
writing skills among the four language skills, and (c) smaller group studies produced a larger effect size 
than those using larger groups or no groups. 
Sauro (2011) reported on a meta-synthesis of SCMC for SLA, operationalizing SLA as the development 
of Canale and Swain’s (1980) four types of communicative competence. She found that 48 of 97 studies 
explored grammatical competence. Strategic competence was the next most investigated (31 studies), 
while 22 studies were performed on sociocultural competence and only 11 on discourse competence. She 
also noted that most of these studies were in response to Chapelle’s (1997) advice to evaluate the quality 
of language and the effect of CALL on language learning. 
However, a critical question can be posed: What counts as speaking and what counts as writing? In 
today’s world, so much communication is done via writing, typing, and texting rather than speaking that 
the lines between writing and speaking are becoming blurred. Chapelle (2009) proposed that use of 
technology changes the nature of communicative competence theory: 
Because learners communicate through technology, communicative competence needs to include 
the ability to communicate using readily accessible L2 technology aids (such as online bilingual 
dictionaries and tools that check grammar), the ability to make appropriate linguistic choices in 
face-to-face, remote, written, and oral modes, and the ability to choose appropriate technologies 
for communication and language learning. (p. 750) 
The question SLA researchers must ask is how learners’ access to new forms of input and new forms of 
CMC affect acquisition. 
Finally, in a meta-analysis of research on computerized games and simulations in CALL, Peterson (2010) 
examined the underlying psycholinguistic and sociocultural constructs for using games and simulations 
for language learning in seven influential studies. Key findings of the studies included extensive target 
language (TL) use and collaborative TL dialogue, frequent instances of negotiation of meaning, and the 
forming of collaborative social relationships, all conducive to second language learning. 
Dorothy Chun Technology in SLA Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 106 
FUTURE AREAS FOR RESEARCH ON TECHNOLOGY AND SLA 
In looking backwards, we see that technology has both enabled SLA research and enhanced L2 learning 
and teaching using a variety of theoretical and methodological approaches. In looking forwards, I propose 
adding a fourth stage to Warschauer’s (2004) three stages of CALL (p. 22). 
Table 1. Stages of CALL 
Stage 1970s-1980s: 
Structural CALL 
1980s-1990s: 
Communicative 
CALL 
2000s 
Integrative CALL 
2010s 
Ecological CALL 
Technology Mainframe PCs Multimedia and 
Internet 
Mobile and 
wearable devices 
English 
teaching 
paradigm 
Grammar 
translation and 
audiolingual 
Communicative 
language teaching 
Content-based, 
English for Specific 
Purposes/English for 
Academic Purposes 
Digital literacies, 
multiliteracies 
View of 
language 
Structural 
(a formal 
structural system) 
Cognitive 
(a mentally 
constructed system) 
Sociocognitive 
(developed in social 
interaction) 
Symbolic and 
intercultural 
competence 
Principal use of 
computers 
Drill and practice Communicative 
exercises 
Authentic discourse Global 
communication 
Principal 
objective 
Accuracy Fluency Agency Identity as global 
citizens 
A suggested name for the stage is ecological CALL, reflecting ecological perspectives of SLA (e.g., 
Kramsch & Whiteside, 2008; van Lier, 2004). This more encompassing view of language acquisition goes 
beyond classroom walls, as do technologies that can be accessed anytime and anywhere (e.g., mobile and 
wearable devices such as glasses and watches). In addition, suggestions to look beyond traditional 
definitions of literacy and to have as a goal digital literacies or multiliteracies (plural) abound (e.g., Kern, 
2015, Lankshear & Knobel, 2011). The scope of language learning is also being extended beyond 
communicative competence. As one of the leading SLA scholars, Kramsch (2011, 2014) has revisited the 
notion of third place or third culture in light of global technologies and has suggested symbolic 
competence as a goal, which is “the ability not only to approximate or appropriate for oneself someone 
else’s language, but to shape the very context in which the language is learned and used” (2011, p. 664). 
Kramsch and Whiteside (2008) wrote, 
In the late modern stance offered by an ecological perspective, symbolic competence is both 
semiotic awareness (van Lier, 2004) and the ability to actively manipulate and shape one’s 
environment on multiple scales of time and space. Symbolic competence in our view adds a 
qualitative metalayer to all the uses of language studied by applied linguists, one that makes 
language variation, choice, and style central to the language learning enterprise. (p. 667) 
What this means for L2 learners, is that in addition to developing L2 grammar, vocabulary, and 
understanding pragmatics, they also need to acquire the cultural know-how for dealing with technologized 
forms of language, either as producers or interpreters of meaning. Digital technologies make possible new 
kinds of texts, allowing writing to be combined with audio, images, music and video in a single 
document. Language is now just one mode for making meaning among many others, and L2 learners must 
be able to make culturally-encoded connections between forms, contexts, and meaning in a variety of 
Dorothy Chun Technology in SLA Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 107 
mediums. 
The landscape of multimodal technologies and digital literacies is constantly changing and evolving. In 
the last 20 years, LLT has published three special issues on the topic: “literacies and technologies” (2000), 
“electronic literacies” (2006), and “digital literacies” (2015). In the introduction to their special issue on 
“digital literacies and language learning,” Hafner, Chik, and Jones (2015, p. 1) “argue that what it means 
to learn a language—the kinds of skills and social practices that one must develop in order to be a 
productive member of civic society—has also shifted” and that two main research notions addressed in 
their special issue are (a) that new modes of reading, writing, and communication create new needs of 
language learners and (b) that globalized online spaces create new, multilingual contexts within which L2 
learners can autonomously capitalize on learning opportunities. These issues go hand-in-hand with the 
need to research 21st century language learning, the development of symbolic competence, and becoming 
global citizens beyond the classroom. 
As Bax (2003, 2011) has proposed for CALL, I suggest that both the fields of CALL and SLA are moving 
in the direction of so-called normalization. Normalization for CALL refers to a state where technology is 
fully integrated into second language teaching and learning and is no longer special or unusual, in the way 
that books, pencils, and blackboards were in traditional classrooms. Similarly for SLA, as so much of 
instruction as well as everyday life is being supplemented, changed, and augmented by technology, both 
SLA research and the process of SLA will continue to be supported by technology. For example, at a 
recent international CALL conference where the theme was task-based language teaching and learning 
(TBLT), Van den Branden (2015) noted how much tasks and technology go (seamlessly) together: what a 
learner is supposed to be able to do with language today has direct relevance to our 21st century world of 
technology. The volume edited by González-Lloret and Ortega (2014), Technology-mediated TBLT, is a 
case in point, and as in everyday life, where we are faced with a whole new set of real world tasks (e.g., 
sending email request, complaints, and refusals), L2 learners will also need to acquire the functional 
linguistic and intercultural skills to carry out communicative actions and interactions in the L2. 
In addition, both SLA and CALL research has repeatedly touted the benefits of feedback, both implicit 
and explicit, and technologies are ideal mediators to provide intelligent and meaningful feedback (e.g., 
ICALL). Learning analytics, which is an educational pursuit into data science, can also be explored; it is 
“a process of gathering and analyzing large amounts of detail about individual student interactions in 
online learning activities” (New Media Consortium, 2015). This aligns with the suggestion of Chun and 
Plass (1997) that a primary research question is not whether technology-based instruction is effective, but 
rather under what conditions and for whom. The technologies for conducting learner analytics are being 
refined and may well be one of the features of so-called Web 3.0 that have been forecasted and are 
emerging, namely that Web 3.0 technologies are personal and portable, in that they are individualized by 
taking a user’s previous actions to interpret and make connections and predictions with this information. 
Finally, in contemplating the future, along with the need for more longitudinal studies, there is also a need 
for what Hubbard (2008) termed native CALL theories. In his review of 25 years of CALL theory and in a 
subsequent article (Hubbard, 2012), he pointed to an insufficiency in employing theories that do not take 
the unique properties of technology into account and called for working towards the creation of new 
theoretical domains, in particular, for CALL. This is a task still waiting to be accomplished. 
 
 
 
 
Dorothy Chun Technology in SLA Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 108 
 
APPENDIX A. SLA Theories and Constructs and Technologies to Study Them 
SLA Theory or Construct Technologies Used Sample Studies 
Interaction approach CMC Smith, 2003 
Usage-based approaches Speech and language 
technologies that provide explicit 
feedback, access to corpora and 
concordances, context-embedded 
examples for implicit learning 
Ellis & Bogart, 2007 
Skill acquisition theory HyperCard program Banzai Nagata, 1998 
Sociocultural theory Wikis, chat Elola & Oskoz, 2010 
Noticing, attention Eye-tracking; multimedia glosses Smith 2012; Yanguas, 2009 
Interlanguage CMC Blake, 2000 
Linguistic environment Audio recordings Shively, 2011 
Role of instruction Video chat Lys, 2013 
Individual differences/Learner 
variables: working memory 
Online working memory test Payne & Ross, 2005 
 
APPENDIX B. Technology as Tool or Mediator for SLA Outcomes 
Learning Outcomes Technologies Used Sample Studies 
L2 Speaking Oral chat (SCMC & ACMC); 
oral chat (SCMC) 
Abrams, 2003; Payne & Ross, 
2005 
L2 Listening Subtitles & transcripts; video 
captioning 
Grgurović & Hegelheimer, 
2007; Sydorenko, 2010 
L2 Reading Hypermedia programs Al-Seghayer, 2001; Yanguas, 
2009 
L2 Writing Writing Pal (ITS + games); wikis 
& chats 
Allen et al., 2014; Elola & 
Oskoz, 2010 
L2 Pronunciation Computerized speech lab, CSL + 
web-based annotation tool with 
video; signal/speech processing 
Hardison, 2004; Warren et al., 
2009 
L2 Vocabulary Computers, mobile phones; 
video, audio, captions; Internet 
reading program 
Stockwell, 2010; Winke, Gass, 
& Sydorenko, 2010; Yoshii, 
2006 
L2 Grammar ICALL + corpus analysis; wikis Cowan et al., 2014; Kessler, 
2009 
Dorothy Chun Technology in SLA Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 109 
L2 Pragmatics Email; audio recordings Biesenbach-Lucas, 2007; 
Shively, 2011 
L2 Testing/Assessment Automated scoring for speech; 
state of the art of CALT 
Crossley & McNamara, 2013; 
Suvorov & Hegelheimer, 2013 
Intercultural Competence Forums; corpora-based e-
referencing tools 
Furstenberg et al., 2001; Liaw, 
2006 
Multiliteracies Multimedia CD-ROM, chat; 
Facebook, YouTube comments, 
Wikipedia writing 
Kramsch et al., 2000; Hafner et 
al., 2015 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Dorothy M. Chun is Professor of Applied Linguistics and Education at the University of California, Santa 
Barbara. Her research areas include L2 phonology and intonation, L2 reading and vocabulary acquisition, 
computer-assisted language learning, and telecollaboration for intercultural learning. 
E-mail: dchun@education.ucsb.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Abraham, L. B. (2008). Computer-mediated glosses in second language reading comprehension and 
vocabulary learning: A meta-analysis. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(3), 199–226. 
Abrams, Z. I. (2003). The effect of synchronous and asynchronous CMC on oral performance in German. 
Modern Language Journal, 87(2), 157–167. 
Al-Seghayer, K. (2001). The effect of multimedia annotation modes on L2 vocabulary acquisition: A 
comparative study. Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 202–232. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num1/alseghayer/ 
Allen, L. K., Crossley, S. A., Snow, E. L., & McNamara, D. S. (2014). L2 writing practice: Game 
enjoyment as a key to engagement. Language Learning & Technology, 18(2), 124–150. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/allenetal.pdf 
Bax, S. (2003). CALL—past, present and future. System, 31(1), 13–28. 
Bax, S. (2011). Normalisation revisited: The effective use of technology in language education. 
International Journal of Computer-Assisted Language Learning and Teaching, 1(2), 1–15. 
Belz, J. A. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning & 
Technology, 6(1), 60–81. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/belz/ 
Belz, J. A. (2003). Linguistic perspectives on the development of intercultural competence in 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 68–99. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/belz/ 
Biesenbach-Lucas, S. (2007). Students writing emails to faculty: An examination of e-politeness among 
native and non-native speakers of English. Language Learning & Technology, 11(2), 59–81. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num2/biesenbachlucas/ 
 
Dorothy Chun Technology in SLA Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 110 
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language 
Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120–136. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/blake/ 
Blyth, C. (2014). Exploring the affordances of digital social reading for L2 literacy: The case of eComma. 
In J. P. Guikema & L. Williams (Eds.), Digital literacies in foreign and second language education (pp. 
201–226). San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Bower, J., & Kawaguchi, S. (2011). Negotiation of meaning and corrective feedback in Japanese/English 
eTandem. Language Learning & Technology, 15(1), 41–71. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/bowerkawaguchi.pdf 
Brown, J. D. (1997). Computers in language testing: Present research and some future directions. 
Language Learning & Technology, 1(1), 44–59. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/brown/ 
Byram, M. (1997). Teaching and assessing intercultural communicative competence. Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters. 
Canale, M., & Swain, M. (1980). Theoretical bases of communicative approaches to second language 
teaching and testing. Applied Linguistics, 1(1), 1–47. 
Chambers, A. (2005). Integrating corpus consultation in language studies. Language Learning & 
Technology, 9(2), 111–125. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num2/chambers/ 
Chapelle, C. (1997). CALL in the year 2000: Still in search of research paradigms? Language Learning & 
Technology, 1(1), 19–43. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/chapelle/ 
Chapelle, C. (2009). The relationship between second language acquisition theory and computer-assisted 
language learning. Modern Language Journal, 93(S1), 741–753. 
Chik, A. (2014). Digital gaming and language learning: Autonomy and community. Language Learning 
& Technology, 18(2), 85–100. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/chik.pdf 
Chun, D. M. (1994). Using computer networking to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence. 
System, 22(1), 17–31. 
Chun, D. M. (Ed.). (2014). Cultura-inspired intercultural exchanges: Focus on Asian and Pacific 
languages. Honolulu, HI: National Foreign Language Resource Center. 
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1996). Effects of multimedia annotations on vocabulary acquisition. Modern 
Language Journal, 80(2), 183.  
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1997). Research on text comprehension in multimedia environments. 
Language Learning & Technology, 1(1), 60–81. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/chun_plass/ 
Chun, D. M., Kern, R., & Smith, B. (2016). Technology in language use, language teaching, and language 
learning. Modern Language Journal, 100(1), 64–80. 
Collentine, J. (2000). Insights into the construction of grammatical knowledge provided by user-behavior 
tracking technologies. Language Learning & Technology, 3(2), 44–57. Retrieved from 
http://www.llt.msu.edu/vol3num2/collentine/ 
Cowan, R., Choo, J., & Lee, G. S. (2014). ICAL for improving Korean L2 writers’ ability to edit 
grammatical errors. Language Learning & Technology, 18(3), 193–207. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/cowanchoolee.pdf 
Crossley, S., & McNamara, D. (2013). Applications of text analysis tools for spoken response grading. 
Language Learning & Technology, 17(2), 171–192. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/crossleymcnamara.pdf 
Dorothy Chun Technology in SLA Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 111 
Ellis, N. C., & Bogart, P. S. (2007). Speech and language technology in education: the perspective from 
SLA research and practice. In SLaTE, Proceedings of the SLaTE Workshop on Speech and Language 
Technology in Education (pp. 1–8). Farmington, PA: Carnegie Mellon University and ISCA Archive. 
Elola, I., & Oskoz, A. (2010). Collaborative writing: Fostering foreign language and writing conventions 
development. Language Learning & Technology, 14(3), 51–71. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2010/elolaoskoz.pdf 
Felix, U. (2008). The unreasonable effectiveness of CALL: What have we learned in two decades of 
research? ReCALL, 20(2), 141–161. 
Furstenberg, G., Levet, S., English, K., & Maillet, K. (2001). Giving a virtual voice to the silent language 
of culture: The Cultura project. Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 55–102. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num1/furstenberg/ 
Garberoglio, C. L., Dickson, D., Cawthon, S., & Bond, M. (2015). Bridging the communication divide: 
CMC and deaf individuals’ literacy skills. Language Learning & Technology, 19(2), 118–133. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2015/garberoglioetal.pdf 
Golonka, E. M., Bowles, A. R., Frank, V. M., Richardson, D. L., & Freynik, S. (2014). Technologies for 
foreign language learning: A review of technology types and their effectiveness. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 27(1), 70–105. 
González-Lloret, M., & Ortega, L. (Eds.). (2014). Technology-mediated TBLT: Researching technology 
and tasks. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Grgurović, M., & Hegelheimer, V. (2007). Help options and multimedia listening: Students’ use of 
subtitles and the transcript. Language Learning & Technology, 11(1), 45–66. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num1/pdf/grgurovic.pdf 
Grgurović, M., Chapelle, C., & Shelley, M. C. (2013). A meta-analysis of effectiveness studies on 
computer technology-supported language learning. ReCALL, 25(02), 165–198. 
Groot, P. (2000). Computer assisted second language vocabulary acquisition. Language Learning & 
Technology, 4(1), 60–81. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/groot/ 
Hafner, C. A., Chik, A., & Jones, R. H. (2015). Digital literacies and language learning. Language 
Learning & Technology, 19(3), 1–7. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2015/commentary.pdf 
Hardison, D. M. (2004). Generalization of computer-assisted prosody training: Quantitative and 
qualitative findings. Language Learning & Technology, 8(1), 34–52. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num1/hardison/ 
Heift, T. (2002). Learner control and error correction in ICALL: Browsers, peekers, and adamants. 
CALICO Journal, 19(3), 295–313. 
Heift, T. (2010). Prompting in CALL: A longitudinal study of learner uptake. Modern Language Journal, 
94(2), 198–216. 
Hirata, Y. (2004). Computer assisted pronunciation training for native English speakers learning Japanese 
pitch and durational contrasts. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 17(3-4), 357–376. 
Hubbard, P. (2008). Twenty-five years of theory in the CALICO Journal. CALICO Journal, 25(3), 
387–399. 
Hubbard, P. (Ed.). (2009). Computer assisted language learning: Critical concepts in linguistics (Vol. 1–
4). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Dorothy Chun Technology in SLA Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 112 
Hubbard, P. (2012). Exploring the impact of technology implementations on theories and models of 
language learning. In J. Burston, D. Tsagari, & F. Doa (Eds.), Foreign language instructional technology: 
Theory and practice. Nicosia, Cyprus: University of Cyprus Press. 
Jalkanen, J., & Vaarala, H. (2013). Digital texts for learning Finnish: Shared resources and emerging 
practices. Language Learning & Technology, 17(1), 107–124. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2013/jalkanenvaarala.pdf 
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity and 
characteristics of language production. Modern Language Journal, 79(4), 457–476. 
Kern, R. (2015). Language, literacy, and technology. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Kern, R., Ware, P., & Warschauer, M. (2004). Crossing frontiers: New directions in online pedagogy and 
research. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 24, 243–260. 
Kessler, G. (2009). Student-initiated attention to form in wiki-based collaborative writing. Language 
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 79–95. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/kessler.pdf 
Kessler, G., Bikowski, D., & Boggs, J. (2012). Collaborative writing among second language learners in 
academic web-based projects. Language Learning & Technology, 16(1), 91–109. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/kesslerbikowskiboggs.pdf 
Klimanova, L., & Dembovskaya, S. (2013). L2 identity, discourse, and social networking in Russian. 
Language Learning & Technology, 17(1), 69–88. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2013/klimanovadembovskaya.pdf 
Kramsch, C. (2011). The symbolic dimensions of the intercultural. Language Teaching, 44(3), 354–367. 
Kramsch, C. (2014). Teaching foreign languages in an era of globalization: Introduction. Modern 
Language Journal, 98(1), 296–311. 
Kramsch, C., & Whiteside, A. (2008). Language ecology in multilingual settings: Towards a theory of 
symbolic competence. Applied Linguistics, 29(4), 645–671. 
Kramsch, C., A’Ness, F., & Lam, W. S. E. (2000). Authenticity and authorship in the computer-mediated 
acquisition of L2 literacy. Language Learning & Technology, 4(2), 78–104. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/kramsch/ 
Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (2011). New literacies (3rd ed.). Berkshire, England: Open University 
Press. 
Laufer, B., & Hill, M. (2000). What lexical information do L2 learners select in a CALL dictionary and 
how does it affect word retention? Language Learning & Technology, 3(2), 58–76. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num2/laufer-hill/ 
Lavolette, E., Polio, C., & Kahng, J. (2014). The accuracy of computer-assisted feedback and students’ 
responses to it. Language Learning & Technology, 19(2), 50–68. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2015/lavolettepoliokahng.pdf 
Lee, L. (2008). Focus-on-form through collaborative scaffolding in expert-to-novice online interaction. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(3), 53–72. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/lee.pdf 
Li, Z., & Hegelheimer, V. (2013). Mobile-assisted grammar exercises: Effects on self-editing in L2 
writing. Language Learning & Technology, 17(3), 135–156. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2013/lihegelheimer.pdf 
Liaw, M. (2006). E-learning and the development of intercultural competence. Language Learning & 
Technology, 10(3), 49–64. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num3/liaw/ 
Dorothy Chun Technology in SLA Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 113 
Lin, H. (2014). Establishing an empirical link between computer-mediated communication (CMC) and 
SLA: A meta-analysis of the research. Language Learning & Technology, 18(3), 120–147. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/lin.pdf 
Lin, H. (2015). A meta-synthesis of empirical research on the effectiveness of computer-mediated 
communication (CMC) in SLA. Language Learning & Technology, 19(2), 85–117. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2015/lin.pdf 
Lin, W.-C., Huang, H.-T., & Liou, H.-C. (2013). The effects of text-based SCMC on SLA: A meta 
analysis. Language Learning & Technology, 17(2), 123–142. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/linetal.pdf 
Lomicka, L. (1998). “To gloss or not to gloss”: An investigation of reading comprehension online. 
Language Learning & Technology, 1(2), 41–50. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num2/article2/ 
Lys, F. (2013). The development of advanced learner oral proficiency using iPads. Language Learning & 
Technology, 17(3), 94–116. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2013/lys.pdf 
McBride, K. (2011). The effect of rate of speech and distributed practice on the development of listening 
comprehension. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 24(2), 131–154. 
Nagata, N. (1998). Input vs. output practice in educational software for second language acquisition. 
Language Learning & Technology, 1(2), 23–40. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num2/article1/ 
New Media Consortium. (2015). NMC Horizon Report: 2015 Higher Education Edition. (2015). Austin 
TX: New Media Consortium. 
O’Dowd, R. (2003). Understanding the “other side”: Intercultural learning in a Spanish-English e-mail 
exchange. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 118–144. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/odowd/ 
Olson, D. J. (2014). Benefits of visual feedback on segmental production in the L2 classroom. Language 
Learning & Technology, 18(3), 173–192. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2014/olson.pdf 
Ortega, L. (1997). Processes and outcomes in networked classroom interaction: Defining the research 
agenda for L2 computer-assisted classroom discussion. Language Learning & Technology, 1(1), 82–93. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/ortega/ 
Park, K., & Kinginger, C. (2010). Writing/thinking in real time: Digital video and corpus query analysis. 
Language Learning & Technology, 14(3), 31–50. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2010/parkkinginger.pdf 
Pasfield-Neofitou, S. (2011). Online domains of language use: Second language learners’ experiences of 
virtual community and foreignness. Language Learning & Technology, 15(2), 92–108. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/pasfieldneofitou.pdf 
Payne, J. S., & Ross, B. M. (2005). Synchronous CMC, working memory, and L2 oral proficiency 
development. Language Learning & Technology, 9(3), 35–54. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/payne/ 
Peterson, M. (2010). Computerized games and simulations in computer-assisted language learning: A 
meta-analysis of research. Simulation & Gaming, 41(1), 72–93. 
Plass, J. L., Chun, D. M., Mayer, R. E., & Leutner, D. (1998). Supporting visual and verbal learning 
preferences in a second-language multimedia learning environment. Journal of Educational Psychology, 
90(1), 25–36. 
 
Dorothy Chun Technology in SLA Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 114 
Reinhardt, J., & Sykes, J. (2014). Digital game and play activity in L2 teaching and learning. Language 
Learning & Technology, 18(2), 2–8. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/commentary.pdf 
Sauro, S. (2011). SCMC for SLA: A research synthesis. CALICO Journal, 28(2), 369–391. 
Sauro, S. (2012). L2 performance in text-chat and spoken discourse. System, 40(3), 335–348. 
Sauro, S., & Smith, B. (2010). Investigating L2 performance in text chat. Applied Linguistics, 31(4), 
554–577. 
Shively, R. L. (2011). L2 pragmatic development in study abroad: A longitudinal study of Spanish service 
encounters. Journal of Pragmatics, 43(6), 1818–1835. 
Smith, B. (2003). Computer–mediated negotiated interaction: An expanded model. Modern Language 
Journal, 87(1), 38–57. 
Smith, B. (2008). Methodological hurdles in capturing CMC data: The case of the missing self-repair. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(1), 85–103. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/pdf/smith.pdf 
Smith, B. (2012). Eye tracking as a measure of noticing: A study of explicit recasts in SCMC. Language 
Learning & Technology, 16(3), 53–81. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2012/smith.pdf 
Sotillo, S. M. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous 
communication. Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 82–119. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/sotillo/ 
Stockwell, G. (2010). Using mobile phones for vocabulary activities: Examining the effect of the 
platform. Language Learning & Technology, 14(2), 95–110. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num2/stockwell.pdf 
Suvorov, R., & Hegelheimer, V. (2013). Computer-assisted language testing. In A. J. Kunnan (Ed.), The 
companion to language assessment (pp. 594–613). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 
Sydorenko, T. (2010). Modality of input and vocabulary acquisition. Language Learning & Technology, 
14(2), 50–73. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num2/sydorenko.pdf 
Taylor, A. (2006). The effects of CALL versus traditional L1 glosses on L2 reading comprehension. 
CALICO Journal, 23(2), 309–318. 
Taylor, A. (2009). CALL-based versus paper-based glosses: Is there a difference in reading 
comprehension? CALICO Journal, 27(1), 147–160. 
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38–67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/thorne/ 
Thorne, S. L., Black, R. W., & Sykes, J. M. (2009). Second language use, socialization, and learning in 
Internet interest communities and online gaming. Modern Language Journal, 93(S1), 802–821. 
Toyoda, E., & Harrison, R. (2002). Categorization of text chat communication between learners and 
native speakers of Japanese. Language Learning & Technology, 6(1), 82–99. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/pdf/toyoda.pdf 
Van den Branden, K. (2015). What can CALL learn from TBLT? Paper presented at the XVIIth 
International CALL Research Conference, Tarragona, Spain. 
Van Lier, L. (2004). The ecology and semiotics of language learning: a sociocultural perspective. 
Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic. 
 
Dorothy Chun Technology in SLA Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 115 
VanPatten, B., & Williams, J. (Eds.). (2015). Theories in second language acquisition: An introduction 
(2nd ed.). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Varonis, E. M., & Gass, S. M. (1985). Non-native/non-native conversations: A model for negotiation of 
meaning. Applied Linguistics, 6, 71–90. 
Ware, P. (2005). “Missed” communication in online communication: Tensions in a German-American 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 9(2), 64–89. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num2/ware/ 
Ware, P. D., & O’Dowd, R. (2008). Peer feedback on language form in telecollaboration. Language 
Learning & Technology, 12(1), 43–63. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/pdf/wareodowd.pdf 
Warren, P., Elgort, I., & Crabbe, D. (2009). Comprehensibility and prosody ratings for pronunciation 
software development. Language Learning & Technology, 13(3), 87–102. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num3/warrenelgortcrabbe.pdf 
Warschauer, M. (1996). Comparing face-to-face and electronic discussion in the second language 
classroom. CALICO Journal, 13(2), 7–26. 
Warschauer, M. (2004). Technological change and the future of CALL. In S. Fotos & C. Brown (Eds.), 
New perspectives on CALL for second language classrooms. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Winke, P., Gass, S., & Sydorenko, T. (2010). The effects of captioning videos used for foreign language 
listening activities. Language Learning & Technology, 14(1), 65–86. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num1/winkegasssydorenko.pdf 
Yanguas, I. (2009). Multimedia glosses and their effect on L2 text comprehension and vocabulary 
learning. Language Learning & Technology, 13(2), 48–67. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num2/yanguas.pdf 
Yanguas, I. (2010). Oral computer-mediated interaction between L2 learners: It’s about time. Language 
Learning & Technology, 14(3), 72–93. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2010/yanguas.pdf 
Yoon, H., & Jo, J. W. (2014). Direct and indirect access to corpora: An exploratory case study comparing 
students’ error correction and learning strategy use in L2 writing. Language Learning & Technology, 
18(1), 96–117. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/yoonjo.pdf 
Yoshii, M. (2006). L1 and L2 glosses: Their effects on incidental vocabulary learning. Language 
Learning & Technology, 10(3), 85–101. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num3/yoshii/ 
Yun, J. (2011). The effects of hypertext glosses on L2 vocabulary acquisition: A meta-analysis. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 24(1), 39–58. 
