Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/emerging.pdf 
February 2016, Volume 20, Number 1 
pp. 1–20 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES 
INTEGRATING TECHNOLOGY INTO STUDY ABROAD 
Robert Godwin-Jones, Virginia Commonwealth University 
APA Citation: Godwin-Jones, R. (2016). Integrating Technology into Study Abroad. 
Language Learning & Technology 20(1), 1–20. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/emerging.pdf 
Copyright: © Robert Godwin-Jones 
INTRODUCTION 
"Ready access to travel and to technology‐enhanced social networking (e.g., Facebook or Skype) has 
changed the nature of study abroad to the point where today’s experiences are fundamentally different 
from those of earlier eras" (Kinginger, 2013a, p. 345). In addition to more travel options and greater 
technology availability, study abroad has changed in other significant ways. In the US, more students are 
going abroad for short-term programs (less than 8 weeks), and the participants represent more diverse 
academic fields, with an increasing number of students from the sciences, social sciences, and business-
related fields. The image of the North American student going abroad primarily for language learning, 
spending a semester or more, no longer fits reality. In fact, many students now engage in service learning, 
internships, or volunteer work while abroad. Nevertheless, study abroad remains an expected experience 
for students with a serious interest in language learning. In this column we will be looking at the varied 
roles that technology can play in the study abroad experience. Some argue that the availability of Internet-
based social media while abroad is for language learning and cross-cultural understanding at best a 
distraction and at worst an inhibitor of full engagement in the target culture, inevitably leading to less 
exposure to the target language and therefore fewer opportunities for language proficiency gains. I will be 
arguing that, in fact, technology can play a positive role, particularly if students are provided with 
appropriate guidance and support. The main areas to be discussed are the personal and learning benefits 
of technology use while abroad, the formation of second-language identities, the affordances for 
pragmatic language development, the integration of mobile devices for place-based language learning, 
and the opportunities for enhancement of intercultural communication competence. 
STAYING CONNECTED 
It is not difficult to find numerous warnings for students going abroad about the downsides of remaining 
digitally connected, with articles such as “How the Internet screwed up study abroad” (Roberts, 2010) or 
“Benefits of study abroad WITHOUT technology” (Lee, 2015). National Public Radio in the US recently 
ran a story on how “Tech may get in the way of good culture shock while studying abroad” (Keck, 2015). 
In that report, a US student studying in Brazil described the epiphany she had when her phone (used for 
Internet connections) broke: “Without my phone I would just stay downstairs and talk with my [host] 
family. And it was like…it was great.” In a piece in the Chronicle of Higher Education, “How Facebook 
can ruin study abroad”, Robert Huesca (2013) recommends a media pledge for study abroad programs, 
similar to the pledge students often take to use the target language exclusively. In this case, the pledge 
would be not to use their digital music libraries, stream home television shows, or use instant messaging. 
Study abroad guidebooks frequently issue recommendations to students that they minimize their use of 
the Internet and mobile devices (Doerr, 2012). At least one study abroad provider, Carpe Diem Education, 
prohibits students from bringing cell phones on study abroad programs. 
While recent studies on study abroad and language learning tend to be more nuanced in the discussion of 
technology use in study abroad, they do point to individual student experiences that seem to confirm the 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 2 
worst fears of those wanting to bridle the use of technology while abroad. Here is the profile of one 
student in a program in France (Kinginger & Belz, 2005): 
Her daily routine included attendance at required classes, after which she would go immediately 
to the study abroad center sponsored by her home university where she would stay until closing 
time, surfing the English language Internet and exchanging emails and Instant Messages with her 
friends and family in the U.S. Outside of service encounters, framed in various ways in her 
journal as threats to her well-being, she made little effort to engage speakers of French, limiting 
her use of the language to her courses. (p. 411) 
Now, 10 years after this student’s experience in 2005, there are significantly more opportunities for online 
social connections, particularly through the use of Internet-enabled mobile devices. Stewart (2010) 
described several US students in Spain skyping every day with boyfriends or girlfriends back home. In 
one case, the Skype calls were part of a pattern of lack of participation in the local community. However, 
in the other case, the student maintained the connection and communication with home, while still being 
able to integrate into the target culture. As Stewart and others have written, the extent of integration into 
the local community depends on a great variety of factors, not just the availability of online 
communication with the home culture. 
There is little disagreement that internet connections to home communities can benefit the often difficult 
social and psychological adjustment involved in living in a foreign culture. Mikal and Grace (2012) 
comment: 
Evidence showed that the Internet provided students with a broader social network that provided 
identity affirming embedded support—and increased the perception that support was available if 
needed. According to survey results, the continuity provided by a sense of connectedness and the 
consistency of online communities enhanced students’ experience by facilitating integration and 
decreasing stress. According to scales measuring the benefits of embedded and perceived support, 
students reported an increased willingness to take risks, initiated more contact with members of 
the target culture, and experienced less stress as a result of their interactions online. (p. 300) 
It stands to reason that emotionally well-adjusted students are more likely to enjoy their experience 
abroad and to be more willing to engage with the local community (see Mikal, Yang & Lewis, 2014). In 
any case, students are not likely to abandon their social networks while abroad. As is the case with mobile 
devices in the classroom, the best part of wisdom may be to take advantage of the inevitable—here 
Internet connectivity and mobile devices—to provide students with emotional stability while allowing 
them to tap in to the valuable connections the Internet can provide to the materials, institutions, and 
people of the target culture. Goertler (2015) provides examples of ways students might connect to the 
target culture through technology: 
Before the students go abroad, technology makes it possible for them to connect with the target 
community, see it, and engage with it. Students may google-earth the place they will live and 
search the Internet for available resources they might use (e.g., a local lacrosse team). Students 
can engage in online communities related to the community they will live in (e.g., Facebook 
groups, blogs, etc.). In addition, they can read the local newspapers and watch the news to know, 
what topics are important to the people in the community and learn more about their perspectives. 
(para. 7) 
The host community is likely to be as digitally engaged as the students themselves. Making connections 
electronically to that community—both at the local and national levels—can provide opportunities for 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 3 
engagement during the study abroad experience, which may hold the possibility of longer-term 
relationships through continued electronic networking.  
Nevertheless, the concern remains that “students who retain close ties with their home cultures beyond the 
initial transition abroad may fail to ever engage fully enough in the target culture to lose their own 
cultural referents” (Mikal & Grace, 2012, p. 302). The overreliance on home networks may indeed 
mitigate the value of the experience abroad as a means to gain a new perspective on one’s own cultural 
values and beliefs as well as those of people in the target culture. This makes orientation, guidance, and 
support before and during the program of great importance. The advice given needs to go beyond turning 
off cell phones, but should instead offer concrete tips on how both to maintain contacts back home and to 
engage with the host community electronically and in person. An organized study abroad program, I 
argue here, should provide mechanisms for positive technology integration, not only through effective 
orientation and counselling, but also through a dedicated shared online space. 
FORGING A SECOND LANGUAGE IDENTITY 
Study abroad has been so heavily promoted for language learning because it has “the potential to enhance 
students’ language ability in every domain” (Kinginger, 2013b, p. 4). Particular improvement is typically 
seen in the areas of oral fluency and vocabulary development (Briggs, 2015; Trentman, 2013a). Because 
the L2 is used for actual, everyday interactions with native speakers, students develop real-world 
communication skills: “Study abroad appears to be particularly useful for the development of abilities 
related to social interactions, precisely those abilities that are least amenable to classroom instruction” 
(Kinginger, 2013b, p. 4). The repeated experiences study abroad students have in daily encounters—
ordering food, going shopping, meeting strangers, solving practical day-to-day problems—provide 
opportunities for learning conversational norms and functional expressions. They likely engage daily in 
speech acts such as greetings, leave-taking, making requests, asking for help, apologizing, while at the 
same time gaining experience in circumlocution, turn-taking, and negotiating meaning. Gains in grammar 
knowledge and accuracy, in contrast, seem to be modest (Collentine, 2004; DeKeyser, 2010, Trentman, 
2013a). 
Study abroad can be such a powerful supplement to classroom instruction that any student with a major 
academic focus on language is urged to go abroad. Yet, as shown by both research and anecdotal 
information, language gains are by no means universal or automatic (Taguchi, 2015b). In fact, some 
studies have shown no gains from study abroad or even a regression in language skills for several students 
(Trentman, 2013b). The individual variation in language improvement can be a source of frustration for 
both students and teachers. Researchers too have struggled to come to terms with the lack of consistency 
in measurements of language gains through study abroad (see Stewart, 2010; Shively, 2010; Kinginger, 
2011; Trentman, 2013a). Part of the problem lies in the complexity of the experience of living and 
studying abroad, with its multifaceted social, psychological, economic, and emotional dimensions, which 
vary greatly with each program, location, and individual. The variety of perspectives, environments, and 
experiences students may encounter makes study abroad “something of a mysterious process” (Meier & 
Daniels, 2013, p. 212) or, as Stewart (2010) puts it, a “black hole” (p. 138). Outside of formal instruction 
at the institution abroad, we tend to know very little about what happens to students during their stay, in 
particular the quantity and quality of local interactions (see Trentman, 2013a). Individual variation in 
study abroad experiences and outcomes is what has led to the increasing emphasis in research on 
qualitative studies, which describe in detail individual student experiences (Stewart, 2010; van 
Compernolle & Kinginger, 2013, Müller & Schmenk, 2015, Taguchi, 2015b). 
There are a number of factors researchers have identified which may have an impact on the language 
learning gains in study abroad. These include initial level of proficiency, grammar knowledge, program 
type, duration of stay, local language variety spoken, and living situation (Trentman, 2013a). The 
individual profile of the student may have a major determining effect on local integration and hence on 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 4 
language learning. Age, racial or ethnic characteristics (Simon & Ainsworth, 2012), as well as gender 
(Pellegrino Aveni, 2005; Kinginger, 2013a) can determine to what extent and with what success students 
integrate into the target culture. Social class and economic status may be factors as well (Kinginger, 
2004). A major contributor to success or failure is motivation, or the degree to which students are 
invested in becoming part of the target linguistic and cultural community. 
However, even highly motivated students may have difficulty integrating into the local community if their 
language proficiency does not allow them to express themselves adequately. DeKeyser (2010) 
demonstrated how unproductive study abroad can be for linguistically ill-prepared students. Other 
researchers have pointed to similar findings (Vande Berg, Connor-Linton, & Paige, 2009). In some cases, 
limited proficiency stands in the way of students representing themselves adequately in the L2. Trentman 
(2013a) found that some US students in an Egyptian program prioritized speaking English, as they were 
“concerned about presenting a persona worthy of being befriended, something they could do much better 
in English than Arabic, particularly when their Arab friends were equally competent in both languages” 
(p. 466). In fact, a common theme across research of language learning and study abroad is the 
importance of reaching a particular threshold of linguistic competence in order to be able to connect to the 
target community (DeKeyser, 2010). 
Students able and willing to seek out opportunities for contact with the local community are likely to have 
a variety of experiences and reactions. Encounters with the target culture may lead to curiosity and 
acceptance but could also lead in the opposite direction, namely to anxiety, anger, and rejection. As 
personal values and norms encounter difference, a variety of reactions are possible. Some US students, 
writes Kinginger (2013a), when encountering unfamiliarity, “typically retreat into a sense of superiority” 
(p. 342). Unexpected encounters in homestays can lead to awkward and unfortunate incidents. In one 
study, five of eight students requested to be moved to different families (Stewart, 2010) and in another, a 
participant requested to move multiple times (Isabelli-García, 2006). These kinds of incidents may be 
most likely to occur if the program is of short duration, so that students do not have the time to overcome 
the initial culture shock. In other cases, the program goals and structure may be oriented towards tourism 
or the traditional “Grand Tour” of Europe, leading to a series of superficial encounters of little 
consequence (see Kinginger, 2008). 
On the other hand, encounters may lead to questioning and reflecting on one’s own values and norms, 
resulting in a willingness to craft a “third space”, representing a foreign language mediated identity 
(Kramsch, 1993; Kinginger, 2013a). Students who have the most satisfying and successful study abroad 
experience are those who engage in the target community to the extent that they take on this added 
identity (Block, 2007). This is something that is greatly facilitated through study abroad: 
In contrast to proficiency gains, which can be obtained in both at home and study abroad settings, 
developments in second language identities are also of interest, because they appear to be specific 
to study abroad, or at least to the experience of using a second language in everyday 
environments that require its use. (Benson, Barkhuizen, Bodycott, & Brown, 2012, p. 190) 
Another benefit for students of learning via everyday, lived experiences is the knowledge that they can 
learn through informal, out-of-school contexts, an important lesson for the continued maintenance of 
language proficiency in the future. 
Study abroad, as a voluntary and time-delineated enterprise, may not provide the same strong incentives 
for integration that migrants experience (Block, 2007). One of the ways to compensate for this lack of 
immediacy and necessity is to engage students through their own personal interests. In order to make 
connections with the target culture, students may seek out groups, hobbies, or sports clubs which mesh 
with their own inclinations. Studies have shown that establishing such connections makes a tremendous 
difference (Schauer, 2008; Dewey, Ring, Gardner, & Belnap, 2013; Meier & Daniels, 2013). They not 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 5 
only provide opportunities for real-world language exchange with native speakers, they also provide 
valuable cultural experiences. At least some of the local community groups or organizations are likely to 
include online communities of practice or interest. Participating in such groups can have multiple benefits 
for study abroad participants. Investigating the possibilities and making contact before the program begins 
can establish relationships which allow students an easier initial entry into the target culture (Trentman, 
2013a). Once in-country, the online participation may result in face-to-face meetings, as well as entry into 
related groups. After the program, continued participation can be instrumental in maintaining connections 
with the target culture. 
A number of studies have shown that participation in exchanges through email, forums, or chat can be 
helpful in relationship building as well as in developing cultural awareness (Thorne, 2003; Tudini, 2007; 
Zeiss & Isabelli-García, 2005). Trentman (2013a) found that having students connect in this way before 
the start of the program offered valuable opportunities for establishing contact, something study abroad 
students often find difficult: 
While communications technology is often seen as something that pulls students home from the 
study abroad environment (Kinginger, 2008), some of the most successful friendships of the 
participants’ in this study were developed through online relationships that began prior to their 
study abroad experience. Finding ways to connect students at home and abroad via technology, 
and have them engage in activities that can lead to the development of deeper relationships that 
extend beyond the study abroad sojourn is one way of countering the trend of increasingly shorter 
terms of study abroad. (p. 470) 
The kind of language encountered in online exchanges provides good preparation for the study abroad 
experience, as the colloquial register used will likely supplement the more formal language learned in the 
classroom and reflected in textbooks. Experiences of this type provide students opportunities for language 
learning in multiple ways, as well as for gaining metalinguistic awareness: “Telecollaborative exchanges 
provide a sheltered opportunity to participate in socially consequential interactions, discover the social 
significance of linguistic choices, and begin crafting an appropriate foreign-language-mediated identity” 
(Kinginger, 2011, p. 68). Studies have shown that chat and other forms of written exchange between 
learners and native speakers can promote the development of negotiating techniques for clarifying 
information, seeking confirmation, or asking questions, aspects of strategic competence that are of 
particular importance in study abroad (Tudini, 2007). 
GAINING PRAGMATIC LANGUAGE SKILLS 
A naturally occurring, real-world environment, such as study abroad, provides an obvious opportunity for 
learning to use language in social settings. Students typically engage in a variety of interactions in their 
daily life abroad: 
By experiencing diverse patterns of communication, learners develop their sociopragmatic 
sensitivity: they come to understand that their linguistic choices are guided by the contextual 
factors of the circumstances and the person to whom they are speaking, and those choices have a 
direct consequence on the outcome of the interaction and interpersonal relationship. (Taguchi, 
2015b, p. 4) 
However, studies have shown that students having studied abroad do not always outperform those who 
did not in their use of linguistically and culturally appropriate forms (Shively, 2010; Taguchi, 2015b). As 
in all study abroad outcomes, it depends on the context and the individual learner. In contrast to grammar, 
there are no clear-cut rules and patterns for learning pragmatic competence, understood here to be “the 
ability to employ different linguistic resources in an appropriate way for a given context” (Martínez-Flor 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 6 
& Usó-Juan, 2006, p. 40). Learning comes slowly, usually through repeatedly encountering the use of 
particular language patterns in speech acts (requests, apologies, etc.) or other social settings or functions. 
This is also the case in other areas, such as turn-taking, expressing politeness, or using face-saving 
strategies. In our first language, we gain pragmatic competence through socialization, not through explicit 
study. Over time, these habits and speech patterns become so automatic, that for adult L2 learners, 
interference from pragmatic patterns in the L1 is frequent. Pragmatic learning in the classroom “generally 
has a poor reputation” (Taguchi, 2015b, p. 8), as these areas of language use are generally neglected in 
favor of grammar and lexis. In addition, textbooks typically give short shrift to language pragmatics. 
In recent years, there has been a greater awareness of the importance of learning pragmatic features of 
language, especially as a consequence of the growing interest in language use online (see Sykes, Oskoz, 
& Thorne, 2008). In participating in international online communities, pragmatic appropriateness is more 
important for effective and acceptable communication than grammatical accuracy or correct word choice 
(Tudini, 2007). Studies have shown that explicit instruction in pragmatics can improve student abilities in 
this area (Cohen & Shively, 2007). A recent state-of-the-art article provides abundant confirmation of the 
utility of explicit instruction (Taguchi, 2015a). The article highlights the important role technology can 
play in this area: “Effective use of technology could increase authenticity of pragmatic language use and 
incentivize the learning of pragmatics, which is often difficult to attain in a formal instructional setting” 
(p. 43). In fact, effective application of technology in the development of awareness and skills in 
pragmatic language use before and during study abroad can make a significant difference, making it more 
likely that students will be successful in engaging with the local community. 
There is a number of ways in which technology can be used to foster learning of pragmatics. Approaches 
which provide networked access to resources are most appropriate for study abroad purposes. In a project 
involving Japanese students studying English in Australia, a commercial product (English Central) was 
used with good results. It featured videos on situations and encounters students were likely to encounter. 
Instruction in English pragmatics may be somewhat different than for most languages, as it will most 
likely not be tied to country-specific practices, given the role of English as a lingua franca and the 
absence of a single cultural homeland. For other languages, online resources may be more specific, tying 
together more closely language and culture. An example is Strategies for Learning Speech Acts in 
Japanese, a website from the University of Minnesota Center for Advanced Research on Language 
Acquisition (CARLA), developed for self-access in helping learners with specific speech acts, namely 
greetings, requests, apologies, and complaints (Ishihara, 2007). For each speech act, there are sample 
dialogs with photos (including audio and transcripts), with the contexts chosen as those most likely to fit 
the needs of college-age learners of Japanese. The site provides rich contextual information and 
explanations of the linguistic forms used. It provides initial introductions to the cultural aspects of each 
speech act, along with comparisons to US patterns. The site includes self-check exercises with generic 
feedback provided, with the option of emailing results to an instructor. 
Johnson and deHaan (2013) used a wiki to create a site for English learners dealing with requests and 
apologies. Students used the wiki in a variety of ways, including posting transcripts of their own 
encounters, which were then analyzed by the students themselves as well as commented on by other 
students. This kind of peer-to-peer learning can be a significant benefit to students (see Shao & Crook, 
2015). Student to student assistance was part of the multi-layered feedback system discussed by Hampton 
(2015), in a study where the Moodle learning management system was used, together with the e-portfolio 
system Mahara. The resulting web site provided support and instruction to UK students studying in 
France. Native speaker tutors monitored course forums and other student writing, offering assistance as 
needed. When patterns of recurring issues and common difficulties appeared, the tutors created online 
tutorials to provide customized help. 
For learning pragmatics, the incorporation of digital video can be quite helpful, as it provides valuable 
visual and nonverbal dimensions, often important in speech acts, as well as in other instances of situated 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 7 
language use. The use of video is frequently part of instruction in pragmatics (Takimoto, 2012; 
Cunningham, 2012). Whatever delivery platforms or media are used, designing a technology plan for 
enhancing students’ pragmatic ability might begin with a consideration of the well-developed 
instructional strategies outlined by Cohen (2005) and Shively (2010). The first step both recommend is to 
raise awareness of sociolinguistic phenomena, initially in the students’ L1. Students—particularly 
monolinguistic US students—tend to have “folklinguistic” theories about language and language learning 
(Miller & Ginsberg, 1995), typically based on the central role of learning grammar and vocabulary 
(Kinginger, 2011). To raise awareness, students might be asked to analyze L1 recorded speech acts for 
evidence of patterns and formulaic exchanges as well as other linguistic phenomena such as adjacency 
pairs (e.g., “How are you?” and “Fine, thanks”). Even though such exploratory material might be covered 
in in a pre-departure orientation session, it would be helpful to have it available online, for possible 
consultation abroad. Several researchers have pointed to the positive student views on having some kind 
of handbook (print or electronic) available while abroad (Paige, Cohen, & Shively, 2004; Trentman, 
2013a). The guidebook from the University of Minnesota, Maximizing Study Abroad, has been found to 
be of particular helpfulness (Goertler, 2015), as it provides practical tips on living and studying abroad, 
but also introduces important metalinguistic concepts. 
The orientation sessions or sessions should introduce and discuss a sampling of L2 pragmatic 
exchanges—the recommended next step in the learning strategy. Since before-departure students are most 
focused on highly practical, day-to-day living information, the examples should be kept to a small number 
that have obvious immediate benefits to students while abroad, such as requesting and thanking, or that 
have a high stakes status such as apologizing (Cohen, 2005; Shively 2010). More complete information 
and additional examples should be available to students while abroad through the website or electronic 
handbook. In some cases, researchers have reported on in-country courses in applied linguistics or 
pragmatics, often taught by the researcher, while serving as the on-site student advisor (Shively, 2008; 
Comas-Quinn, Mardomingo, & Valentine, 2009; Stewart, 2010; Trentman, 2013a; Goertler, 2015). This 
arrangement, however, is far from universal and, given shrinking budgets, is unlikely to be possible in 
many situations. 
Having an on-site instructor helps significantly with mentoring and monitoring, but this is possible 
through a networked environment as well (see Hampton, 2015). Personalized attention to individual 
student progress may not be feasible, but tailoring resources and materials to the unique context of the 
study abroad program can be very helpful. Creating a resource-rich site, such as that for Japanese speech 
acts, is no easy task. Researchers in pragmatics have pointed to the importance of using, whenever 
possible, language spoken by native speakers in real, naturally occurring settings, rather than relying on 
the intuitive responses of native speakers to discourse completion tasks (DCT), often used in pragmatic 
studies (Golato, 2003; Shively, 2010). As Cohen (2005) comments, “questionnaires may reflect what 
natives think they do rather than what they do in real interactions” (p. 281). When available, speech can 
be retrieved from corpora (Taguchi, 2015a). It is possible as well to pull examples from sources such as 
feature films, television programs, filmed role-plays, or YouTube videos (see Alcón Soler, 2005; Cohen, 
2005; Martínez-Flor & Usó-Juan, 2006; Takimoto, 2012). 
Online resources for learning pragmatics may focus exclusively on one specific area of pragmatics, such 
as speech acts. However, given the language-specific nature of pragmatic speech, it may be helpful in 
some cases to link to or include specific grammatical or lexical information typically needed. If dealing 
with polite requests in German, for example, one would want to link to information about subjunctive 
forms and modal verbs, while for Korean, information about titles and honorifics would be needed. 
Depending on the site and the language profile at that location, it can be very useful to include 
information about language varieties, including dialects, as well as specific communities of practice (i.e., 
student slang). Of particular usefulness are audio and video clips of authentic speech. Trentman (2013a) 
advocates strongly preparing students learning Arabic for the reality of Arabic diglossia (coexistence of 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 8 
different language varieties), exposing them to at least one dialectical variety in addition to the Modern 
Standard Arabic (MSA) of the classroom: 
Even if students do not study the exact dialect used abroad, studying both MSA and a dialect at 
home will expose them to the shared linguistic features of the Arabic dialects as well as the 
sociolinguistic contexts in which they need to mix these varieties, making them more prepared to 
deal with the sociolinguistic reality of the Arab world, whether they intend to go abroad or simply 
engage with a variety of Arabic media at home. (p. 469) 
In a recent study, Raish (2015) found that having students learn at least some dialect forms before going 
to Egypt made a significant difference in the initial integration into the local community. 
According to Taguchi (2015a), the most consistent benefit for students comes from an instructional model 
which provides pragmatic samples, followed by opportunities for production practice. This is the 
recommended next step in the learning strategy—to provide virtual practice with using appropriate 
pragmatic language. One of the advantages of using technology for practice with pragmatics is the ability 
to provide feedback. In real-life encounters, native speakers are less likely to correct miscues in pragmatic 
appropriateness than in grammar mistakes, due to the greater possibility of loss of face for the learner, as 
well as to the fact that there are not well-established “correct” options in many situations (Shively, 2010). 
The kind and extent of computer-based feedback provided will depend on the incorporation of machine 
intelligence (versus pattern matching) and on the resources available, which may range from stock text 
responses or explanations to a library of audio or video clips. An intelligent system tracking student 
progress can keep a log and flag errors to a monitoring system or person. With improvements in speech 
technology, one can imagine use of speech recognition in this context. To be useful to study abroad 
students, a pragmatic learning site would still be valuable even without a great deal of interaction or 
customized feedback. In fact, there is a danger of creating something with too sharp a learning curve. A 
study abroad companion site should be designed to supplement and support students learning experiences 
abroad, not replace them. It is also the case, as Hampton (2015) comments, that students abroad already 
carry a heavy cognitive and emotional load coping with a new linguistic and cultural environment and do 
not need the extra burden of trying to work out how to use complex technology tools or services. 
One of the ways in which study abroad programs have helped participants with learning pragmatics is to 
send them out to become amateur ethnographers (Jurasek, Lamson, & O'Maley, 1996; Ogden, 2006; 
Trentman, 2013a). This provides valuable cultural insights as well as language learning opportunities. 
Students are typically trained in basic ethnographic field methods, providing the ability to observe, 
record, and analyze events and interactions in the target culture: 
This connects their more general knowledge to the local context they encounter, promotes 
interactions with locals via data collection, helps them overcome ethnocentric orientations, and 
assists linguistic development through the need to collect and analyze information in the target 
language beyond superficial interactions. (Trentman, 2013a, p. 469) 
This kind of hands-on learning is likely to imbue social encounters with more significance and, as 
Trentman (2013a) comments, may be used on the students’ return from abroad in follow-up analysis and 
reflection, in the context of a senior seminar or other such course. Shively (2008) sent students studying 
in Spain out with voice recorders to record service encounters at banks, cafés, and stores. Students created 
transcripts of the conversations, which they analyzed in their journals. Shively provided program 
participants brief instruction in Spanish pragmatics with a one-hour orientation at the beginning of the 
program and shorter sessions during the sojourn, including half an hour at five weeks, just prior to 
students’ scheduled second round of service encounters. That session focused on making requests, which 
students implemented in the upcoming service encounter. It is likely that this kind of just-in-time 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 9 
orientation is of particular usefulness for students. 
LEVERAGING MOBILITY 
In her study of service encounters in Spain, Shively (2008; 2011) equipped students with dedicated digital 
voice recorders (Marantz 660, at some $350 each). Today, students would be able to use their audio 
recording capabilities on their own smartphones. In the US, in 2015, 92% of students own smartphones 
(exceeding for the first time the percentage owning laptops, 91%; Dahlstrom, Brooks, Grajek, & Reeves, 
2015). Given that fact, it seems nonsensical not to have students use the phones for data gathering, and 
not just for audio recording, but for taking photos and videos as well. Today’s smartphones are, in fact, 
ideal for ethnographic fieldwork, given their built-in GPS and networking capabilities. There are a great 
variety of ways in which students abroad could engage with on-site people and places through use of their 
smartphones, such as creating a virtual tour of a city, museum, park, or campus; conducting surveys, 
interviews, or polls; doing realia studies (menus, posters, etc.) based on photo-capturing and running an 
optical recognition or translation app (such as TextLens); or creating a narrated montage of signs and 
billboards. 
In studying a given neighborhood through its signs and inhabitants, students could aspire to provide a 
view into the linguistic landscape of a given area. Leung and Wu (2012) used signs in Mandarin and 
Cantonese to study the changing dynamics of the tension between long-established Cantonese speaking 
Chinese-Americans in Philadelphia’s Chinatown and the spread of Mandarin through its popularity as an 
instructed foreign language in the United States. Bloomaert (2013) provides another interesting example, 
examining the make-up and history of a neighborhood in Amsterdam through its changing signs. Students 
might similarly study the mix of languages used in advertising or in personal or public signs, in that way 
combining linguistic and cultural study. 
Many North American students are likely to be familiar with the very popular “Humans of New York,” 
and may find its combination of street portraits and brief life stories inspiring, and something they might 
want to emulate with a project of their own. The creator, Brandon Stanton, has recently expanded the 
scope of the project, collecting photos from some 20 countries, with a special interest in Iran. He also 
created a Facebook page about Syrian refugees to Europe, a topic likely to be of interest to many students 
as an example of interacting with an issue of significant current interest. In fact, the ability of a 
smartphone to document events as they unfold makes it a powerful tool for capturing immediacy, mass 
events, or unexpected scenes of everyday life. In the process, students can move beyond the tourist gaze, 
towards the possibility of interacting with critical social or political issues. One approach that could be 
used for this purpose is reflexive photography. This involves selecting key photographs, which are then 
annotated to provide a personal record and analysis of a situation or location (Amerson & Livingston, 
2014). Wallace (2015) describes the use of reflexive photography in a project helping international 
teaching assistants in the United States improve their English. In some cases, an approach like that used in 
PhotoVoice projects (Graziano, 2011) might be appropriate, in which local inhabitants are provided with 
loaner cameras to take pictures they judge to signal important aspects of their cultural identity. This could 
become part of a compelling project in oral history. 
Stanton always asks permission before photographing his subjects. This issue is one which students 
engaging in similar projects are likely to face, along with cultural or religious concerns over photographs. 
Ethical concerns and cultural sensitivity apply as well to making audio or video recordings. For Shively’s 
(2010) study, students were told to record their service encounters surreptitiously. This process was 
justified by the researcher, in that the conversations took place in public areas: 
The Institutional Review Board of the researcher’s home university approved this method of data 
collection based primarily on the principle that the Spaniards who were unknowingly recorded 
along with the students were speaking in a public place and that anyone in the vicinity would be 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 10 
able to overhear what they said. Public speech does not carry the same risks to the speaker as 
does private speech, which may contain elements that a person may not want other people to hear. 
(p. 130) 
There may be a difference between recording anonymously an openly public interaction with many 
speakers (orders being placed at a food stand, for instance) and recording a conversation with a single 
individual, particularly, as was the case in this study, when detailed information about that person and 
location were documented. In any case, this is an area where some open discussion about best practices 
would be advisable (see Rosenbaum, 2012). This could be done in person, or become part of a program’s 
online presence. 
As smartphones have improved in terms of processing power, connectivity options, and quality of 
audio/video capture and processing, using them to connect directly to cloud services has become much 
more feasible. In a mobile blogging project several years ago, the intent was to have students send all 
photos, text entries, and audio recordings directly to a blog (Comas-Quinn, Mardomingo, & Valentine, 
2009). However, this proved to be technically challenging, resulting in a total of only two images and 
three audio recordings actually posted. Today there are mobile apps, such as BlogPress, Blogsy, or the 
WordPress mobile app, that make it quite easy to upload media-rich blog posts. WordPress recently added 
an Instagram widget that shares Instagram posts in a blog sidebar. Facebook and Pinterest are easily now 
updated from mobile phones. Microblogging, such as through Twitter, is an ideal candidate for use on 
mobile devices. Of potential interest as well are apps for writing personal journals, such as Penzu, Rove, 
Journey, or Day One. These include features such as automatic reminders, searching, multiple privacy 
options, media integration, and cloud syncing. 
In fact, there are many mobile apps that can be helpful for students engaged in study abroad. The Study 
Abroad Blog offers an annotated list of apps in a variety of categories, as does studyabroad.com. These 
apps range from obvious, such as Google Maps, the Wi-Fi Finder, or Evernote (for note taking), to more 
specialized areas such as locating a public bathroom (Sit or Squat). Another option in support of a study 
abroad program is the creation of a dedicated app, ideally available on all major mobile platforms 
(Godwin-Jones, 2011). An example is the Connect-Exchange Study Abroad app from Texas Tech 
University (Rice & Lauren, 2014). It is designed to foster communication and collaboration, and features 
user-generated content through student uploads and categorizing of local sites, people, and artefacts. The 
app’s Activity Stream shows most recently uploaded content, along with the number of views of each 
item. Users are asked to tag uploads using their own descriptions or the suggested tags. Unfortunately, the 
embedded tags tend to encourage essentialist views of culture, as they include categories such as 
collectivistic or individualistic. Moving even further in that direction is the CutureGPS app from the 
Hofstede Center, which provides for tourists or business people numerical scores for national cultures in 
the familiar Gert Hofstede categories of power distance, individualism, masculinity, uncertainty 
avoidance, and long-term orientation. This encourages the misconception that individual cultural identity 
is determined by generalized national characteristics (Godwin-Jones, 2012). 
Because mobile devices are available anywhere and anytime, they provide a uniquely efficient tool for 
support. That use was the primary goal of the group blog project discussed in Shao and Crook (2015), 
which offered assistance in cultural and linguistic areas to Chinese students in the UK. Cultural adaptation 
and language learning are the goals behind the EU sponsored MASELTOV Project (Kukulska-Hulme, 
2015), which provides migrants with a daily mobile companion, supplying localized information and 
place-based opportunities for vocabulary acquisition. The GPS and other enhanced capabilities of 
smartphones now also allow creation of quite sophisticated place-based mobile games. In fact, the ARIS 
platform was specifically designed for this purpose. A number of language-learning games have been 
created with this platform. Mentira, for example, was designed to teach Spanish pragmatics through 
students helping to solve a murder mystery (Holden & Sykes, 2013): 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 11 
Successful completion of in-game tasks requires completing various pragmatic functions such as 
agreement, refusal, and apology with each of the NPCs [non-playing characters]. Pragmatically 
appropriate player choices lead to more clues and successful gameplay, whereas inappropriate 
pragmatic choices can result in roadblocks or game over experiences. Another unique component 
of the Mentira-based curriculum is a visit to a local neighborhood where the game’s story is 
based. Players are required to collect clues while visiting local sites to solve the mystery. The 
connection of the fictional game world and the real world plays a critical role for the learners, as 
it makes the target language interaction with simulated characters meaningful. (Taguchi, 2015a, 
p. 14) 
There are obvious opportunities here for mobile games to incorporate places, situations, characters and 
history tied to the location of a study abroad program. It is certainly possible that students would be 
included in or even primarily responsible for creating such projects. In fact, the Chrono-Ops game (saving 
the planet from ecological disaster) was created by students and designed in a way which allows future 
users to add content created on their mobile devices. Using the GPS capabilities of phones, apps could be 
developed which provide content (text, audio, or video) based on the user location. The Iowa City 
UNESCO City of Literature app provides an example. Similarly, scavenger hunts could be created which 
help students learn about landmarks, institutions, or other significant places in a given location. My local 
television station recently created such an app, the Mercy Street Scavenger Hunt, built with Scavify, to 
take viewers of a new TV show around Richmond, Virginia, to discover US Civil War sites and 
characters. 
GAINING INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION COMPETENCE 
Using games for developing pragmatic language skills likely makes that process more enjoyable to 
students and therefore may lead to more time on task. The development of pragmatic competence in the 
L2, combining as it does language and culture, is a key factor in students gaining confidence and 
competence in the area of intercultural communication, a stated goal for many study abroad programs: 
“Through the examination of cross-cultural differences in pragmatic behavior and the specific language 
practices of a speech community, the study of L2 pragmatics can play an important role in developing the 
cognitive, behavioral, and communicative components of intercultural competence” (Shively, 2010, p. 
106). That process involves the experience of using the L2 in real social interactions, but also the 
opportunity to analyze and reflect on those encounters. The greater awareness of metalinguistic 
considerations in communication is a key goal in the instruction of pragmatics. While some students may 
choose on their own to write thoughtfully about their interactions abroad, most current programs which 
target language learning and intercultural learning provide organized, often required, opportunities for 
online student reporting. In US study abroad programs, this is usually done through student blogs, which 
may serve as much for marketing as they do for learning (Rodríguez, 2010). Blog posts, assuming they 
are made public, have the benefit of allowing friends and family to follow student study abroad 
adventures. In some cases, this one-to-many format may free students from the obligation of more 
frequent, hence potentially disruptive, personal communication back home (Mikal & Grace, 2012). 
In studies on the use of blogs for study abroad in recent years, some best practices have emerged. 
Although blogs serve the important role of helping to develop learner autonomy, guidance is often needed 
to introduce students to key concepts, to suggest contexts for discussion, or to encourage deeper 
reflection. Lee (2011) stresses the importance of “training students to learn autonomously with teacher 
intervention guidance and support” (p. 89). Moving beyond surface level understanding of social 
interactions and miscommunications may require prompting: “Teachers need to find ways, such as using 
guided questions, to stimulate students’ high order thinking” (p. 90). As part of that effort to encourage 
and enable more reflective posts, Lee suggests the option of having students blog in their own native 
language. This is, in fact, done in the highly regarded Cultura model for cross-cultural exchange 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 12 
(Furstenberg, Levet, English, & Maillet, 2001). Another approach, used by Winke and Teng (2010), is to 
have students write short weekly posts in the L2, in this case Chinese, and more intermittent, longer, and 
reflective posts in the L1, here English. In a program for UK learners of French, Hampton (2015) had 
students use different languages for different kinds of posts, namely English for academic and reflective 
writing and French for more informal posts, such as those recounting excursions, movie reviews, or 
sharing recipes. Shao and Crook (2015) describe the experience of having students participate in mobile 
blogging as “naturalized language learning” (p. 19), as Chinese students in the UK moved from exclusive 
use of Chinese to a mix of Chinese and English, and finally, after an extended period, to English. 
Lee (2011) points out that the post-comment structure of blogs does not encourage cultural exchange, 
with exchanges being quite brief and lacking in continuity. Goertler (2015) points to the fact that blog 
posts often echo each other, with students rarely engaging others through questioning views or expressing 
opposing opinions. An alternative to blogs is to have students create personal electronic journals. These 
do not tend to be public, but that is also an option. Stewart (2010) had US students during a semester 
abroad in Mexico write in their journals two to three times a week. For the first three weeks, students 
wrote in English, then switched to Spanish for the rest of the semester, following requests from the 
students themselves. Stewart reported that through the journals, he was able to have a fuller, ecological 
grasp of the entire Mexican experience, including living arrangements, classroom instruction, and 
interactions with native speakers. This gave him significant insight into the different ways students were 
living and learning, providing both opportunities for intervention, when needed, and a more complete 
picture of student learning for assessment purposes. Through the use of student journals, Jackson (2013) 
was able to follow the development of linguistic and pragmatic competence doing a semester abroad: 
“Those who displayed a higher level of sociopragmatic awareness in the host language at the end of the 
sojourn had a more sophisticated understanding of cultural difference and a higher level of intercultural 
competence” (p. 184). As was the case with blogs, it may be helpful for student journals to include 
recommendations on topics as well as guiding questions. 
Another option for students to engage electronically with others on their experiences abroad is to use 
Facebook or other social media. Back (2013) points out that one of the advantages of Facebook is that, 
given its wide international usage, it is possible that students could contact host families in advance 
through that medium. This could also result in continued Facebook interactions, something less likely to 
be possible with blogs or other media normally used in academic settings. In his study of Facebook use by 
English learners from a variety of countries, Mitchell (2012) found that Facebook proved to be an 
efficient mechanism for maintaining contact, but not well suited for the initial process of making friends. 
As Facebook plays such a central role in the lives of many college-age students, it provides a 
communication channel with which students feel comfortable and which therefore they are likely to use 
regularly. In a recent project of UK students in France, Hampton (2015) discovered that students found 
the communication options provided through Moodle did not fit their needs for informal conversation 
among themselves and decided to create a backchannel Facebook group. Similarly, a group of US 
students in Europe used the app GroupMe to create a group discussion tool that bypassed the “official” 
social media used in the program (Hetz, Dawson, & Cullen, 2015). 
One of the benefits of having an organized group of study abroad participants regularly writing about 
their experiences is the possibility for the home university to incorporate those student experiences into 
regular on-campus instruction. A group of US students studying in Spain served as “intercultural 
informants” for students at home studying Spanish (Elola & Oskoz, 2008). In addition to raising greater 
awareness of cross-cultural issues in the at-home group, the questions from those students led the group in 
Spain to reflect more on their social interactions and what they meant: 
Study abroad students helped confirm or reject some of the at home students’ preconceptions 
about the culture of Spain, especially on certain occasions in which the knowledge acquired in the 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 13 
classroom did not accurately correspond with first-hand knowledge of Spain’s diverse cultures. 
As a result, the study abroad students became the eyes and ears of the at home students. 
Moreover, it was important to discover that the at home students’ comments made the study 
abroad students think more deeply about certain aspects of life in Spain. (p. 472) 
Beloit College (Wisconsin) students studying in Buenos Aires, Dakar, and Quito connected with a variety 
of classes at their home campus through blogs and videoconferencing (Ellett, 2010). The peer-to-peer 
learning was effective for both groups, while the experience is reported to have eased the reentry process 
for returning students. They were able to reconnect with at-home students who had shared their 
experience virtually, and thus were more receptive to the changed perspective of the returnees. Bittner 
(2015) points out that the scheduled interactions with the home campus provided a helpful structure for 
the study abroad students. On the other hand, Hampton (2015) found that some students resented and 
resisted the requirement to connect to the home campus, feeling that it interfered with their main goal of 
integrating into the target culture. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
Much of the research on study abroad emphasizes the importance of providing some kind of structured 
follow-up for returning students. There seems to be a growing recognition that this needs to be more than 
a one-time presentation or lecture, but rather an opportunity for students to reflect on the experience and 
use the knowledge and skills gained to develop a project related in some way to the experience abroad. 
That could be through a regular on-campus course, online learning, or through contributions to a shared 
electronic space such as a wiki. Students at the University of Warwick returning from a year abroad in 
France serve as online consultants to the next cohort (Hampton, 2015). For that program, participating 
students have a permanent electronic companion for their experience by creating an e-portfolio on 
Mahara. One of the other options is the use of digital storytelling, in which students focus on a particular 
experience, write a script (usually in the L2), and provide a narrated slideshow, often accompanied by an 
appropriate soundtrack. Digital storytelling has been used with good results in study abroad environments 
(Rodríguez, 2010, using VoiceThread; Buckner, 2015, using SoundSlides). The created stories provide 
excellent vehicles for sharing highlights of the study abroad experience. 
In addition to connecting to the campus community, returning students can use social media to continue 
the connections they established abroad. As Shively (2010) comments, this is likely to be increasingly an 
option, no matter where the experience took place: 
As the number of people who participate in online communities throughout the world continues 
to increase, educators must recognize that increasingly, being a member of a culture also includes 
being a member of an online community. Instead of discouraging SA [study abroad] students 
from using technology during their sojourn abroad, educators may want to consider the ways in 
which new technologies can be best employed as a means to engage students in online TL [target 
language] communities, as well as to help them develop pragmatic competence. (p. 124) 
The advice sometimes given to students going abroad to forego technology is not just unrealistic, it also 
wrongly assumes that host communities are not digitally connected: 
The assumption behind advising against Internet and TV use is that locals do not share in these 
activities. Given that using the Internet and other media is one way people become viewed as 
‘globalised’, portraying the host people as not actively using these media renders them 
parochially localized. (Doerr, 2013, p. 237) 
As Doerr points out, the whole discourse of immersion used to describe the study abroad experience sets 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 14 
up a dichotomy that does not exist in reality. Immersion also assumes that both the home culture of the 
students and the host country represent homogeneous communities. Part of the rationale for exposing 
students to language varieties is to sensitize them to the reality of linguistic and cultural diversity within a 
given language community. The frequent code-switching and mixing of registers on the Internet, one 
hopes, will expose students to the “heteroglossic real world of linguistic hybridity” (Kramsch, 2014, p. 
300), moving them beyond the binary opposition of home and host cultures, towards a more 
multilinguistic and multicultural orientation. 
An important part of the broadening of horizons through study abroad should be a more complete 
understanding of language. Encouraging students to focus on developing abilities in language pragmatics 
may help them gain a greater appreciation of real language use, expanding their skill set and their sense of 
what is involved in being a competent L2 speaker. As Kinginger (2013b) comments, we expect study 
abroad students to “broaden their repertoire of speech acts, become more aware of register and style, 
develop greater autonomy as conversationalists, and incorporate fluency-enhancing formulaic language 
into their speech” (p. 4). By paying attention to language pragmatics, through themselves noting and 
analyzing in their blogs or journals the interactions they experience, students gain insight into what 
aspects of language are most crucial for effective communication and participation in social communities. 
It is likely that in many programs, student journals or other online writings are used for formal assessment 
of student learning, measurement of progress in linguistic or pragmatic performance, as well as 
development of intercultural communication competence. As Kinginger (2013a) points out, it is not just 
knowledge of the correct pragmatic forms that should be considered:  
Assessments based on performance alone are not sufficient. Assessing student knowledge of L2 
pragmatics should take into account not only what students can do, but also what motives and 
meanings are assigned to this performance, and the degree to which these reflect a sophisticated 
interpretation of their use in the local contexts the students have experienced. (p. 353) 
Students may be aware of the culturally normative practices and patterns, but for personal or cultural 
reasons may elect not to use them. Some US female students in Japan, for example, were reluctant for 
reasons of personal integrity and conviction to use the self-effacing language typical of many Japanese 
women (Kinginger, 2013a). Kim and Brown (2014) point to the importance of students learning not only 
frequently used pragmatic forms (i.e., pragmalinguistic resources), but also the range of options and 
situations in which they can be used (sociopragmatic awareness). They provide examples from a Korean 
context of the limited usefulness of students simply learning idealized L1 norms in this area, as actual use 
tends to be fluid and personal. 
In gaining pragmatic language abilities, students move away from nativist views about language; that is, 
the idea that native speaker characteristics are the goal of language learners. Nativism, as Kramsch (2014) 
comments, is still prevalent in our classrooms, textbooks, and study abroad brochures. Briggs (2015) 
points to how this is perpetuated through marketing by private language schools, as in this example from 
Eurolinga: “No matter what your level, you will soon be speaking fluently, with understanding, ease and 
confidence. By taking part in one of our study abroad programs…you will be armed with an authentic 
accent” (p. 129). Nativist views are likely ingrained in a student’s own view of language. One hopes that 
study abroad will help to break the stranglehold that grammar, vocabulary, and native-like pronunciation 
seem to have over the popular view of language learning and help students “break away from inhibitory 
perceptions of accuracy and its effects on intelligibility” (Müller & Schmenk, 2015, p. 16). For many US 
students, successful communication in the L2 echoes the findings of Miller and Ginsberg (1995) for 
students having studied abroad in Russia: “Success in Russian means producing grammatically correct 
utterances” (p. 302). Such beliefs “exclude many of the features of language for which study abroad is 
particularly advantageous” (p. 295). Depending on the profile of the students in the program, discussing 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 15 
and changing learner beliefs about language remains today an area that could benefit from explicit 
instruction, before and during the period abroad (see Paige, Cohen, & Shively, 2004). 
The intercultural awareness, language skills, and knowledge students gain through study abroad can be a 
life-changing experience, moving students to subject positions as global citizens and confident L2 
speakers. One of the students in Shively’s (2011) study of US students in Spain commented: “I like 
myself better when I speak Spanish well” (p. 1833). The experience of learning the language through 
study abroad has strengthened her self-confidence and created a new positive identity as a Spanish 
speaker. This is the kind of outcome we hope to see from study abroad: both enhanced language 
proficiency and an awareness of the benefits of a new subject position. Case studies of student 
experiences demonstrate the kinds of unique experiences students undergo, which provide them special 
insights into their own cultural roles and identities. That might include using ones whiteness and status as 
a native speaker of English to gain entry into an Egyptian community, in order to then use that connection 
to practice speaking Arabic (Trentman, 2013a); or the realization of a student’s inevitable “foreigner” 
identity when correctly using Japanese deprecating gift-giving language, only to be laughed at by native 
speakers (Kinginger, 2013a). Making sense of such experiences is assisted by sharing with others and 
comparing experiences across cultures. That is not something that happens on its own. As DeKeyser 
(2010) comments: “No magical implicit learning process takes over when the students go abroad” (p. 89). 
This is equally true for language learning and cultural awareness. It is particularly important for students 
to gain an understanding of the dynamics of their own identity formation, and how it is shaped by context 
and experience. Ushioda (2006) calls for language teachers to “develop [their] students’ critical awareness 
of the very barriers, constraints and ideologies in the surrounding social context that limit their autonomy 
and motivation” (p. 159). This is of particular relevance for language students in study abroad 
environments. To provide maximum benefit from the study abroad experience, it is important for 
programs to prepare students adequately, linguistically and culturally, and to supply engagement 
opportunities and mechanisms for reflection and sharing. In that process, networked and mobile 
technologies are likely to play an ever-increasing role. 
 
REFERENCES 
Alcón Soler, E. (2005). Does instruction work for learning pragmatics in the EFL context? System, 33(3), 
417–435. 
Amerson, R., & Livingston, W. G. (2014). Reflexive photography: an alternative method for 
documenting the learning process of cultural competence. Journal of Transcultural Nursing, 25(2), 202–
210. 
Back, M. (2013). Using Facebook Data to Analyze Learner Interaction during Study Abroad. Foreign 
Language Annals, 46(3), 377–401. 
Benson, P., Barkhuizen, G., Bodycott, P., & Brown, J. (2012). Study abroad and the development of 
second language identities. Applied Linguistics Review, 3(1), 173–193. 
Bittner, P. (2015, May 26). Why All Study-Abroad Students Should Connect With Classrooms Back 
Home. Retrieved from 
http://blogs.edweek.org/edweek/global_learning/2015/05/why_all_study_abroad_students_should_conne
ct_with_classrooms_back_home.html 
Block, D. (2007). Second language identities. London: Continuum. 
Blommaert, J. (2013). Ethnography, Superdiversity and Linguistic Landscapes: Chronicles of 
Complexity. Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 16 
Briggs, J. (2015). Out-of-class language contact and vocabulary gain in a study abroad context. System, 
53, 129–140. 
Buckner, M. (2015). Investigating digital storytelling as an assessment practice in study abroad 
programs (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest dissertations and theses. (ProQuest no. 
3722295) 
Cohen, A. D. (2005). Strategies for learning and performing L2 speech acts. Intercultural Pragmatics, 
2(3), 275–301. 
Cohen, A. D., & Shively, R. L. (2007). Acquisition of requests and apologies in Spanish and French: 
Impact of study abroad and strategy-building intervention. Modern Language Journal, 91(2), 189–212. 
Collentine, J. (2004). The effects of learning contexts on morphosyntactic and lexical development. 
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 26(2), 227–248. 
Comas-Quinn, A., Mardomingo, R., & Valentine, C. (2009). Mobile blogs in language learning: Making 
the most of informal and situated learning opportunities. RECALL Journal, 21(1), 96–112. 
Dahlstrom, E., Brooks, D., Grajek, S., & Reeves, J. (2015). ECAR Study of Students and Information 
Technology, 2015. Retrieved from http://net.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/ss15/ers1510ss.pdf 
DeKeyser, R. M. (2010). Monitoring processes in Spanish as a second language during a study abroad 
program. Foreign Language Annals, 43(1), 80–92. 
Dewey, D., Ring, S., Gardner, D., & Belnap, R. (2013). Social network formation and development 
during study abroad in the Middle East. System, 41(2), 269–282. 
Doerr, N. M. (2013). Do ‘global citizens’ need the parochial cultural other? Discourse of immersion in 
study abroad and learning-by-doing. Compare: A Journal of Comparative and International Education, 
43(2), 224–243. 
Ellett, R. (2010). Bringing Study Abroad into the College Classroom. EDUCAUSE Review, 45(5), 102–
103. 
Elola, I., & Oskoz, A. (2008). Blogging: Fostering Intercultural Competence Development in Foreign 
Language and Study Abroad Contexts. Foreign Language Annals, 41(3), 454–477. 
Furstenberg, G., Levet, S., English, K., & Maillet, K. (2001). Giving a virtual voice to the silent language 
of culture: The cultura project. Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 55–102. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num1/furstenberg/ 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2012, June 13). Culture? There’s an app for that. Retrieved from 
http://acrossculturesweb.com/wp/?p=46 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2011). Mobile Apps for Language Learning. Language Learning & Technology, 
15(2), 2–11. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/emerging.pdf 
Goertler, S. (2015, July 13). Study abroad and technology: Friend or enemy? Retrieved from 
http://fltmag.com/study-abroad-and-technology/ 
Golato, A. (2003). Studying Compliment Responses: A Comparison of DCTs and Recordings of 
Naturally Occurring Talk. Applied Linguistics, 24(1), 90–121. 
Graziano, K. (2011). Working with English Language Learners: Preservice Teachers and Photovoice. 
International Journal of Multicultural Education, 13(1), 1–19. 
 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 17 
Hampton, C. (2015). Meeting in the Virtual Middle: Blending online and human resources to generate a 
year abroad community. In R. Mitchell, N. Tracy-Ventura, & K. McManus (Eds.), Social Interaction, 
Identity and Language Learning during Residence Abroad (pp. 223–240). London: Eurosla. 
Hetz, P., Dawson, C., & Cullen, T. (2015). Social Media Use and the Fear of Missing Out (FoMO) While 
Studying Abroad. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 47(4), 259–272. 
Holden, C., & Sykes, J. (2013). Place-based Mobile Games for Pragmatics Learning. In N. Taguchi & J. 
Sykes (Eds.), Technology in Interlanguage Pragmatics Research and Teaching (pp. 1–15). Philadelphia: 
John Benjamins Publishing. 
Huesca, R. (2013). How Facebook can ruin study abroad. Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved from 
http://chronicle.com/article/How-Facebook-Can-Ruin-Study/136633/ 
Isabelli-García, C. L. (2006). Study abroad social networks, motivation and attitudes: Implications for 
second language acquisition. In M. A. DuFon & E. Churchill (Eds.), Language learners in study abroad 
contexts (pp. 231–258). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Ishihara, N. (2007). Web-based curriculum for pragmatics instruction in Japanese as a foreign language: 
An explicit awareness-raising approach. Language Awareness, 16(1), 21–40. 
Jackson, J. (2013). The transformation of “a frog in the well”: A path to a more intercultural, global 
mindset. In C. Kinginger (Ed.), Social and cultural aspects of language learning in study abroad (pp. 
179–206). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Johnson, N., & deHaan, J. (2013). Strategic Interaction 2.0: Instructed intercultural pragmatics in an EFL 
context. International Journal of Strategies Information Technology and Application, 4(1), 49–62. 
Jurasek, R., Lamson, H., & O'Maley, P. (1996). Ethnographic Learning While Studying Abroad. 
Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad, 2(1), 23–44. 
Keck, N. (2015, February 10). Tech May Get In The Way Of Good Culture Shock While Studying 
Abroad. Retrieved from: http://www.npr.org/2015/02/10/385267279/tech-may-get-in-the-way-of-good-
culture-shock-while-studying-abroad 
Kim, E., & Brown, L. (2014). Negotiating Pragmatic Competence in Computer Mediated 
Communication: The Case of Korean Address Terms. CALICO Journal, 31(3), 264–284. 
Kinginger, C. (2004). Alice doesn’t live here anymore: Foreign language learning as identity 
(re)construction. In A. Pavlenko & A. Blackledge (Eds.), Negotiation of identities in multilingual contexts 
(pp. 219–242). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Kinginger, C. (2008). Language learning in study abroad: Case studies of Americans in France. Modern 
Language Journal, 92(s1), 1–124. 
Kinginger, C. (2011). Enhancing Language Learning in Study Abroad. Annual Review of Applied 
Linguistics, 31, 58–73. 
Kinginger, C. (2013a). Identity and Language Learning in Study Abroad. Foreign Language Annals, 
46(3), 339–358. 
Kinginger, C. (2013b). Social and cultural aspects of language learning in study abroad. Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins. 
Kinginger, C., & Belz, J. (2005). Socio-cultural perspectives on pragmatic development in foreign 
language learning: Microgenetic case studies from telecollaboration and residence abroad. Intercultural 
Pragmatics, 2(4), 369–421. 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 18 
Kramsch, C. (1993). Context and Culture in Language Teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Kramsch, C. (2014). Teaching Foreign Languages in an Era of Globalization: Introduction. Modern 
Language Journal, 98(1), 296–311. 
Kukulska-Hulme, A. (2015). Language as a bridge connecting formal and informal language teaching 
through mobile devices. In L.-H. Wong, M. Milrad, & M. Specht (Eds.), Seamless Learning in the Age of 
Mobile Connectivity (pp. 281–294). London: Springer. 
Lee, L. (2011). Blogging: Promoting learner autonomy and intercultural competence through study 
abroad. Language Learning & Technology, 15(3), 87–109. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/lee.pdf 
Lee, M. (2015, February 12). Benefits of study abroad WITHOUT technology. Retrieved from 
http://www.goabroad.com/articles/study-abroad/tuning-out-tuning-in-the-benefits-of-studying-abroad-
without-technology 
Leung, G., & Wu, M.-H. (2012). Linguistic landscape and heritage language literacy education: A case 
study of linguistic rescaling in Philadelphia Chinatown. Written Language & Literacy, 15(1), 114–140. 
Martínez-Flor, A., & Usó-Juan, E. (2006). A Comprehensive Pedagogical Framework to Develop 
Pragmatics in the Foreign Language Classroom: The 6R Approach. Applied Language Learning, 16(2), 
39–64. 
Meier, G., & Daniels, H. (2013) ‘Just not being able to make friends’: social interaction during the year 
abroad in modern foreign language degrees. Research Papers in Education, 28(2), 212–238. 
Mikal, J. P., & Grace, K. (2012). Against abstinence-only education abroad: Viewing Internet use during 
study abroad as a possible experience enhancement. Journal of Studies in International Education, 16(3), 
287–306. 
Mikal, J. P., Yang, J., & Lewis, A. (2014). Surfing USA: How Internet Use Prior to and During Study 
Abroad Affects Chinese Students’ Stress, Integration, and Cultural Learning while in the United States. 
Journal of Studies in International Education, 19(3), 203–224. 
Miller, L., & Ginsberg, R. B. (1995). Folklinguistic theories of language learning. In B. F. Freed (Ed.), 
Second language acquisition in a study abroad context (pp. 293–315). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Mitchell, K. (2012). A social tool: Why and how ESOL students use Facebook. CALICO Journal, 29(3), 
471–493. 
Müller, M., & Schmenk, B. (2015). Narrating the sound of self: The role of pronunciation in learners’ 
self-constructions in study-abroad contexts. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, Early View. 
doi:10.1111/ijal.12109 
Ogden, A. (2006). Ethnographic Inquiry: Reframing the Learning Core of Education Abroad. Frontiers: 
The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad, 13, 87–112. 
Paige, R. M., Cohen, A. D., & Shively, R. L. (2004). Assessing the impact of a strategies-based 
curriculum on language and culture learning abroad. Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study 
Abroad, 10, 253–276. 
Pellegrino Aveni, V. (2005). Study abroad and second language use. Constructing the Self. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.  
Raish, M. (2015). The Acquisition of an Egyptian Phonological Variant by U.S. Students in Cairo. 
Foreign Language Annals, 48(2), 267–283. 
 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 19 
Rice, R. & Lauren, B. (2014). Developing intercultural competence through glocal activity theory using 
the connect-exchange study abroad app. In G. Vershuldsdonck & M. Limbu (Eds.), Digital rhetoric and 
global literacies: Communication modes and digital practices in the networked world (pp. 154–173). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
Roberts, B. (2010, September 23). How the Internet screwed up study abroad. Retrieved from 
http://insidestudyabroad.com/2010/09/how-the-internet-screwed-up-study-abroad/ 
Rodríguez, K. (2010). Digital Storytelling in Study Abroad: Toward a Counter-Catalogic Experience. 
Seminar.net International Journal of Media, Technology & Lifelong Learning, 6(2), 219–233. 
Rosenbaum, K. (2012, September 1). Photography While on Study Abroad: Breaking Free from the 
Viewfinder. Retrieved from http://melibeeglobal.com/blog/2012/09/01/photography-while-on-study-
abroad-breaking-free-from-the-viewfinder/ 
Schauer, G. A. (2008). Getting better in getting what you want: language learners’ pragmatic 
development in requests during study abroad sojourns. In M. Putz & J. Neff-van Aertselaer (Eds.), 
Developing contrastive pragmatics: Interlanguage and cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 399–426). New 
York: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Shao, Y., & Crook, C. (2015). The Potential of a Mobile Group Blog to Support Cultural Learning 
Among Overseas Students. Journal of Studies in International Education, 19(5), 1–24. 
Shively, R. L. (2008). Politeness and social interaction in study abroad: Service encounters in L2 
Spanish. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. 
Shively, R. (2010). From the Virtual World to the Real World: A Model of Pragmatics Instruction for 
Study Abroad. Foreign Language Annals, 43(1), 105–137. 
Shively, R. (2011). L2 pragmatic development in study abroad: A longitudinal study of Spanish service 
encounters. Journal of Pragmatics, 43, 1818–1835. 
Simon, J., & Ainsworth, J. (2012). Race and Socioeconomic Status Differences in Study Abroad 
Participation: The Role of Habitus, Social Networks, and Cultural Capital. International Scholarly 
Research Network, 2012, 1–21. doi:10.5402/2012/413896 
Stewart, J. (2010). Using e-Journals to Assess Students’ Language Awareness and Social Identity During 
Study Abroad. Foreign Language Annals, 43(1), 138–159. 
Sykes, J., Oskoz, A., & Thorne, S. (2008). Web 2.0, Synthetic Immersive Environments, and Mobile 
Resources for Language Education. CALICO Journal, 25(3), 528–546. 
Taguchi, N. (2015a). Instructed pragmatics at a glance: Where instructional studies were, are, and should 
be going. Language Teaching, 48(1), 1–50. 
Taguchi, N. (2015b). “Contextually” speaking: A survey of pragmatic learning abroad, in class, and 
online. System, 48, 3–20. 
Takimoto, M. (2012). Metapragmatic discussion in interlanguage pragmatics. Journal of Pragmatics, 
44(10), 1240–1253. 
Thorne, S. (2003). Artifacts and Cultures-Of-Use in Intercultural Communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38–67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/pdf/thorne.pdf 
Trentman, E. (2013a). Arabic and English during study abroad in Cairo, Egypt: Issues of access and use. 
Modern Language Journal, 97(2), 457–473. 
Trentman, E. (2013b). Imagined Communities and Language Learning During Study Abroad: Arabic 
Learners in Egypt. Foreign Language Annals, 46(4), 545–564. 
Robert Godwin-Jones Integrating Technology into Study Abroad 
 
Language Learning & Technology 20 
Tudini, V. (2007). Negotiation and Intercultural Learning in Italian Native Speaker Chat Rooms. The 
Modern Language Journal, 91(4), 577–601. 
Ushioda, E. (2006). Language motivation in a reconfigured Europe: Access, identity, autonomy. Journal 
of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 27(2), 148–61. 
van Compernolle, R., & Kinginger, C. (2013). Promoting metapragmatic development through 
assessment in the zone of proximal development. Language Teaching Research, 17(3), 282–302. 
Vande Berg, M., Connor-Linton, J., & Paige, R. M. (2009). The Georgetown Consortium Project: 
Interventions for student learning abroad. Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad, 18, 
1–75. 
Wallace, L. (2015). Reflexive photography, attitudes, behavior, and CALL: ITAs improving spoken 
English. CALICO Journal, 32(3), 449–479. 
Winke, P., & Teng, C. (2010). Using task-based pragmatics tutorials while studying abroad in China. 
Intercultural Pragmatics, 7(2), 363–399. 
Zeiss, E., & Isabelli-García, C. (2005). The benefits of asynchronous computer mediated communication 
in enhancing cultural acquisition. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 18(3), 151–169. 
