Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/fonglinengle.pdf 
October 2016, Volume 20, Number 3 
pp. 142–158 
 
Copyright © 2016, ISSN 1094-3501 142 
POSITIONING IDENTITY IN COMPUTER-MEDIATED DISCOURSE 
AMONG ESOL LEARNERS 
Carlton J. Fong, The University of Texas at Austin 
Shengjie Lin, The University of Texas at Austin 
Randi A. Engle , The University of California, Berkeley 
The present study explores a linguistic mechanism in which the identity of English for 
speakers of other languages (ESOL) learners can be influenced online. Analyzing the 
discourse of ESOL chat room participants and how they uptake positioning statements 
through online conversations, we present two vignettes that illustrate the kind of discourse 
in which participants position one another as language learners. We apply a discourse 
analysis framework of joint projects and positioning to an online context for ESOL 
learners to understand the processes by which identity is formed via online discourse. In 
both vignettes of online discourse, we examine the linguistic processes through which 
ESOL learners’ language identity was positioned and formed. This article supports the 
importance of examining identity positioning and language learning in the online setting. 
We discuss implications for how online chat sessions may foster positive identity 
development. 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English 
Keywords: Discourse Analysis, Computer-Mediated Communication, L2 Identity 
APA Citation: Fong, C. J., Lin, S., & Engle, A. R. (2016). Positioning identity in 
computer-mediated discourse among ESOL learners. Language Learning & Technology, 
20(3), 142–158. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/fonglinengle.pdf 
Received: October 9, 2014; Accepted: September 21, 2015; Published: October 1, 2016 
Copyright: © Carlton J. Fong, Shengjie Lin, & Randi A. Engle 
INTRODUCTION 
Learning a language involves more than simply acquiring the basics of reading, speaking, listening, and 
writing; interactions in social situations play an important role in the linguistic development of language 
learners (Duran, 2008). In these interactions, notions of identity and a discourse community that supports 
this identity are critical (Chen, 2013; Norton, 2000; Pavlenko & Norton, 2007; Street, 1993). In the 
present study, we used Gee’s (2000) definition of identity, one that refers to the certain kind of person 
someone is in a particular context—in this case, learning English for speakers of other languages (ESOL). 
We analyzed discourse in online chat looking for how identity regarding learning a second language can 
be positioned. Because of our interest in what we could understand from an analysis of learners’ words 
themselves, we used the discourse produced in online chat, referencing previous work in computer-
mediated communication (e.g., Schallert et al., 2009). 
Identity Development in Language Learning: A Social Process 
Developing one’s identity as a learner is inextricably related to the social context. Learning requires 
enacting particular identities, and at least at some level, involves making (or remaking) selves and 
relationships (Moje, 2008). Moreover, learning occurs in discourse communities where identities can be 
formed (Moje & Lewis, 2007). Gee’s (2014b) discourse theory offers a model for framing identity 
development within social processes. All speakers engage in both recipient design—taking into 
consideration the discourse recipients—and position design—considering how speakers would like the 
Carlton J. Fong, Shengjie Lin, and Randi A. Engle Positioning ESOL Learner Identity 
 
Language Learning & Technology  143 
recipient to be, feel, think, and act. Discourse is an inherent mechanism of identity positioning, either 
assuming the listener’s identity or inviting the listener to take on a new one (Gee, 2014a). Similarly, 
Holland, Lachicotte, Skinner, and Cain (1998) defined this notion of relational identity through discourse 
as “how one identifies one’s position relative to others, mediated through the way one feels comfortable 
or constrained, for example, to speak to another, to command another …” (p. 127). 
Learning a second language involves identity-negotiating processes. Duran (2008) discussed the 
importance of identity and agency in second language acquisition (SLA): “Language learning and 
acquisition are social developmental processes as much or more than basic intrapsychological processes. 
Learning and acquiring [second language] competencies requires becoming a person with identities that 
can exercise agency in real contexts with other cultural and social beings” (p. 1230). In addition, Goffman 
(1959) argued that language users self-regulate their communicative practices with others with the 
intention that their messages and identity are properly understood. Applied to SLA, learners need to be 
sensitive to not only how they effectively relay the correct message but also how they maintain their 
identity as a second language user. 
Moje and Lewis (2007) further described language learning as participating in power relations and 
negotiating agency. They elaborated that socialization in discourse communities forcibly shapes learning 
opportunities. In a related line of work, Lam (2004a, 2009) identified a phenomenon in the 
marginalization of English as a Second Language (ESL) students from native English speakers at school. 
For example, the Chinese-speaking students in Lam’s (2004a) study reported being laughed at and 
described the segregation between them and English-speaking Chinese students. Positioned as non-
proficient learners of English, ESL students may have felt uncomfortable or unsettled in their sense of 
identity as ESL students. Research has supported that legitimizing learners’ diverse and multifaceted 
identities is critical for student interest and success (McClure, 2010). For instance, Pavlenko (2004) 
claimed that students whose voices go unheard may lose interest in language learning. 
Lam (2004b) suggested the Internet as a different social medium, where ESL students can acquire second 
language literacy and achieve the safe expression of their identity. Through online chat, the ESL students 
in Lam’s research adopted new identities emerging from a larger, collective identity of online chatters. 
Creating a new identity by interacting with similar peers as immigrant English learners, they used online 
chat as a secret code in which they could communicate, moving from solitude in their American schools 
to solidarity with other ESOL speakers. The following quote from Lam (2000) captured the social nature 
of identity development in language learning: “A central construct is the language user’s identity, for in 
practicing any form of literacy, the user is at the same time enacting a particular social role and 
membership in a particular group” (p. 459). 
Online Communication and Second Language Acquisition 
Previous research has suggested that both synchronous and asynchronous computer-mediated 
communication (CMC) positively influences SLA (e.g., Kern, 1995; Shin, 2006). Online communication 
fosters growth for language learners in three areas: language skills, equality, and autonomy (Warschauer, 
1997). For example, Kern (1995) implemented a program called Interchange, a synchronous online chat 
program, into university-level French courses. Because of the frequent opportunities for language 
production and student expression, CMC led to increased active participation, grammatical competence 
and sophistication, and reliance on peers. Similarly, Kelm (1992) demonstrated how Interchange 
increased native English speakers’ oral participation in their foreign language courses. Although Kern 
(2006) argued that CMC should not replace classroom discussions, he posited that CMC can effectively 
restructure classroom dynamics and enhance the social use of language.  
Studies on English language learners have validated the use of CMC not only for linguistic and cognitive 
boosts but also for noncognitive and motivation gains. Examining students’ views on a synchronous 
online discussion in a writing class, Meunier (1998) found that students reported high level of situational 
Carlton J. Fong, Shengjie Lin, and Randi A. Engle Positioning ESOL Learner Identity 
 
Language Learning & Technology  144 
and task motivation. Cross-culturally, studies in Asia also reported that students exhibited high levels of 
motivation and enjoyment communicating in their second language using synchronous online chat 
(Freiermuth & Huang, 2012). Opportunities to express oneself, craft personal profiles, and develop a 
sense of community around shared interests motivated individuals to engage in CMC (Klimanova & 
Dembovskaya, 2013). Comparing interactions during face-to-face and online discussions in language 
classrooms, Jarrell and Freiermuth (2005) found that Japanese English as a Foreign Language (EFL) 
students reported online chat as being a motivating tool and discussed a number of motivating reasons. 
First, students felt less pressure to respond using online chat and appreciated the choice to contribute at 
their own pace. Second, online chat afforded anonymity and reduction of social barriers, leading to 
greater focus on message content instead of participant characteristics (see Garton, Haythornthwaite, & 
Wellman, 1997). Third, they found that EFL students were more willing to communicate and that they 
sustained English conversation with less switching to Japanese in CMC. Other motivational factors 
discussed in previous research included stimulating connections with diverse and international partners as 
well as the facilitation of meaningful projects (e.g., Warschauer, 1996). 
One facet of CMC is the sense of safety and its resultant empowerment to share one’s inner voice 
(Warschauer, Turbee, & Roberts, 1996), which may promote motivation to participate in further online 
communication. Beauvois (1992) investigated English native speakers’ learning French through CMC. 
According to the findings, students reported more freedom to express themselves with little risk of 
rejection and described online learning as the most fruitful in their second language production. 
Comparing online and face-to-face interactions, research has indicated that non-native speakers feel more 
comfortable and less worried about their language deficiencies in the online context compared to in-
person contexts (Freiermuth, 2001; Warschauer, 1996). Focusing on the words online chatters used, 
Schallert et al. (2009) examined the linguistic markers of politeness and face-saving. When writing 
messages with functions that were more directed to others (e.g., evaluating another’s message, presenting 
a contrasting view, or managing the conversation), students worried more about possible face threats and 
used more politeness strategies to mitigate such imposition. That is, the words themselves seemed to have 
fostered a safer environment. 
A study by Kramsch, A’Ness, and Lam (2000) documented the experiences of a Chinese immigrant high 
school student who experienced frustration and discrimination because of his Chinese accent while 
speaking English. Through his involvement with CMC, he grew in his confidence and comfort level with 
communicating in English. Kramsch et al. explained such a shift was due to changing physical properties 
from printed books and face-to-face conversations to the electronic medium. CMC facilitated the process 
in which this student created a fictional self, blurring the boundary lines that positioned his social identity 
as a linguistic minority. In this process, second language learners could build a stronger sense of identity 
through their own version of reality and reify their own voice in identifiable social contexts. 
In sum, previous theory and research has underscored the importance of identity development and the 
social context in language learning. Moreover, CMC is a medium that motivates dialogue, forms 
discourse communities, and develops new identities through social positioning as second language 
learners. Our study investigates online discourse and underlying mechanisms of the motivational, social, 
and identity-forming processes in CMC. 
ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK 
We used an analytical framework to identify how ESOL students jointly negotiated their identities in 
online chat. We used a selection of chat transcripts and applied a framework using joint projects (Clark, 
1996) and positioning (Wortham, 2004) to identify and analyze instances of identity positionality within 
online discourse.  
Our analytical framework integrated Gee’s (2014a) critical approach to discourse analysis with Mercer’s 
Carlton J. Fong, Shengjie Lin, and Randi A. Engle Positioning ESOL Learner Identity 
 
Language Learning & Technology  145 
(2007) sociocultural discourse analysis. Gee (2014a) described critical discourse analysis as not merely 
describing words that people use, but speaking to institutional or social problems and issues in the world. 
These issues often involve the possession and distribution of social capital. We too analyzed language as 
intricately tied to social goods that are traded, in particular, examining the capital of one’s identity being 
distributed by online participants. Using Mercer’s (2007) sociocultural discourse approach, we operated 
under the basic assumption that we were able to examine collective thinking activities enabled through 
language processes. Sociocultural discourse analysis afforded us the assessment of linguistic processes 
through which individuals strive for intersubjectivity. Kramsch et al. (2000) described this notion as 
identity constructed through discourse. Framed by critical discourse analysis and sociocultural discourse 
analysis, we examined a series of discourse interactions called joint projects. 
Joint Projects 
Clark and Schaefer (1989) defined discourse as “a sequence of utterances produced as the participants 
proceed turn by turn” (p. 259). Discourse involves both participants in a highly coordinated activity 
ensuring what is said is attended to, heard, and understood. In pursuit of communication goals, 
engagement in discourse involves the monitoring of the uptake of utterances in social contexts and the 
subsequent adjustment (Duran, 2008). To capture this dynamic, we analyzed discourse interactions called 
joint projects (Clark, 1996). Clark defined a joint project as “a joint action projected by one of its 
participants and taken up by the others” (p. 191). According to Clark (1996), the four types of uptake are 
as follows: 
1. Full compliance: Respondents may comply fully with the project as proposed. 
2. Alteration of project: Respondents may alter the proposed project to something they are able and 
willing to comply with. 
3. Declination of project: When respondents are unable or unwilling to comply with the project as 
proposed, they may decline to take it up. 
4. Withdrawal from project: Respondents may also withdraw entirely, for example, by deliberately 
ignoring the question and changing the topic. 
Clark (1996) described the process in achieving such joint purposes as “negotiation” (p. 203), in which 
participants set forth a possible joint project and show what they are willing to accomplish individually 
and collectively. Eventually, the two interlocutors establish mutual belief that both have identified the 
purpose and the means to achieve it. We opted to use joint projects as our framework to explicitly 
examine how identity positioning is taken up by others and to complement the notions of social exchange 
in Gee’s (2014a) approach and collective thinking in Mercer’s (2007) approach. 
Positioning 
One of the central and inherent works of discourse is positioning, language that assumes or claims a 
particular identity for the listener (Gee, 2014a). One definition of positioning is “an event of 
identification, in which a recognizable category of identity gets explicitly or implicitly applied to an 
individual in an event that takes place across seconds, minutes, or hours” (Wortham, 2004, p. 166). In a 
classroom-based study, Wortham observed how primary school teachers and students positioned a 
particular student (i.e., explicitly used identity-related labels) and how these verbal terms affected student 
identity. In particular, he examined through classroom discourse how an exemplary student became 
someone who was no longer viewed as a contributing student, but instead as an oppositional presence. 
In the Wortham (2004) study, one example of how the teacher in this classroom explicitly positioned the 
student occurred when they were engaged in a large group discussion. The positioned student was asked a 
question, and she guessed haphazardly instead of looking at the text. In response, the teacher evaluated 
her behavior followed by “… exactly what you do as a bad student ….” Labeling her a bad student, the 
Carlton J. Fong, Shengjie Lin, and Randi A. Engle Positioning ESOL Learner Identity 
 
Language Learning & Technology  146 
teacher explicitly positioned her as a student who did not try to find the right answer, but just guessed 
arbitrarily. One caveat is that we hoped to provide an example of positioning and not necessarily negative 
labeling. 
Wortham (2004) argued that you can position yourself and embrace an identity, and in the preceding case, 
the positioned learner identified as a bad student eventually outwardly flaunted social norms and acted in 
opposition to the teachers. Positioning can take various forms: self-deprecating statements (I’m stupid) 
that can sometimes be modest defenses to a compliment, positive statements towards the self (I’m a good 
student), and descriptive statements that portray a personal quality or ability (I am a musician) or 
membership in a community (I am Latino). These statements are explicit forms of positioning, utterances 
that place a recognizable identity category to an individual. These statements differ from implicitly 
positioning which indirectly identifies an individual. For example, the statement I am practicing a piece 
for a recital is an implicit positioning that conveys the meaning of I am a pianist or I am a musician. 
Another positioning statement can be I can help you with your math homework, which indirectly portrays 
confidence or the ability to teach. 
The notion of thickening is also discussed by Wortham (2004), defined as “the increasing 
presupposability of an individual’s identity over ontogenetic time, as the individual and others come 
increasingly to think of and position him or her as a recognizable kind of person” (p. 166). In his case 
study, he commented how the identity of the good student gone bad was thickened via the influence of 
others, perpetuating the positioning through their behavior and speech towards her. 
The kind of positioning that we were interested in involves one’s status as an ESOL learner. This 
characteristic can be positioned by identifying one’s attitudes towards learning (in English specifically), 
one’s intelligence, academic achievement, or language capabilities. We looked for these particular 
features in positioning statements because we argue that they are linguistic ways in which an identity as 
an English learner can be influenced and developed. We label such statements as positioning statements 
towards learning. 
Present Study 
Using a sociocultural and critical approach to discourse analysis (Gee, 2014a; Mercer, 2007), we examine 
the online chat of ESOL learners for evidence of identity-positioning statements. Moreover, through this 
peer interaction, we were interested in capturing how positioning statements are taken up and the resulting 
intersubjectivity that emerged from the discourse. Using a blend of quantitative and qualitative methods 
and applying Mercer’s (2007) approach to sociocultural discourse analysis, we were guided by two 
research questions: 
1. From a quantitative approach to assess the relative incidence of the positioning statements, how 
often do ESOL students make positioning statements related to learning English? 
2. From a qualitative approach to understand the relationships among interactions that occur in the 
conversations, what kind of identity-positioning occurs and are positioning statements being 
taken up in regards to joint purposes? 
As a caveat, we wanted to clarify that the scope of this article is limited to applying tools of grounding 
joint projects and positioning in analyzing the interactions that occur in ESOL learner chat. Note that we 
do not take into account the background of the ESOL students or how their proficiency of English has 
changed over time. In our study, we focused on a snapshot of linguistic instances in which ESOL students 
produce and uptake identity-positioning statements. 
METHOD 
We excerpted conversations from a public online chat medium called EnglishClub.com, described as a 
Carlton J. Fong, Shengjie Lin, and Randi A. Engle Positioning ESOL Learner Identity 
 
Language Learning & Technology  147 
meeting place of ESOL learners. (We opted to use the term ESOL when describing our study and 
participants, instead of ESL and EFL, because of the ambiguity of whether English was their second or 
foreign language.) Along with a simple chat interface, there was a toolbar with options to customize fonts 
and colors as well as insert emoticons. We recorded chat sessions over a three-day period. Dividing the 
period into 30-minute sections, we then used a lottery method to choose 10 chat sessions to analyze. To 
fairly assess the prevalence of positioning statements and to avoid cultural bias originating from time 
zones when the chat occurred, we opted for a random selection of online chat, risking the lack of 
contiguity in excerpted conversations. 
Borrowing methodology from previous discourse analysis work in CMC (see Jordan et al., 2012; 
Schallert et al., 2009), we cut and pasted the dialogue that naturally occurred. Following the various 
threads in the conversation was very difficult; multiple conversations were taking place and teasing apart 
the various turns became a sizeable obstacle. When comments did not begin with a direct address, we 
evaluated if turns belonged to specific sequences by seeing if the topic was conditionally relevant to 
previous turns (see Schallert et al., 1996). We provide in brackets our interpretation of the turns if there 
was difficulty interpreting the message. 
Participants 
Due to the nature of the data collection, information regarding the ESOL students was limited. We were 
able to collect their usernames, avatars, and utterances. Other participant characteristics were inferred 
from their text-based conversations. Because inquiring age and country of origin was a common 
conversation topic in the chat room, we speculated that members were between the ages of 18 and 26, 
most likely college students, and originating from diverse cultural backgrounds such as Vietnam, China, 
Mexico, Italy, Peru, Iran, and Argentina. Note that this information was not verifiable given the 
anonymous nature of the setting and our inability to link chatter demographics with accuracy, under the 
assumption that these chatters could be masking their true identity. 
In the two vignettes we analyzed, there were four participants: Maria, Kevin, Bui, and Leon (pseudonyms 
were used). Maria was a female participant originating from a Spanish-speaking country. She seemed to 
know many members in the chat room as she was often asked questions from multiple members. Also 
from a Spanish-speaking country, Kevin was a male participant who was a relatively “talkative” member 
(posted more than average). Bui was a male participant who speaks Vietnamese, and he often used 
sarcasm and made jokes with other members. Leon, a Spanish-speaking male, was relatively quiet 
(contributed less than average). 
Data Analysis 
A common criticism to our analytic framework that we want to discuss before proceeding is the problem 
of validity or interpretation of discourse. Cameron (2001) outlined some responses to the problem of 
interpretation especially when participants are not available to validate the analysis. First, she ruled out 
the infinite variety argument, that texts simply cannot be interpreted with any reading the researcher may 
produce. Second, she urged interpretation that is mindful of the whole text and whether lexical choices 
stay true to the dominant interpretative frame. Third, she acknowledged that there is always potential 
variation in the interpretation as communication involves inference and background knowledge, but 
maintained that the analyst can explain a number of different meanings from the same discourse. Last, she 
recommended the use of an external reference group (e.g., focus groups) to provide corroboration of the 
discourse analysis. 
In order to best validate our analysis, we adhered closely to Cameron’s (2001) recommendations. Since 
we could not probe into the minds of the speakers themselves, we provided a careful analysis and 
interpretation of the discourse, keeping in mind that there were “better” interpretations that consider the 
surrounding context and dominant interpretative frame. In this vein, we used conversation vignettes 
Carlton J. Fong, Shengjie Lin, and Randi A. Engle Positioning ESOL Learner Identity 
 
Language Learning & Technology  148 
instead of isolated statements to better understand our case examples in context. We used a recursive 
qualitative content analysis of the online contributions (Henri, 1992; Stacey & Gerbic, 2003), which 
involves a continuous back and forth between theory and data, defining and redefining categories. 
Specifically, once positioning statements were identified, we examined each turn as well as the 
surrounding context and how the positioning statement was responded to, using the joint projects and 
uptake framework as a basis for our coding scheme. A subsequent turn was interpreted as a response to a 
previous turn to create a joint project. In addition, when appropriate, we provide multiple interpretations 
making use of pragmatics beyond the text. To provide as much corroboration as possible, the analyses 
were conducted independently by the authors and verified through multiple rounds of checking to ensure 
reliability. 
Researchers’ Background and Experience 
The first two authors conducted the analyses, and in order to establish trustworthiness and to describe any 
inherent biases, a brief biographical description of our personal and professional characteristics is 
required (Patton, 1990). Both coders working as researchers, came from an Asian background and had 
graduate backgrounds in psychology and education; the first author was a native English speaker, and the 
second author studied English as a second language. 
RESULTS 
From the ten chat sessions, there were a total of 2257 content turns. There were 53 turns that were coded 
as containing positioning statements, yielding a 2.35% prevalence rate. We noted that this frequency was 
a fairly low rate of prevalence and moved to qualitatively understand the kinds of positioning statements 
that were made and if they were taken up. The following are two examples of positioning statements: 
1. Kevin: It’s a phrase for smart people. I am an intelligent person 
Kevin: I am an anthropologist 
2. Kevin: how do you do to be so happy all time, Bui? 
Bui: I chat, Kevin =) 
In Example 1, Kevin described himself as a smart person, and later an intelligent person. In a subsequent 
turn, Kevin positioned himself as an anthropologist. Related to characteristics of intelligence and 
academic achievement, these statements explicitly positioned Kevin as a learner. In Example 2, Kevin 
was asking Bui why he seems happy all the time, and Bui responded citing his chatting behavior as the 
reason. This statement reflects Bui’s disposition towards chatting: it makes him happy. Since chat is used 
in an ESOL context, Bui’s identity towards learning English is implicitly positioned as positive. 
Using Clark’s (1996) joint projects as our framework, we identified how students engaged in the uptake 
process; however, due to the lack of co-presence (typical of face-to-face conversations), many proposals 
were not taken up, and in a literal sense, were ignored. Since the chat room was often rife with 
interweaving conversations, proposals that were not considered at all were frequent (they did not 
necessarily have the significance that deliberate ignoring would—an issue of basic grounding; see Clark, 
1996). Freiermuth (2011) discussed this phenomenon of a crowded chat channel and resultant multiple 
conversations that can occur as well as the inability to engage in dialogue using sequential turn-taking. 
This occurrence tended to reduce the need for online chatters to establish or hold the floor, but required 
chatters to juggle multiple topics. Chatters must also maintain interest among others who may become 
disoriented or ignore turns when trying to keep pace. 
To further examine positioning statements as instances of identity-related discourse, we selected two 
vignettes to highlight the noteworthy and more complex instances of positioning statements towards 
learning English. The vignettes originated from two different chat sessions. 
Carlton J. Fong, Shengjie Lin, and Randi A. Engle Positioning ESOL Learner Identity 
 
Language Learning & Technology  149 
Vignette One 
In the first vignette (see Figure 1), Maria proposed a question: “How can I say buitres?” She was unsure 
of how to translate this Spanish word (buitres literally means vulture, but in slang, it connotes more of a 
free-loader or someone who rarely pays for anything, relying instead on other people). However, this 
question was taken up as a discussion on the use of Spanglish, a combination of Spanish and English 
through code-switching and borrowing (Ardila, 2005). 
In Line 1, Maria presented her question to the group. Next, Bui took up Maria’s proposal, but he did not 
directly respond to it by translating buitres; instead Bui made a new proposal, altering the project. Bui 
may have interpreted Line 1 as an attempt to use only English in the chat room by finding an English 
equivalent, but he thought there was no problem in borrowing Spanish words in English. Instead, he 
encouraged the use of Spanglish to also aid his own partial comprehension. 
 
Figure 1. Vignette 1 transcript and joint projects. 
Kevin had taken up what Bui said but also placed new meaning regarding his proposal. He explicitly 
positioned himself as understanding English better than Spanglish. To Kevin, English on its own without 
Spanish borrowings (as in Spanglish) was easier to comprehend than Spanglish although he was a 
Spanish speaker, unlike Bui. In the next line, Leon, who spoke Spanish, agreed that Spanglish was harder; 
he was in full compliance with Line 4. Leon created common ground with Kevin by accepting the 
presentation that Kevin displayed, perhaps in full compliance that Kevin was better at English. At the 
same time, in Line 4, Kevin made a declination of project regarding the acceptability of Spanglish. 
Stating how he understood English better, he noted his preference for English over Spanglish. In Line 5, 
Leon declined Line 3 and was in full compliance with Line 4: Bui said that Spanglish is harder—possibly 
interpreted as unacceptable due in part to the difficulties of understanding it. 
Carlton J. Fong, Shengjie Lin, and Randi A. Engle Positioning ESOL Learner Identity 
 
Language Learning & Technology  150 
In Vignette 1, we identified three joint projects: (1) Maria as a speaker of Spanglish, (2) speaking 
Spanglish as acceptable, (3) Kevin as better at English than Spanglish. The first joint project of Maria was 
altered at first by Bui, but not declined or withdrawn, to generalize for all Spanglish speakers as being 
acceptable. Leading to the second joint project, Bui’s proposal was declined twice by both Kevin and 
Leon in Line 4 and Line 5, respectively, as Leon was in full compliance with Kevin’s comment that 
Spanglish was more difficult to understand, and thus, should not be accepted. The third joint project was 
positioning Kevin as better at English than Spanglish, and Leon was in full compliance again, agreeing 
that Spanglish was harder. We believed that each of these joint projects displayed how their identities as 
language learners were jointly positioned in their online discourse. Maria’s identity as a welcomed 
Spanglish speaker and Kevin’s identity as more competent in English speaking receive affirmation from 
the other chatters as their joint projects of positioning statements were mutually agreed upon. 
Vignette Two 
In the second conversation (see Figure 2), Kevin wondered why Bui was not talking for a while (Line 11), 
and Bui claimed to be practicing his reading skills (Line 13). One interpretation of Kevin’s Line 11 was a 
positioning of Bui, specifically, that his specialty was in speaking, not being silent. However, this 
positioning statement was never taken up or negotiated. 
In Line 13, Bui responded that he was merely reading what other people have been saying, perhaps in 
hopes of improving his ability to comprehend the conversations taking place. Another interpretation may 
involve positioning himself as a good student, flaunting that he was rehearsing his English. Maria was in 
full compliance with Bui’s positioning statement of himself, agreeing that what he said was, for the most 
part, true. She accepted Bui’s presentation with a smiling emoticon following his name in Line 14—a 
sign of approval of the last turn. However, she made an alteration to Bui’s proposal by modifying his 
presentation: she corrected “reading skill” to “reading comprehension.” This alteration was further 
evidence that Maria was in compliance with Bui positioning himself as a good student. By replacing 
“skill” with “comprehension,” perhaps she wanted to use an academic word, something more 
sophisticated, such as “comprehension” which is frequently used in the classroom. Through Maria’s 
alteration of Bui’s learning activity into greater sophistication, perhaps Bui’s identity was elevated to a 
higher status individual who not only practices the skill but also enhances comprehension. Maria’s 
alteration was significant because it displayed her acceptance and agreement that Bui was indeed 
practicing his reading. 
Perhaps in jest, Bui responded in Line 17 that there were no reading comprehension questions. One 
interpretation is that Bui’s response was not necessarily a declination of Maria (although a literal 
translation would lead others to believe so), but rather, an argument about a vocabulary concern: if his 
comment was supposed to be reading comprehension, then there should be the appropriate questions. 
Since such questions are implausible in the online setting, the response was humorous, denoted by the use 
of smiling emoticons. 
In Line 19, Maria altered Bui’s proposal and responded by saying she will provide the reading 
comprehension questions. Not only did she continue to comply with Bui’s positioning statement as a 
student who improves reading ability, but she also positioned herself as a person who can provide these 
questions, a teacher perhaps with enough authority in reading comprehension. Although this positioning 
statement can be a humorous attempt at role play, this could have been implicit positioning that she was 
sufficiently capable in reading comprehension to even offer up this service, even in pretense. In Line 22, 
Bui was in full compliance with Maria’s positioning statement from Line 19. By asking for only yes or no 
questions, Bui and Maria shared the mutual belief that she can provide such questions. 
In response to Bui’s positioning of Kevin in Line 13, Kevin responded in Line 20 that he was learning as 
well. He took up Bui’s implicit positioning statement that Kevin was not improving his reading skill by 
frequently posting, and responded by saying that he is learning too. In Line 13, it was unclear that Bui 
Carlton J. Fong, Shengjie Lin, and Randi A. Engle Positioning ESOL Learner Identity 
 
Language Learning & Technology  151 
was positioning Kevin, but Line 20 retroactively indicated that Bui was positioning Kevin as not 
practicing reading skills. Bui and Kevin did not share common ground on whether Kevin was also 
learning, since Kevin was almost taunting back to Bui in disagreement: “I’m learning too!” There were 
two opposing beliefs with regards to Kevin also being one who practices reading skill. However, Kevin 
made an interesting alteration when he said “learning” instead of “practicing” reading skill. He may be 
referring to his behavior as learning by reading as well or he may be assuming that his writing is a form of 
learning. Regardless of which interpretation, Kevin used a richer term “learning” in response to the 
activity Bui was engaged in and Kevin was evading in Line 13. Kevin’s statement may be thickening 
Bui’s identity, a transformation from a student who practices reading comprehension to a learner, with 
himself included. 
 
Figure 2. Vignette 2 transcript and joint projects that position Bui, Kevin, and Maria. 
 In Vignette 2, there were three joint projects that occurred: (1) Bui as one who practices reading, (2) 
Kevin as one who is not practicing reading but eventually is learning, and (3) Maria as an authority to 
make reading comprehension questions. The first joint project was in full compliance and altered multiple 
times to show that Bui is indeed practicing reading skill, but also practicing reading comprehension, and 
eventually learning. The second joint project of Kevin as one who is not practicing reading was 
retroactively determined, but eventually declined by Kevin, saying that Kevin was indeed learning. The 
Carlton J. Fong, Shengjie Lin, and Randi A. Engle Positioning ESOL Learner Identity 
 
Language Learning & Technology  152 
third joint project of Maria was in full compliance as Bui requested only yes or no questions from her—
someone who is qualified to offer such questions. 
DISCUSSION 
Research has suggested that CMC enhances the positive identity development of ESOL learners, but less 
is known about the linguistic mechanisms through which identity can be formed. In the present study, we 
highlighted how participants’ words in online chat may affirm their learning of English and sense of 
becoming competent students through the use of discourse and joint projects. From previous research, 
identifying as a student was the most frequent type of identity that was indexed by Chen (2013) in her 
examination of multilingual writers in social networks. Therefore, we first examined how prevalent this 
linguistic occurrence appeared in our data. The frequency of positioning statements in regards to language 
learning and SLA was notably low. One reason for this scarcity may be that participants may have already 
developed a mutual belief that they were competent language learners, so they did not need to position 
one another explicitly in their dialogue. Perhaps the chat room itself was implicitly understood to be 
helpful for improving their English, so it was not a relevant issue to discuss with others. ESOL chat 
members may have been more interested in finding out about other cultures, personal lives, and stories 
rather than topics explicitly related to language learning and their identity associated with their second 
language. 
Previous research has supported the motivating aspects of computer-mediated, intercultural exchange 
with overseas peers and the possibility of a second language being the medium for this exchange. 
(Freiermuth & Huang, 2012; 2015). Another explanation for the infrequency of identity-positioning 
statements comes from the social identity theory or a type of group loyalty (Lea & Spears, 1992). When 
group membership is salient, de-individuation occurs, which may have led to a shortage of identity-
related statements towards the self (a focus on the group, and not the individual). 
Although such positioning statements were rare, we took an in-depth approach of examining when they 
did occur to investigate the nature of these joint projects. Looking at the online conversations, we 
investigated how these positioning statement joint projects may have been an underlying mechanism to 
develop ESL learner identity, even in small, but perhaps potent doses. We posit that the chat participants 
were building up their identity towards learning: Bui and Kevin as learners of English engaged in reading 
comprehension and Maria as an English language learner competent enough to assess reading 
comprehension. 
In Vignette 1, the learners debated whether speaking Spanglish should be acceptable due to its 
comprehension difficulty in the chat room. Bui responded by assuring Maria that the use of both 
languages was acceptable in blended form. This interaction was aligned with the findings from previous 
research on the safe environment created through online discourse (Lam, 2004b). We argue that this sense 
of safety may arise through discourse from fellow chatters as they position one another as welcomed to 
learn English regardless of their competence. The joint project was followed by another occurrence of 
positioning: Kevin proposing that he understands English better than Spanglish, which is responded to in 
full compliance by Leon. Similar to previous research, this joint project suggested how online learners 
may enjoy the mutual exchange of shared feelings and goals towards learning English (Spiliotopoulos & 
Carey, 2005). Together, Kevin and Leon were affirming to each other their affinity towards English, and 
arguably, jointly positioning their identities as language learners. 
In Vignette 2, Bui described himself as a learner who is improving his reading skills. This positioning 
statement was in compliance with Maria as she agreed that he was a good student and even suggested 
through an alteration that what he was actually doing is more sophisticated—reading “comprehension.” 
The turns taken in Vignette 2 built a progression in Bui’s positioning through the joint projects regarding 
Bui’s type of activity, content of activity, and status of educational effort. Figure 3 provides three parallel 
Carlton J. Fong, Shengjie Lin, and Randi A. Engle Positioning ESOL Learner Identity 
 
Language Learning & Technology  153 
processes in the joint project of positioning Bui. He is not only positioned as someone who is practicing 
his reading skill, but also engaged in a sophisticated, complex level of reading comprehension and, 
ultimately, learning. His identity was no longer one of putting in no effort and not speaking, as positioned 
in the beginning of the conversation, but it was re-positioned, altered from just doing a simple activity of 
practicing reading skill. Bui’s identity as a learner was consistently identified as more sophisticated and 
meaningful across joint projects, in a process called micro-thickening (Wortham, 2004). Participating in 
this chat room was positioned and agreed upon to be sophisticated learning. Similarly, Bui was implicitly 
labeled and positioned as an advanced learner, and applied the same identity to himself as he was in full 
compliance with the negotiated joint projects, indicating a personal stake in how he was being positioned. 
Joint projects such as this one may bolster an ESOL student’s identity as an English learner. 
 
Figure 3. The joint project of positioning Bui. 
We argue that the positioning process of aforementioned identities in Vignette 2 may represent how 
Kramsch et al. (2000) described her participants as blurring the boundary lines of their social identity. We 
also observed how the online environment affords opportunities for role-play, self-authorship, and 
creating of a fictional self. However, in our study, learners were creating selves positioned positively to 
learn English. We extended these findings by examining how identity authorship is not exclusively 
occurring within the self, but is being socially constructed by other online participants within joint 
projects of mutually taking up their positioning proposals. 
In sum, the online participants were establishing understanding of what they were being positioned as and 
responding to these joint projects. In this mutual belief of their positioning, peers can potentially build up 
one another’s identities as confident learners of English. These two vignettes highlight the uptake of 
positioning statements, but what is it about the CMC environment that affords this positioning? 
A set of explanations comes from the willingness to communicate (WTC) literature. For example, 
Freiermuth and Jarrell (2006) provided a number of reasons that increase WTC including congenial 
Carlton J. Fong, Shengjie Lin, and Randi A. Engle Positioning ESOL Learner Identity 
 
Language Learning & Technology  154 
environments, opportunities to express their opinions, greater self-confidence and affiliation, reduced 
anxiety, and relationships that share common background knowledge and seem equitable and intimate. 
We contend that the CMC context with enhanced WTC is the fertile ground for the kinds of positioning 
statements that we observed in our data. Perhaps because of increased affiliation and self-confidence 
among chatters (i.e., Maria and Bui), participants were more willing to identify themselves and each other 
using identity-positioning statements. 
Another possible explanation stems from Kramsch et al. (2000) and the notions of authorship facilitated 
through the online environment. According to social identity theory (Lea & Spears, 1992), when group 
membership is made salient, positive characteristics of the group are conferred upon individual members, 
and individuals adopt the group’s identity and norms. Perhaps individuals in our study sensed a positive 
group membership as online learners of English, and began to adopt such identities for themselves and 
discuss aspects of these identities. In online chat, members may feel comfortable to affirm one another as 
competent language learners. Moreover, participants may have developed camaraderie with one another 
and in that shared identity, positioned one another as allies. 
Furthermore, compared to face-to-face communication, CMC has been associated with higher levels of 
private self-awareness and lower levels of public self-awareness (Matheson & Zanna, 1988). Private self-
awareness refers to covert aspects of the self such as personal feelings, beliefs, and values, whereas public 
self-awareness involves overt aspects of the self that are sensitive to attention and evaluation by others. 
The pattern we observed in our data perhaps reflects this trend, as the chat participants’ use of positioning 
statements seemed to target their sense of private self-awareness. These reasons extend the growing 
literature on motivating qualities of online chat. 
Some limitations to the study involve determining accurate meanings in online conversations. It was 
difficult to isolate a single meaning or interpretation while analyzing the language because the 
interpretation depended largely on conversational context. Another difficulty was the lack of online co-
presence, leading to uncertainty about whether proposals were taken up or not. Cues of uptake and 
common ground in face-to-face conversation were lost—a hurdle in CMC discourse analysis. In addition, 
further details about the participants were unavailable to provide a more complete understanding of the 
participants as well as the opportunity for member checking. Future considerations for research involve 
case studies in ESOL classrooms that engage in online chat. Accompanied with interviews and 
comparative analyses of classroom conversations, future studies may triangulate results from the 
classroom, online interactions, and self-report measures. 
CONCLUSION 
Does ESOL learner identity get positioned in online chat contexts and, if so, how often and by what 
mechanism? What is the nature of identity positioning and how is it affirmed in online conversations? Our 
study provides some answers to these questions through a quantitative assessment of the prevalence of 
positioning statements and a qualitative look at two conversation vignettes in select online chat 
transcripts. We found that 2% of turns reflected instances of positioning, but despite its low prevalence, 
two in-depth analyses of case examples uncovered the nature of positioning and the powerful ways 
learner identity was discussed and grounded. In both vignettes, we observed the positioning of chat 
participants’ linguistic characteristics and competencies. In Vignette 1, the use of Spanglish and English 
and their respective users were positioned and discussed in a series of joint projects. In Vignette 2, chat 
participants positioned themselves and one another as active language students who practice, learn, and 
help others learn English. Together, these vignettes painted a vivid picture of how learner identity was 
positioned and taken up by chat room participants. 
Additionally, our study applies an analytic framework and uses case examples to better understand how 
identity is positioned online for ESOL learners. Methodologically, we provide an approach to identity 
Carlton J. Fong, Shengjie Lin, and Randi A. Engle Positioning ESOL Learner Identity 
 
Language Learning & Technology  155 
positioning using joint projects, which can be used to describe intersubjectivity in other contexts. Our 
findings also suggest the use of CMC fosters identity development for language learners. Although our 
study was not directly linked with a formal language learning education context such as an ESL 
classroom, we believe that our analysis has relevance for language instructors as they might incorporate 
online chat into their pedagogy. One classroom application entails language learners reflecting upon their 
experience and particular episodes of online discourse. As students consider the discourse of their 
learning process as they engage in chat, this may bolster their sense of identity towards language learning. 
It is important to note that the potential threat of negative statements to tear down one’s identity remains, 
and we encourage caution in wisely implementing online chat with language learners. However, despite 
such a warning, findings from our study support how online chat sessions may foster positive identity 
development within and beyond the classroom. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I want to especially thank Rick Kern and Randi Engle for serving as advisers for my undergraduate thesis, 
upon which this work is based. I also want to extend a thank you to the anonymous reviewers for their 
thoughtful suggestions and insights. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Carlton J. Fong is a research fellow at the University of Texas at Austin. His research interests include the 
motivational, sociocultural, and psychosocial development of postsecondary students and the use of meta-
analysis in the social sciences. 
E-mail: carlton.fong@utexas.edu 
Shengjie Lin is a PhD student in the Department of Educational Psychology with an emphasis in Human 
Development, Culture, and Learning Sciences (HDCLS) at the University of Texas at Austin. He is 
interested in second language acquisition for international students as well as investigating emotions in 
learning. 
E-mail: shengjie.lin@utexas.edu 
Randi A. Engle (deceased) was an associate professor of Education and Cognitive Science at University 
of California, Berkeley. She studied the foundational perspectives on how language, communication, and 
social interaction influence learning. 
 
REFERENCES 
Ardila, A. (2005). Spanglish: An anglicized Spanish dialect. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences, 
27(1), 60–81. doi:10.1177/0739986304272358 
Beauvois, M. H. (1992). Computer-assisted classroom discussion in the foreign language classroom: 
Conversation in slow motion. Foreign Language Annals, 25(5), 455–464. doi:10.1111/j.1944-
9720.1992.tb01128.x 
Cameron, D. (2001). Working with spoken discourse. London, England: Sage. 
Chen, H. I. (2013). Identity practices of multilingual writers in social networking spaces. Language 
Learning & Technology, 17(2), 143–170. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/chen.pdf 
Carlton J. Fong, Shengjie Lin, and Randi A. Engle Positioning ESOL Learner Identity 
 
Language Learning & Technology  156 
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Clark, H. H., & Schaefer, E. F. (1989). Contributing to discourse. Cognitive Science, 13(2), 259–294. 
doi:10.1207/s15516709cog1302_7 
Duran, R. P. (2008). A commentary on “L2 literacy and the design of the self”: Electronic representation 
and social networking. In J. Coiro, M. Knobel, C. Lankshear, & D. J. Leu (Eds.), Handbook of research 
on new literacies (pp. 1229–1240). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Freiermuth, M. R. (2001). Native speakers or non-native speakers: Who has the floor? Online and face-to-
face interaction in culturally mixed small groups. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 14(2), 
169–199. doi:10.1076/call.14.2.169.5780 
Freiermuth, M. R. (2011). Debating in an online world: A comparative analysis of speaking, writing, and 
online chat. Text & Talk , 31(2), 127–151. doi:10.1515/text.2011.006 
Freiermuth, M. R., & Huang, H. C. (2012). Bringing Japan and Taiwan closer electronically: A look at an 
intercultural online synchronic chat task and its effect on motivation. Language Teaching Research, 
16(1), 61–88. doi:10.1177/1362168811423341 
Freiermuth, M. R., & Huang, H. C. (2015). Do opposites attract? Willingness to communicate in the 
target language for academically, culturally, and linguistically different language learners. International 
Journal of Computer-Assisted Language Learning and Teaching, 5(2), 40–57. 
doi:10.4018/IJCALLT.2015040103 
Freiermuth, M. R., & Jarrell, D. (2006). Willingness to communicate: Can online chat help? International 
Journal of Applied Linguistics, 16(2), 189–212. doi:10.1111/j.1473-4192.2006.00113.x 
Garton, L., Haythornthwaite, C., & Wellman, B. (1997). Studying online social networks. Journal of 
Computer‐ mediated Communication, 3(1). doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.1997.tb00062.x 
Gee, J. P. (2000). Identity as an analytic lens for research in education. Review of Research in Education, 
25, 99–125. doi:10.1207/s15516709cog1302_7 
Gee, J. P. (2014a). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Gee, J. P. (2014b). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of self in everyday life. Garden City, NY: Doubleday. 
Henri, F. (1992). Computer conferencing and content analysis. In A. R. Kaye (Ed.), Collaborative 
learning through computer conferencing: The Najaden papers (pp. 117–136). New York, NY: Springer. 
Holland, D., Lachicotte, W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in cultural worlds. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Jarrell, D., & Freiermuth, M. R. (2005). The motivational power of Internet chat. RELC Journal, 36(1), 
59–72. doi:10.1177/0033688205053482 
Jordan, M. E., Schallert, D. L., Park, Y., Lee, S., Chiang, Y.-h. V., Cheng, A.-C. J., Song, K., Chu, H.-N. 
R., Kim, T. & Lee, H. (2012). Expressing uncertainty in computer-mediated discourse: Language as a 
marker of intellectual work. Discourse Processes, 49(8), 660–692. doi:10.1080/0163853X.2012.722851 
Kelm, O. R. (1992). The use of synchronous computer networks in second language instruction: A 
preliminary report. Foreign Language Annals, 25(5), 441–454. doi:10.1111/j.1944-9720.1992.tb01127.x 
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity and 
characteristics of language production. Modern Language Journal, 79(4), 457–476. doi:10.1111/j.1540-
4781.1995.tb05445.x 
Carlton J. Fong, Shengjie Lin, and Randi A. Engle Positioning ESOL Learner Identity 
 
Language Learning & Technology  157 
Kern, R. (2006). Perspectives on technology in learning and teaching languages. TESOL Quarterly, 40(1), 
183–210. doi:10.2307/40264516 
Klimanova, L., & Dembovskaya, S. (2013). L2 identity, discourse, and social networking in Russian. 
Language Learning & Technology, 17(1), 69–88. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2013/klimanovadembovskaya.pdf 
Kramsch, C., A’Ness, F., & Lam, W. S. E. (2000). Authenticity and authorship in the computer-mediated 
acquisition of L2 literacy. Language Learning & Technology, 4(2), 78–104. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/kramsch/default.html 
Lam, W. S. E. (2000). L2 literacy and the design of the self: A case study of a teenager writing on the 
Internet. TESOL Quarterly, 34(3), 457–482. doi:10.2307/3587739 
Lam, W. S. E. (2004a). Border discourses and identities in transnational youth culture. In J. Mahiri (Ed.), 
What they don’t learn in school: Literacy in the lives of urban youth (pp. 457–482). New York, NY: Peter 
Lang. 
Lam, W. S. E. (2004b). Second language socialization in a bilingual chatroom: Global and local 
considerations. Language Learning & Technology, 8(3), 44–65. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num3/pdf/lam.pdf 
Lam, W. S. E. (2009). Multiliteracies on instant messaging in negotiating local, translocal, and 
transnational affiliations: A case of an adolescent immigrant. Reading Research Quarterly, 44(4), 377–
397. doi:10.1598/RRQ.44.4.5 
Lea, M., & Spears, R. (1992). Paralanguage and social perception in computer‐mediated communication. 
Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce, 2(3-4), 321–341. 
doi:10.1080/10919399209540190 
Matheson, K., & Zanna, M. P. (1988). The impact of computer-mediated communication on self-
awareness. Computers in Human Behavior, 4(3), 221–233. doi:10.1016/0747-5632(88)90015-5 
McClure, K. K. (2010). Seeking inclusivity in English language learning web sites. Journal of Language, 
Identity, & Education, 9(4), 265–281. doi:10.1080/15348458.2010.503917 
Mercer, N. (2007). Sociocultural discourse analysis: Analyzing classroom talk as a social mode of 
thinking. Journal of Applied Linguistics, 1(2), 137–168. doi:10.1558/japl.2004.1.2.137 
Meunier, L. (1998). Personality and motivational factors in electronic networking. In J. Muyskens (Ed.), 
New ways of learning and teaching: Focus on technology and foreign language education (pp. 63–126). 
Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle. 
Moje, E. B. (2008). Foregrounding the disciplines in secondary literacy teaching and learning: A call for 
change. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 52(2), 96–107. doi:10.1598/JAAL.52.2.1 
Moje, E. B., & Lewis, C. (2007). Examining opportunities to learn literacy: The role of critical 
sociocultural literacy research. In C. Lewis, P. Enciso, & E. B. Moje (Eds.), Reframing sociocultural 
research on literacy: Identity, agency, and power (pp. 15–48). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Norton, B. (2000). Identity and language learning: Gender, ethnicity, and educational change. Harlow, 
UK: Longman. 
Patton, M. Q. (1990). Qualitative evaluation and research methods (2nd ed.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
Pavlenko, A. (2004). Gender and sexuality in foreign and second language education: Critical and 
feminist approaches. In B. Norton & K. Toohey (Eds.), Critical pedagogies and language learning 
(pp. 53–71). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Carlton J. Fong, Shengjie Lin, and Randi A. Engle Positioning ESOL Learner Identity 
 
Language Learning & Technology  158 
Pavlenko, A., & Norton, B. (2007). Imagined communities, identity, and English language learning. In J. 
Cummins & C. Davison (Eds.), International handbook of English language teaching (pp. 669–680). 
Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer. 
Schallert, D. L., Chiang, Y.-h. V., Park, Y., Jordan, M. E., Lee, H., Cheng, A.-C. J., Chu, H.-N. R, Lee, 
S., Kim, T., & Song, K. (2009). Being polite while fulfilling different discourse functions in online 
classroom discussions. Computers & Education, 53(3), 713–725. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2009.04.009 
Schallert, D. L., Lissi, M. R., Reed, J. H., Dodson, M. M., Benton, R. E., & Hopkins, L. F. (1996). How 
coherence is socially constructed in oral and written classroom discussions of reading assignments. 
Yearbook of the National Reading Conference, 45, 471–483. 
Shin, D. (2006). ESL students’ computer-mediated communication practices: Context configuration. 
Language Learning & Technology, 10(3), 65–84. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num3/pdf/shin.pdf 
Spiliotopoulos, V., & Carey, S. (2005). Investigating the role of identity in writing using electronic 
bulletin boards. Canadian Modern Language Review, 62(1), 87–109. doi:10.3138/cmlr.62.1.87 
Stacey, E., & Gerbic, P. (2003). Investigating the impact of computer conferencing: Content analysis as a 
manageable research tool. In G. Crisp, D. Thiele, I. Scholten, S. Barker, & J. Baron (Eds.), Interact, 
integrate, impact: Proceedings of the 20th annual conference of the Australasian Society for Computers 
in Learning in Tertiary Education (pp. 495–503). Adelaide, Australia: Australasian Society for 
Computers in Learning in Tertiary Education. 
Street, B. (1993). Cross-cultural approaches to literacy. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Warschauer, M. (1996). Motivational aspects of using computers for writing and communication. In M. 
Warschauer (Ed.), Telecollaboration in foreign language learning: Proceedings of the Hawai‘i 
symposium (pp. 29–46). Honolulu, Hawai‘i: University of Hawai‘i, Second Language Teaching & 
Curriculum Center. Retrieved from http://www.nflrc.hawaii.edu/networks/NW01/NW01.pdf 
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer‐ mediated collaborative learning: Theory and practice. Modern 
Language Journal, 81(4), 470–481. doi:10.1111/j.1540-4781.1997.tb05514.x 
Warschauer, M., Turbee, L., & Roberts, B. (1996). Computer learning networks and student 
empowerment. System, 24(1), 1–14. doi:10.1016/0346-251X(95)00049-P 
Wortham, S. (2004). From good student to outcast: The emergence of a classroom identity. Ethos, 32(2), 
164–187. doi:10.1525/eth.2004.32.2.164 
