Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2017, Volume 21, Issue 3 
pp. 44–58 
LANGUAGE TEACHING AND TECHNOLOGY FORUM  
 
 
Copyright © 2017 Kelly Arispe & Jack Burston 
 
 
Making it personal: Performance-based assessments, 
ubiquitous technology, and advanced learners 
Kelly Arispe, Boise State University 
Jack Burston, Cyprus University of Technology 
Abstract 
This pedagogical implementation study advocates for performance-driven assessments to help learners 
become aware of and improve upon presentational speaking skills at the advanced level. A social media 
content creation tool, Adobe Spark Video, enabled learners to practice oral skills outside of class. The task 
design, implementation, and evaluation met the principle objectives of learner autonomy—namely 
awareness, choice, reflection, and goal setting. A step-by-step guide with examples and survey results about 
student perceptions is included. While the case study targeted upper-division Spanish majors, the 
pedagogical model could be adapted for intermediate and advanced learners of any second or foreign 
language. 
Keywords: Learner Autonomy, Ubiquitous Learning and Teaching, Instructional Design 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: Spanish 
APA Citation: Arispe, K., & Burston, J. (2017). Making it personal: Performance-based assessments, 
ubiquitous technology, and advanced learners. Language Learning & Technology, 21(3), 44–58. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2017/arispeburston.pdf 
Introduction 
A traditional foreign language major (i.e., with no native or heritage language background) faces formidable 
odds in achieving advanced-level competence. Second language acquisition research suggests that with 
Category 1 languages like Spanish, French, Italian, and so forth, learners need 720 contact hours to reach 
the advanced level (Malone, Rifkin, Christian, & Johnson, 2003). Yet, a typical undergraduate program 
affords 320 hours at best. With less than half of the required time on task, the discrepancy between 
advanced-level expectations and intermediate-level realities is all but inevitable. Not surprisingly, 
graduating majors in foreign language programs in the US regularly fail in great numbers to meet the 
minimum requirements set forth by the American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages (ACTFL) 
in oral proficiency for teacher certification (i.e., advanced-low). 
This pedagogical implementation study aimed to serve as a model for addressing the dual problems of 
inadequate time on task and lack of metalinguistic awareness of what constitutes advanced language 
competence. It proposed to do this through the use of a social media content creation tool (SMCCT; see 
Lewis, Pea, & Rosen, 2010) and explicit exposure to objective benchmarks of language ability. 
Ubiquitously accessible pedagogical resources (Burston, 2014), in this case the SMCCT, provides the 
means of greatly extending student time on task outside of the classroom, and performance-driven 
assessments1 raise awareness of the criteria that underlie the determination of advanced-level competence. 
The SMCCT used, Adobe Spark Video (ASV), was aligned to the National Council of State Supervisors 
for Languages (NCSSFL) and ACTFL can-do statements (CDSs) and the ACTFL performance descriptors 
(PDs) to offer intermediate-high- and advanced-level second language (AL2) learners the opportunity to 
improve oral proficiency while becoming more autonomous through four key elements in a learner 
autonomy (LA) framework: awareness, choice, reflection, and goal setting. Insights from a Senior Capstone 
(fourth-year) Spanish Linguistics course are highlighted. However, this model for assessment design and 
Kelly Arispe and Jack Burston 45 
 
 
evaluation can be adapted to intermediate and advanced levels and applied to any language. 
The Advanced-Low Hurdle 
In Spring 2016, the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP) and ACTFL made it a 
requirement that foreign language teacher candidates reach at least advanced-low (for category 1 and 2 
languages) on the Oral Proficiency Interview (OPI) in order for programs to maintain national recognition. 
This cut-off has serious consequences for teacher candidates not having the advantage of being a native or 
heritage speaker. Indeed, according to the most recent national study of teacher certification results (Glisan, 
Swender, & Surface, 2013), in 2012, 45.7% of all category 1 and 2 language candidates ranked no higher 
than intermediate-high. Inasmuch as native and heritage speakers are included in these statistics, it can be 
confidently assumed that on the one hand, their presence inflated the success rate and, on the other, the 
failure rate is particularly reflective of traditional students. Needless to say, these statistics should not only 
impact foreign language teacher education preparation but also incite discussion within foreign language 
programs about how to improve linguistic competence especially for traditional language majors. It begs 
the question, given the longstanding dominance of communicative language teaching methods, why foreign 
language and teacher training programs struggle to graduate advanced-level students at least in terms of 
oral proficiency. After all, advanced-low is the minimum level at which teachers can speak spontaneously 
in the classroom, provide the language input that is necessary for language acquisition to occur, and interact 
comfortably with their students in the foreign language. So, too, teachers need to be able to speak at the 
advanced level in order to deliver a standards-based instructional program (Glisan, 2013, p. 543). 
One of the challenges in advanced-level foreign language courses is that linguistic development is often 
parenthetical to content like literature, linguistics, or culture. While these content areas are critical in 
fostering learning outcomes for any given major, they should not come at the cost of continued language 
development. As competency level studies published over the past 50 years consistently attest, access to 
content alone in the target language demonstrably fails to allow substantial numbers of learners to reach an 
advanced level of proficiency (e.g., Carroll, 1967; Hamlyn, Surface, & Swender, 2007; Hiple & Manley, 
1987; Sullivan, 2011; Swender, 2003; Uber Grosse, Alley, & Uber, 1992). For upper-division content 
courses to have any hope of overcoming this shortcoming, they must be conceptualized and implemented 
with a strong, integrated, language learning component. Moreover, explicit learning outcomes must align 
to a holistic framework that transcends the course. So, too, it is essential that learners have an accurate 
awareness of their current foreign language competence level as well as of what constitutes an advanced 
level. This applies to all graduating majors, but especially to those requiring teacher certification. Without 
such awareness, students in their third and fourth years really have no way of knowing what exactly they 
need to do on an individual basis to attain advanced-level competence. Typically, language learners have 
only their grades and the title of courses in which they have enrolled (e.g., Advanced Writing) as an 
indication of their linguistic competence level. Yet grades and course titles do little, if anything, to help 
orient them to the descriptive benchmarks that underlie the criteria upon which advanced-level linguistic 
competence is evaluated. If students are not to be left shooting in the dark, course evaluations, in addition 
to grades, need to systematically incorporate self-assessments and formative or summative assessments that 
use a holistic evaluation based on the same objective measures of proficiency against which advanced-level 
performance is judged. In this way, advanced language learners are empowered to be conscious and 
conscientious participants in how they work with their instructor to bolster their success. 
Although many in the profession may question the required OPI advanced level as an unrealistic and 
overbearing burden on foreign language teacher candidates, these types of objective measures do have the 
merit of revealing compelling characteristics about the typical foreign language major and the nature of 
language development over time. A viable way to address the time issue (i.e., 720 hours) is to incorporate 
computer-assisted language learning (CALL) materials outside of class to increase time on task. The 
alignment of CALL to the level of the learner, however, is paramount. As is implied by the broad range of 
46 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
published results in teacher certification OPI assessments, the linguistic competence level of third- and 
fourth-year students can, and usually does, easily vary from intermediate-low to superior on the ACTFL 
scale. CALL materials need to be adaptive (i.e., personalized) and strategically implemented within a LA 
framework in order to afford learners increased opportunities to progress on the proficiency scale and make 
the transition from intermediate to advanced level. It is this goal that motivates the pedagogical 
implementation case study that follows, which was based upon the exploitation of the SMCCT, ASV. 
Conceptual Framework: Proficiency Driven Assessments and Learner Autonomy 
LA and AL2 learners share a synergistic relationship. The more proficient learners become in a language, 
the better they are able to take hold of their learning (Holec, 1979). LA refers to the goal for learners to 
assume responsibility for their own learning process (Benson, 2006; Blin, 2004; Holec, 1979; Little, 2007; 
Schwienhorst, 2012; Van Lier, 2014). While arguably beneficial for any academic discipline, LA is 
especially essential for the L2 classroom because it influences language development. For example, L2 
learners must make appropriate choices when engaging with resources in and speakers of the target 
language; and they must be aware of their linguistic objectives with regards to these interactions. Little 
(2007) offers some of the most tangible concepts of LA for language learning and highlights three 
pedagogical principles that are required for achieving the goal of LA. First, learners need to value their role 
as a key player in the process of learning. Second, learners should be reflective and critically evaluate how 
they are learning. Last, Little suggests that learners need to use the target language “as the principal medium 
of language learning” (p. 2). Perhaps most importantly, LA is largely rooted in the notion of awareness: 
language awareness, self-awareness as a language learner, awareness of learning goals, and, finally, an 
awareness of options or learning strategies (Porto, 2007, p. 673). 
ACTFL provides an effective toolkit for helping learners become aware of what is required to improve their 
proficiency. In addition to defining the proficiency levels and sub-levels according to mode (writing, 
reading, listening, speaking), ACTFL, in tandem with the NCSSFL, provides a check-list of CDSs that 
make linguistic progress both tangible and implementable. By using the CDSs for self-assessments, AL2 
learners are encouraged to become better aware and reflective about functions that are either attainable or 
just within reach. In the same way, the PDs provide rich detail for beginner, intermediate, and advanced 
levels across seven domains that address the learner’s performance and communicative ability. Moreover, 
PDs can provide instructors with helpful language to include in a rubric for summative assessments that 
target a function of the CDSs. In this way, the CDSs and PDs can be used together to offer holistic, 
descriptive direction in linguistic development. In both the CDS and PD documents, ACTFL encourages 
language instructors to explicitly guide learners to look as a scaffold to the level just beyond their reach. 
Thus, these documents help language instructors foster a LA environment, especially for AL2 learners that 
must overcome larger boundaries of proficiency at the advanced and then superior levels on the inverted 
ACTFL Guidelines Pyramid. 
CALL is defined by Levy (1997) as the “search for and study of applications of the computer in language 
teaching and learning” (p. 1). Drawing upon Kessler’s (2013) description of digital project-based learning 
as a context for promoting participatory culture in a LA framework, ASV, exploits CALL material that 
offers AL2 learners additional context beyond the traditional classroom. Accordingly, autonomy can be 
negotiated through the ways learners are encouraged and empowered to interact with SMCCTs such as 
ASV through content creation and, later, reflection. 
The SMCCT used in this study, ASV, is not a language learning technology. Rather, it is a web-based tool 
that coincidentally helps language learners organize and voice-record their presentations efficiently and 
creatively. Using the ACTFL CDSs as the impetus to offer both awareness and choice, AL2 learners used 
ASV for a project-based presentational speaking assessment. The technology enabled AL2 learners to 
reflect both individually and collaboratively on presentational speaking parameters via a rubric that drew 
largely from the PDs, which the instructor used for feedback. The following sections outline the 
Kelly Arispe and Jack Burston 47 
 
 
instructional context and the details of the assignment from implementation to evaluation based on a case 
study at Boise State University (BSU). 
Instructional Context 
Adhering to Little’s (2007) pedagogical principles for LA, this case study was designed to help graduating 
Spanish majors become aware of, reflect on, and practice their oral proficiency according to the ACTFL 
proficiency guidelines. At BSU, the topic of the Senior Capstone course (Spanish 498) varies depending on 
the expertise of the professor. For this study, it was a Spanish sociolinguistics course that explored language 
and identity in the Spanish-speaking world. The students in the course were exposed to the notion of oral 
proficiency in large part because of the OPI that was administered when they entered into their upper-
division (i.e., 300-level) coursework. They also knew that the OPI would be administered when they exited 
the program. Thus, they had taken one OPI exam, had heard and read about it in their syllabus, and had 
been aware of their level of oral proficiency from their third year. Over the previous two years, several of 
the instructors in the Spanish program had used the CDSs in their courses, but this was not mandatory and 
therefore not standardized in the program. Therefore, the students in this study had some familiarity with 
oral proficiency and the ACTFL proficiency guidelines and yet no explicit understanding of how to advance 
to the next level. 
Like all other upper-division Spanish courses at BSU, Spanish 498 is populated by learners with a broad 
range of linguistic backgrounds, namely native speakers, heritage language learners, returning missionaries 
with extended experience abroad (two or more years), and traditional second language learners. Figure 1 
shows the average oral proficiency profile for Spanish majors enrolled in their final semester (i.e., Senior 
Capstone). As with other published studies of the linguistic competency of graduating language majors, a 
wide proficiency range is attested, in this case from intermediate-mid to superior. It is to be noted, however, 
that the Advanced ratings (which together amount to 82.2%) are very high compared to nationally published 
averages (e.g., Glisan et al., 2013). This high level of linguistic competence results from the particular 
context at BSU—that is, a substantial number of native speakers, heritage language learners, and students 
that spend two or more years abroad. Figure 2 depicts the linguistic profile for the 74 graduating Spanish 
majors that took the OPI from 2014 to 2016. 
 
Figure 1. OPI advisory ratings (N = 74) for graduating Spanish Majors at BSU from 2014 to 2016 
48 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
 
Figure 2. OPI advisory ratings according to linguistic profile for graduating Spanish majors at BSU from 
2014 to 2016 
Of the 74 graduates, just 51.4% (N = 38) were traditional second language learners, meaning they neither 
were native speakers or heritage language learners nor had experienced extended study abroad (for two or 
more years). As Figure 3 demonstrates, even so, BSU traditional second language learners exceed the 
national average, with 65.7% attaining advanced level proficiency or higher. Notwithstanding, some 
caution is warranted when interpreting these results, firstly because the sample size is small and secondly 
because these ratings were advisory.2 Lastly, however good the BSU results may be, the bottom line remains 
that over a third of traditional graduating majors remain at the intermediate level of competency. 
 
Figure 3. OPI ratings for traditional second language graduating Spanish majors from 2014 to 2016 
Owing to a successful internal grant in 2013 that provided both the infrastructure and training to aid teaching 
and learning via mobile technology, the upper-division Spanish program at BSU is mostly mobile. As a 
result, the participants in this study were accustomed to using a number of mobile apps and web-based tools 
in their courses—for example, Notability, Adobe Spark, Nearpod, PicCollage, and Google Docs. One of 
the principal objectives in the mobile initiative was to increase opportunities for learners to use the target 
language in personalized ways both in and out of the classroom. Personalized CALL usually refers to 
adaptive, language learning technologies that can cater to the individual needs of the language learner. In 
the context of this study, however, personalization refers to the ways the instructor designed and 
Kelly Arispe and Jack Burston 49 
 
 
implemented the task and the pairing of the technology. Specifically, learners were offered the opportunity 
to choose the level of the task that best fit their needs as well as to personalize the assessment according to 
their interests, experiences, and so forth. 
ASV (formerly Adobe Voice) has been one of the standout technologies in the program and specifically in 
Spanish 498. Since all students were provided with Apple iPads, they could access ASV using these devices 
to create professional animated video presentations. However, being entirely cloud-based, ASV was equally 
accessible to them from virtually any computer with a broadband Internet connection. The video was unique 
in that the users’ voice animated what was depicted on each slide so that the focus was on the content (i.e., 
picture or words on the slide) rather than a traditional video presentation where the speaker would be front 
and center. Users could select from templates that featured themes (e.g., show and tell, tell a story, promote 
an idea, etc.), or they could start from scratch. One of the best characteristics of ASV was that it encouraged 
users to talk under 60 seconds before prompting them to move on to their next slide, therefore scaffolding 
an organized discourse (which was one of the benchmarks for advanced presentational speaking on the 
PDs). With the tap of a button, users could grab images and icons from the web and create a powerful visual 
that connected to the idea they were discussing or defending. Because this tool did not allow much room 
for text, it obliged students to communicate via oral discourse, which was the objective of the assignment 
Making it Personal. 
Making it Personal: The value of Awareness, Choice, and Reflection in Advanced 
Language Learning 
The title of the course in question was Senior Seminar: Multilingualism, Identity, and Linguistic Variation 
in the Spanish Speaking World. One of the goals of the course was to make content personal and to help 
learners—regardless of linguistic or ethnic background—find a way to relate and identify with Spanish-
speaking communities either abroad or in the US. To this end, the theme for the summative assessment 
(comprising 20% of the total grade) was Making it Personal. Students, working independently, did the 
assignment four times during the 15-week semester (each time the ASV assessment probed a different topic 
according to the thematic unit) and targeted three of the course learning outcomes: 
• Analyze the most salient patterns and characteristics for linguistic change and variation in Spain, 
Latin America, and the US. 
• Practice and improve presentational speaking via a research presentation and Making it Personal 
assessments. 
• Learn about and demonstrate digital fluency in tandem with Spanish language proficiency. 
Assessment and Rubric Design 
The assessment was designed to adhere to the three course objectives listed above as well as to four LA 
objectives (i.e., awareness, choice, reflection, and goal setting) through the incorporation of the CDSs and 
PDs. In addition, the instructor was also mindful of the ACTFL Global Competencies and aligned the 
Making it Personal assignment to two of the five global competencies: 
• Recognize the multiplicity of factors that influence who people are and how they communicate. 
• Reflect on one’s personal experiences across cultures to evaluate personal feelings, thoughts, 
perceptions, and reactions. 
Appendix A and Appendix B elucidate how the instructor designed the task and the rubric, respectively. 
Assessment Implementation 
The assessment implementation was a 3-part process that was conducted outside of class (see Appendix C). 
At the beginning of the semester, a proficiency workshop was conducted to present the ACTFL proficiency 
guidelines and distribute the CDSs and PDs specific to presentational speaking. Students were guided 
50 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
through the documents and asked to self-assess their performance in accordance with the ACTFL PDs that 
were studied. Although the CDS and PD documents existed only in English, students responded to all three 
steps in the target language (i.e., Spanish). A student example (permission granted; final OPI advisory rating 
was intermediate-high), may be seen at this page. 
Reflections on Learner Progress 
Since the purpose of this paper is to provide a pedagogical model for using instructional technology, no 
analysis of linguistic gains is presented. However, student reactions to becoming more aware, the use of 
the ASV technology, and perception about oral proficiency provide valuable feedback to help steer future 
pedagogical implementation. There were a total of 17 students (7 male, 10 female; aged approximately 18–
40) enrolled in the course and the linguistic background of the students was indicative of Spanish majors 
in general. Native speakers and heritage language learners accounted for 23.5%, each, while students with 
extended study abroad accounted for just 11.8% and traditional second language learners 41.2%. 
To collect this feedback, a short, anonymous survey was sent out to all of the students four months after the 
course had ended. The lapse in time was beneficial in helping students distance themselves from course 
evaluation (in this case, one particular assignment) and their final grade. On the other hand, the time lag 
undoubtedly contributed to a low response rate—only 7 out of 17 students replied. Notwithstanding, those 
that did so responded favorably to the Making it Personal assignment and to the way it increased awareness 
of their presentational speaking performance at the intermediate and advanced levels. 
First, all of the respondents found the incorporation of the CDSs and the PDs in the rubric to be an improved 
way of receiving feedback over just a grade (see Figure 4). Second, they agreed that ASV was a good 
technology for creating and practicing in the target language (see Figure 5). 
 
Figure 4. Learner perception about CDSs and PDs for feedback 
Kelly Arispe and Jack Burston 51 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Learner perception about use of ASV technology 
Last, all but one student believed that the assignment helped them improve their oral proficiency (see Figure 
6). It should be pointed out, however, that the one student who responded Neutral was a female native 
speaker who arguably did not experience much need to improve oral skills. Although she did not disagree 
(or find it to be a hindrance), the assignment might not have targeted her particular presentational speaking 
needs at the superior level (the OPI rating the student received).3 
 
Figure 6. Learner perception about oral proficiency gains. 
Finally, students were asked to reflect on the value of the assignment in raising awareness of advanced-
level expectations. What follows are some of their responses. Words in bold connect to the key pedagogical 
purpose of the assignment, especially as it relates to the principles of LA. 
Reflection Prompt: The Making it Personal assignments were an attempt to help you measure your own 
abilities according to real-world expectations. Do you agree this is important? Was the assignment 
successful in helping you become more aware? 
52 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
I think it matters very much to know what is expected at the advanced level for oral proficiency. Before 
the course, I did not know that there was even a rubric. You were successful in helping me become 
more aware and that has improved my oral proficiency inside and out of the academic atmosphere. 
As a result of this class I reached a level of Spanish proficiency I had no idea a non-native speaker 
could reach. In the short break after the semester I can already feel a small decrease in proficiency. 
The level of practice and practical application that comes with this course and the program in general 
was one of the greatest experiences of my life. 
I feel like I have a better understanding of the academic use of Spanish from the assignments. In 
conversation classes the conversations are more general and casual. But in your class it was academic 
and complex and challenged me in a way that I had to form an opinion regarding a topic that was 
complex and then articulate that opinion using academic Spanish. 
Conclusion 
For most traditional L2 learners, the lack of time on task unquestionably impedes reaching the advanced 
level before graduating. Foreign language instructors need to consider every viable way to overcome this 
shortcoming, especially in light of the new ACTFL and CAEP standards for advanced-low oral proficiency. 
CALL materials have the potential to increase opportunities for language practice outside of class. Yet, no 
matter how sophisticated the technology may be, the role of the instructor in helping learners to successfully 
engage with the technology remains critical. As learners try to inch their way up the more advanced levels 
of the inverted pyramid, they need to understand the path forward so that time on task is used purposefully 
and strategically. Just as foreign language classrooms should be learner-centered, language learning should 
be rooted in a learner-centered process built on explicit knowledge about the nature of proficiency. Thus, 
raising awareness about how to navigate advanced-level expectations successfully is paramount. Learners 
must also be aware of their linguistic abilities in light of these expectations. ASV is a unique SCMCCT that 
captures what learners can do by recording their presentation. However, the key elements in this assignment 
are instructional design, implementation, and evaluation. Specifically, learners select the task that fits their 
individual ability and are guided to pay attention to their linguistic abilities through the rubric evaluation. 
As a result of their choice, practice, and reflection, students were able to set tangible goals for moving 
forward. 
Although objective evidence of gains in oral proficiency resulting from Making it Personal assignments 
has yet to be established, preliminary student self-evaluations do point in this direction. At the very least, it 
can be said with confidence that the students in this study knew what was expected of them for advanced-
level oral proficiency. They also knew exactly how they measure up according to the ACTFL CDSs and 
PDs that transcend their achievements in the course from a content standpoint (i.e., how well they 
understood Hispanic sociolinguistics). Thus, for all learners, whether they are struggling to make the 
transition to the advanced level or trying to move up the advanced scale, performance-driven assessments 
provide a roadmap for ongoing learning. 
Future Implications and Limitations 
Future studies should look at linguistic gains in light of performance-driven assessments to evaluate the 
role of explicit learning and LA. Long-term effects that take into account LA and the role of ongoing 
learning would also help evaluate whether or not awareness, choice, reflection, and goal setting lead to 
patterns in language learning behavior that transcend both the classroom and the program. It would be 
especially relevant to examine whether and how learners that go into graduate language programs utilize a 
similar process to continue improving proficiency. Lastly, it is also worth exploring how a SMCCT, like 
ASV, better prepares graduates for the workforce. Foreign language programs struggling to advocate and 
demonstrate their relevance could benefit from an approach that combines digital fluency in tandem with 
Kelly Arispe and Jack Burston 53 
 
 
language proficiency. 
Finally, there are some limitations with regards to this study. First, the BSU Spanish program has an 
infrastructure in place that readily supports instructional technology and language learning with CALL. 
This is not the case for all language programs, and although ASV is an easily accessible tool, teacher 
training and learner training would have to be carefully scaffolded so that the focus were on language 
practice and creation, not learning and troubleshooting the technology. Second, this assessment targeted 
presentational speaking according to the CDS and PD documents, which, together, contributed to language 
performance practice in an instructional setting and targets—ultimately, oral proficiency. However, 
assessment of presentational speaking alone is not enough. Interpersonal speaking also plays an important 
role in oral proficiency. So, too, other modes like interpretive listening and reading and presentational and 
interpersonal writing should also be woven into the fibers of every L2 course, especially into upper-level, 
content-heavy AL2 courses. 
Notes 
1. Performance, as defined by ACTFL, is a result of “explicit instruction in an instructional setting” and 
the performance descriptors detail “more granular information about language learners” than the 
proficiency guidelines. However, “a collective set of performances generally correlates to a proficiency 
level” (ACTFL, 2015, pp. 3–4). 
2. An ACTFL advisory OPI rating is assigned to an individual by an ACTFL certified OPI tester in his or 
her own academic institution. 
3. The results in the survey were anonymous, however, in this instance the participant replied to an open-
ended comment where she divulged her reasoning for her response based on her native speaker and 
OPI superior ranking status. 
References 
ACTFL. (2015). ACTFL Performance Descriptors for Language Learners. Retrieved from 
https://www.actfl.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/ACTFLPerformance-Descriptors.pdf 
Benson, P. (2006). Learner autonomy: Insider perspectives on autonomy in language teaching and 
learning. Dublin, Ireland: Authentik. 
Blin, F. (2004). CALL and the development of learner autonomy: Towards an activity-theoretical 
perspective. ReCALL, 16(2), 377–395. 
Burston, J. (2014). MALL: The pedagogical challenges. CALL Journal, 27(4), 344–357. 
Carroll, J. (1967). Foreign language proficiency levels attained by language majors near graduation from 
college. Foreign Language Annals, 1(2), 131–151. 
Glisan, E. (2013). On keeping the target language in language teaching: A bottom-up effort to protect the 
public and students. Modern Language Journal, 97(2), 541–544. 
Glisan, E., Swender, E., & Surface, E. (2013). Oral proficiency standards and foreign language teacher 
candidates: Current findings and future research directions. Foreign Language Annals, 46(2), 264–
289. 
Hamlyn, H., Surface, E., & Swender, E. (2007). What proficiency testing is telling us about teacher 
certification candidates. Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the American Council on the 
Teaching of Foreign Languages, San Antonio, TX. 
54 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Hiple, D., & Manley, J. (1987). Testing how well foreign language teachers speak: A state mandate. 
Foreign Language Annals, 20(2), 147–153. 
Holec, H. (1979). Autonomy and foreign language learning. Oxford, UK: Pergamon Press. 
Kessler, G. (2013). Collaborative language learning in co-constructed participatory culture. CALICO 
Journal, 30(3), 307–322. 
Levy, M. (1997). Computer-assisted language learning: Context and conceptualization. Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press. 
Lewis, S., Pea, R., & Rosen, J. (2010). Beyond participation to co-creation of meaning: Mobile social 
media in generative learning communities. Social Science Information, 49(3), 351–369. 
Little, D. (2007). Language learner autonomy: Some fundamental considerations revisited. International 
Journal of Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 1(1), 14–29. doi: 10.2167/illt040.0 
Malone, M. E., Rifkin, B., Christian, D., & Johnson, D. E. (2003). Attaining high levels of proficiency: 
Challenges for language education in the United States. Paper presented at the Conference on Global 
Challenges and U.S. Higher Education, Durham, NC. 
Porto, M. (2007). Learning diaries in the English as a foreign language classroom: A tool  for accessing 
learners’ perceptions of lessons and developing learner autonomy and reflection. Foreign Language 
Annals, 40(4), 672–696. 
Schwienhorst, K. (2012). Learner autonomy and CALL environments. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Sullivan, J. (2011). Taking charge: Teacher candidates’ preparation for the oral proficiency interview. 
Foreign Language Annals, 44(2), 241–257. 
Swender, E. (2003). Oral proficiency testing in the real world: Answers to frequently asked questions. 
Foreign Language Annals, 36(4), 520–526. 
Uber Grosse, C., Alley, D., & Uber, D. (1992). Testing the limits of proficiency: The ACTFL OPI and FL 
departments. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Council on the Teaching of 
Foreign Languages, Rosemont, IL. Retrieved from http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED359788.pdf 
Van Lier, L. (2014). Interaction in the language curriculum: Awareness, autonomy, and authenticity. 
New York, NY: Routledge. 
  
Kelly Arispe and Jack Burston 55 
 
 
Appendix A. Instructor Task Design Flow-Chart 
For an example of this process, see Appendix B. 
 
 Step 1 
 Select CDSs 
Determine proficiency range to target 
Intermediate-high (IH), advanced-low (AL), or 
advanced-mid (AM) 
CDSs for Presentational Speaking 
IH: I can make presentations in a generally organized 
way on school, work, and community topics and on 
topics I have researched. I can make presentations on 
some events and experiences in various time frames. 
AL: I can deliver organized presentations appropriate to 
my audience on a variety of topics. I can present 
information and events and experiences in various time 
frames. 
AM: I can deliver well-organized presentations on 
concrete, social, academic, and professional topics. I can 
present detailed information about events and 
experiences in time frames. 
 Step 2 
 With Step 1 in mind, 
 create content objectives 
Course Content Objectives 
Characterize linguistic phenomena specific to 
Spanish in the US. 
Recognize attitudes and ideologies that 
associate with these phenomena. 
Provide an example (personal) that connects to 
the content. 
 Step 3 
 Create the rubric 
Create different task descriptions based on the 
CDS for the three proficiency levels. 
Determine categories that are essential for 
success specific to the assignment (e.g., 
professionalism, pronunciation, content, etc.). 
Incorporate the PD descriptors for standardized 
qualities of intermediate- or advanced-level 
(whichever they choose) presentational 
speaking. 
56 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Appendix B. Topic Selection for Students 
Example: Making it Personal #3 
Based on your pre-reflection, you will select the topic for the proficiency level that best defines you at this 
moment: 
A. Intermediate-high: 
CDS: I can make presentations in a generally organized way on school, work, and community topics 
and on topics I have researched. I can make presentations on some events and experiences in various 
time frames. 
Topic: Select two linguistic phenomena that characterize Spanish in the US from Chapter 5 and explain 
them in your own words and with examples (not borrowing the examples from the book). Reflect on 
(a) why these are interesting to you, (b) how they change or expand your perception about Spanish in 
the US, and (c) how these phenomena connect to the overarching theme of the class about the evolution 
of language. 
B. Advanced-low: 
CDS: I can deliver organized presentations appropriate to my audience on a variety of topics. I can 
present information and events and experiences in various time frames. 
Topic: Select two linguistic phenomena that characterize Spanish in the US from Chapter 5 and explain 
them in your own words. Tell about a time when you’ve spoken with Spanish speakers in the US. Or, 
retell the experience of one of the anecdotes form the speakers in Habla Ya that we have watched in 
class. Reflect on (a) why these are interesting to you, (b) how they change or expand your perception 
about Spanish in the US, and (c) how these phenomena connect to the overarching theme of the class 
about the evolution of language. 
C. Advanced-mid: 
CDS: I can deliver well-organized presentations on concrete, social, academic, and professional topics. 
I can present detailed information about events and experiences in time frames. 
Topic: Defend or dispute an attitude or ideology related to Spanish in the US that we have discussed 
and studied in relation to Chapter 5. In your argument, explain the concept of the systematicity of the 
language. In addition, reflect on how Spanish in the US will continue to evolve in the future and make 
a prediction about the linguistic evolution and social perception that will follow. 
  
Kelly Arispe and Jack Burston 57 
 
 
Instructor’s Rubric 
Points Comments 
Creativity and Professionalism  
1 2 3 4 5  
Pronunciation  
1 2 3 4 5  
Content: Did the student answer all the items 
specific to their topic prompt? 
 
5 6 7 8 10  
Quality of the example or reflection to support the 
topic 
 
5 6 7 8 10  
Intermediate or advanced performance: Based on 
the topic and level you selected, did you meet the 
majority of the expectations in the 7 domains (see 
the ACTFL PDs)? 
 
5 6 7 8 10  
Appendix C.  
The following steps demonstrate how learners were encouraged to become autonomous while working 
towards improved presentational speaking performance for each Making it Personal assignment. 
Step 1. Becoming Aware (Pre-Reflection) 
1. Go to the Presentational Speaking pages in the CDSs. Begin at intermediate-mid and go as far as 
you can (up to superior, if relevant). Please select (mark with an X) the descriptors that correspond 
to activities you can do with ease. 
2. Read through the presentational PDs. In the intermediate and advanced columns, underline key 
words that indicate what you can do with ease and circle key words that describe what you cannot 
do with ease. 
3. Write a one-paragraph summary (in Spanish) about your observations from these two documents 
in relation to your speaking abilities. Conclude by selecting the level that is just within reach of 
your comfort zone (e.g., intermediate-high, advanced-low, or advanced-mid). 
Step 2. Choice (Making it Personal) 
See the rubric and select the task at the proficiency level you have chosen. Complete the assignment based 
on the topic description for that level. 
Step 3. Reflection and Goal Setting 
Post-reflection (once you’ve received the graded rubric and feedback from your instructor) 
1. Go back and watch your Making it Personal assignment. 
2. Based on the feedback from your instructor, reflect on what you did well and write down three 
goals you have for improving on the next assignment. 
3. As a result of this assignment, do you feel you need to continue working on presentational speaking 
skills at this level or are you ready to move to the next sub-level? You need to justify your claim. 
58 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
About the Authors 
Kelly Arispe (PhD) is an Assistant Professor at BSU where she teaches upper-division Spanish courses 
with an emphasis on Hispanic linguistics. She is also the Program Coordinator for French, German, and 
Spanish Teacher Education candidates. Her research is in second language development and CALL, 
specifically as it relates to advanced language learners. She is a certified Oral Proficiency Examiner by 
ACTFL, and her research and praxis has recently stemmed from the intersection of standards-based 
practices and the implementation of mobile technologies at the advanced level. 
E-mail: kellyarispe@boisestate.edu 
Jack Burston holds the position of Honorary Research Fellow in the Language Centre of the Cyprus 
University of Technology. He is a language-teaching specialist with a formal background in theoretical and 
applied linguistics, second language acquisition, and testing. He also has considerable expertise in CALL, 
foreign language software evaluation, language center design, and professional faculty development. His 
current research is focused on mobile-assisted language learning. Jack was a member of the editorial board 
of the CALICO Journal for 18 years, served as the Software Review Editor of the CALICO Journal for 13 
years, and was a member and chair of the CALICO Executive Board. He was the editor of the IALLT 
Language Center Design Kit and the Digital Language Lab Solutions volumes. 
E-mail: jack.burston@cut.ac.cy 
