Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2017, Volume 21, Issue 3 
pp. 67–71 
BOOK REVIEW  
 
 
Copyright © 2017 Kimberly Becker & Phuong Nguyen 
 
 
Review of Technology-enhanced language learning 
for specialized domains: Practical applications 
and mobility 
Kimberly Becker, Iowa State University 
Phuong Nguyen, Iowa State University 
 
Technology-enhanced language learning for specialized 
domains: Practical applications and mobility 
Martín-Monje, E., Elorza, I., & Riaza, B. G. (Eds.) 
2016 
ISBN: 978-1-13-856513-5 
US $ 49.95 
286 pp. 
Routledge 
New York, NY 
 
With the emergence of Web 2.0, speech recognition systems, and machine translation, applications of 
information and communication technology (ICT) for education have advanced dramatically over the last 
15 years. The book Technology-enhanced language learning for specialized domains: Practical 
applications and mobility, edited by Martin-Monje, Elorza, and Riaza (2016), provides a comprehensive 
overview of essential topics broadly related to technological advances in specialized language learning and 
teaching over the last decades. As noted in its introduction, the book—divided into six parts with a total of 
20 chapters—attempts “to provide a representative sampling of how technological applications have 
contributed to enhance language learning in a variety of ways” (p. 1). Thus, the book is a valuable resource 
for practitioners and researchers interested in the integration of technology and language learning. 
The first part, General Issues about Learning Languages with Computers, includes four chapters and 
explores general issues about learning languages with computers. Chapter 1, by Pegrum, provides an 
overview of the different types of digital literacies, loosely categorized as language-related, information-
related, connection-related, or remix literacies—“reworking existing cultural artefacts to express new 
meanings” (p. 18)—and discusses their roles in language comprehension and production. The author claims 
that mobile literacy, which pulls together other literacies and thus evolves into the most significant literacy 
skill set, should be considered a complement for traditional language and literacy skills. Pegrum asserts that 
digital literacy skills are an important factor contributing to effective language use and argues for the 
integration of digital literacies with language, culture, and more traditional literacies among language 
teachers. Chapter 2, by Vinage, reports on a study examining the effects of using wikis to develop 
participants’ intercultural competence. In Chapter 3, Jiménez-Muñoz calls for the inclusion of context in 
evidence-based ICT-enhanced research on English for specific purposes learning. Arguing that a two-
dimensional model (i.e., delivery–learning outcome) is insufficient in evaluating the impact of ICT usage 
on learning, the author proposes that contextualized interpretation of data facilitates the discovery of 
relevant patterns of successful pedagogical ICT usage. Part 1 ends with a chapter by Escobar that presents 
a case study on the effects of online activities on students’ test performance. The researcher found that 
68 Language Learning & Technology 
 
although students did not perform well on an English grammar test, they outperformed those who did not 
participate in online activities on oral, reading, and writing tasks. 
Part 2 focuses on the use of technology in language assessment. Chapter 5, by Álvarez, presents a brief 
review of the history, advantages, and drawbacks of technology-enhanced assessment, including computer-
based, computer-adaptive, web-based, and computer-assisted language testing as a field. This chapter also 
discusses the future of technology-enhanced assessment and issues for research such as construct definition 
and the impact of computer literacy on test performance. Chapter 6, by Beltrán-Palanques, illustrates a 
technology-enhanced assessment of pragmatic competence using Google Docs and Google Hangouts for 
interactive discourse completion tasks (IDCTs) and retrospective verbal reports (RVRs). The researcher 
concluded that synchronous computer-mediated communication could be used to create an environment for 
performing the IDCTs and conducting the RVRs and that test takers had positive attitudes towards using 
the ICT tools for the test. The last two chapters in Part 2 are more descriptive in nature, with Chapter 7, by 
Romero, Ranero, and Cesteros, explaining the development and use of a questionnaire for evaluating digital 
educational materials and Chapter 8, by Pareja-Lora, describing the architecture and methodology of 
OntoTagger, a part-of-speech (POS) tagger, designed to interlink other POS taggers to increase accuracy 
rates. 
Part 3, Mobile-Assisted Language Learning, includes three chapters focusing on the benefits, challenges, 
and implementation of mobile-assisted language learning (MALL). First, Chapter 9, by Underwood, 
discusses the relevance, opportunities, and challenges of MALL in language for specific purposes (LSP), 
with an emphasis on mobile tools for vocabulary learning. In Chapter 10, Hockly’s classroom-based action 
research project presents a practical framework for designing and implementing communicative MALL 
tasks. The author identifies six key parameters for the design of communicative MALL tasks. Finally, in 
Chapter 11, Read, Bárcena, and Kukulska-Hulme argue for the potential of mobile devices in language 
massive open online courses (LMOOCs) using an example of a successful course. They claim that correctly 
structured and managed LMOOCs can bridge formal and informal learning to facilitate the development of 
L2 competences and that mobile devices can be potent tools for students in LMOOCs. 
LMOOCs are further discussed in the three chapters in Part 4. Chapter 12, by Sokolik, looks at the 
challenges and benefits surrounding the online teaching of writing. The author points out that despite 
challenges related to content delivery, discussion forums, assessment tools, plagiarism, and attrition, 
writing MOOCs are still quite popular because they provide many benefits to the stakeholders. These 
benefits include building communities of discourse, stress-free environments that lower the affective filter, 
relative ease of access, and promise for big data. The chapter concludes with a call for re-examining the 
methods used to teach writing so that more academic writing students can benefit from MOOCs. Chapter 
13, by Rubio, Fuchs, and Dixon, emphasizes the need for a re-examination of design issues in LMOOCs 
and then provides best practice recommendations. The chapter highlights the need to focus on course 
design, rather than on a finished course product. These course design practices include building community, 
enhancing the social aspects of the course, providing a variety of feedback and assessment types (i.e., the 
potential of learners as assessors), and ensuring student accountability. Part 4 is finalized with Chapter 14, 
by Martín-Monje and Ventura. The authors present a study exploring how social learning affects the 
acquisition of specialized vocabulary in an LMOOC. Rather than adding any additional methods into the 
MOOC itself, they present research that includes a social learning aspect (a Facebook group). The research 
concludes that all stakeholders in the MOOC believed that “social networks have the potential to engage 
students and foster interaction in LMOOCs” (p. 196). The authors call for more research in the area of using 
social networks to supplement MOOCs focused on language acquisition. 
Part 5, Corpus-Based Approaches to Specialized Linguistic Domains, spans three chapters. Chapter 15, by 
Berber Sardinha, is a practitioner-focused chapter about teaching LSP with corpus-based methods. In this 
chapter, the author classifies corpus-based teaching materials into two categories: phraseology-centered 
and register-centered. Examples of pedagogical activities using each type are provided. The topic of 
Chapter 16, by Díez, is related to transcribing and annotating non-native speech corpora. The purpose of 
Kimberly Becker and Phuong Nguyen 69 
 
this chapter is to introduce “a framework for compiling, transcribing, and annotating a non-native speech 
corpus” (p. 225). The author cites two primary goals for the use of this framework: (a) providing a resource 
for empirical studies on pronunciation in SLA and (b) providing a foundation for a database that can 
contribute to the development of software programs aiding in computer-assisted pronunciation teaching. 
The authors also contend that for non-native spontaneous speech, standardization of transcription 
conventions are needed to account for disfluencies and non-linguistic vocalizations. Chapter 17, by Ramos 
and Moreno, is the last corpus-related chapter and is about the use of corpora in translator training. This 
chapter explores the use of corpus-based training materials for legal translators and makes an argument for 
the efficiency of this type of specialized training. 
The final section of the book, Part 6, focuses on computer-assisted translation (CAT) tools for language 
learning. Chapter 18, by Fernández-Parra, describes the use of CAT tools for translation and advocates 
expanding their use for language learning as well. This chapter examines the use of two CAT tools (SDL 
Trados Studio 2011 Suite and Dèjá Vu X2) to supplement language learning for self-study and classroom 
use. The chapter cites portability, shareability, and reuse as the main benefits of the translation tools and 
emphasizes that tools such as these could never replace other strategies, but could co-exist or contribute in 
a supplementary way—especially in schools that are already using these programs. Chapter 19, by Bausela, 
focuses on utilizing corpus-based translation in the classroom. The author examines the development of an 
ad hoc corpus of microbiology texts to be used for specialized translation purposes and claims that corpora 
can enhance the competence of translators in training. Chapter 20, by Moreno, is about Videos for Speaking, 
a MALL app designed to improve oral skills. The chapter provides a brief state of the field of MALL, 
outlines the steps taken to develop the app, and then reports on a qualitative pilot study of its use. The 
findings demonstrate the potential of the app to promote oral language development. 
Technology-Enhanced Language Learning for Specialized Domains: Practical Applications and Mobility 
provides a clear overview of how various technologies have affected language teaching and learning. A 
strength of the book is its varied representation of current technologies in language learning via an 
examination of multiple methodological positions, including empirical studies (whether quantitative, 
qualitative, mixed-methods, or action research). Consequently, the book is also research-oriented, providing 
readers with up-to-date findings in technology integration in language learning and prompting future 
research. Readers with research ideas in areas such as technology-enhanced language assessment, data-
driven learning (corpus-based pedagogy), MALL, LMOOCs, and translation can find much potential within 
these chapters. Also, the book builds on other recently noted themes in technology-enhanced language 
learning, such as the focus on practices and methods instead of products (Canagarajah, 2014; Pennycook, 
2010). Consequently, the book seems to achieve most of its goal “to provide a representative sampling of 
how technological applications have contributed to enhance language learning in a variety of ways in the 
last years” (p. 1). It certainly represents a major portion of those effects. However, its representativeness in 
some areas seems incomplete. 
There are several sections of the book that could benefit from some additional topics relevant to the 
application of technology in language learning and assessment. First, Part 2 on technology and assessment 
could show a more direct application of technology in language assessment. For example, while Chapter 8 
provides a detailed description of the development and implementation of a tagger, a discussion of the 
importance and application of such technology in automatic scoring or automatic feedback systems to 
language learners would be useful in helping readers see how such technologies have been employed in the 
L2 classroom and large-scale assessment. Second, the focus on MALL in Part 3 could be improved by 
widening its scope. While the discussion of vocabulary learning in Chapter 9 is useful, it would be 
advantageous to include other skill areas, especially reading, listening, and pronunciation or speaking, as 
using MALL for these skills has become an important research focus (see Bozdoğan, 2015). Finally, in the 
chapters related to oral skills (Chapter 16 and Chapter 20), one might expect to see information about 
automatic speech recognition, which has been noted as an effective technology in second language teaching 
(Bodnar, Cucchiarini, de Vries, Strik, & van Hout, 2017; Duman, Orhon, & Gedik, 2015; Golonka, Bowles, 
Frank, Richardson, & Freynik, 2014). 
70 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Furthermore, the chapter organization could be more coherent. For instance, the review of a POS tagger is 
found in Chapter 8 of Part 2, Languages and Technology-Enhanced Assessment, but its descriptions of the 
tagger’s development, which focus on natural language processing, might fit better in Part 5 (i.e., the use 
of corpora in language instruction). Moreover, Chapter 20, which is about a MALL-based app, is in Part 6 
about translation, yet the chapter focuses on using the app to improve students’ oral competence and hence 
might work better in Part 3. However, as the authors acknowledge, the topics covered in this book overlap, 
which makes organizing them more challenging. 
Overall, Technology-Enhanced Language Learning for Specialized Domains: Practical Applications and 
Mobility provides readers with an overview, theoretical background, and some practical issues related to 
important topics in the field. Its relevance in the world of language teaching and language learning cannot 
be understated, for as the afterword points out, “the question is not whether a course or a learning situation 
is technology-enhanced or not, but rather to what extent it is” (p. 280). This book is a relatively 
comprehensive collection of how the technological changes and advances of the recent past have affected 
ICTs related to information (e.g., assessment and corpus tools), communication (e.g., language teaching 
and learning, MALL, LMOOCs, and translation tools), and interrelated aspects of ICTs. As such, the book 
has met its goal to place emphasis not on “how much technology will develop in the next years, but rather 
on the consequences that past changes are having for language teaching and learning and how these and the 
coming changes will affect them” (p. 1). The book is relevant to language teachers, linguists, and 
researchers in related fields because of its intersecting topics, which build upon each other throughout, and 
its presentation of information relevant to current and future endeavors in language learning and teaching. 
This edited volume weaves together past and present, paving the way for a better understanding of the 
current and future transformations taking place as a result of technological innovation and its effects on 
language learning and teaching in specialized domains. 
References 
Bodnar, S., Cucchiarini, C., Penning de Vries, B., Strik, H., & van Hout, R. (2017). Learner affect in 
computerised L2 oral grammar practice with corrective feedback. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 30(3–4), 223–246. 
Bozdoğan, D. (2015). MALL revisited: Current trends and pedagogical implications. Procedia - Social 
and Behavioral Sciences, 195, 932–939. 
Canagarajah, A. S. (2014). Translingual practice: Global English and cosmopolitan relations. New York, 
NY: Routledge. 
Duman, G., Orhon, G., & Gedik, N. (2015). Research trends in mobile assisted language learning from 
2000 to 2012. ReCALL, 27(2), 197–216. 
Golonka, E. M., Bowles, A. R., Frank, V. M., Richardson, D. L., & Freynik, S. (2014). Technologies for 
foreign language learning: A review of technology types and their effectiveness. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 27(1), 70–105. 
Pennycook, A. (2010). Language as a local practice. London, UK: Routledge. 
About the Author 
Kimberly Becker is a PhD student in Applied Linguistics and Technology at Iowa State University with 
research interests in computer-assisted language learning and corpus linguistics. She taught ESL for 10 
years before pursuing her PhD. Kim now works on the ISUComm Online Learning Team and teaches a 
global online course about technology in language teaching. 
Email: kpb@iastate.edu 
Kimberly Becker and Phuong Nguyen 71 
 
Phuong Nguyen is a PhD student in Applied Linguistics and Technology and a Statistics minor at Iowa 
State University. Her research interests include computer-assisted language learning and language 
assessment, especially computer-assisted language testing, rating scale development, and integrated writing 
assessment. She is currently developing a writing rating scale using examinees’ performance language. 
E-mail: phuongn@iastate.edu 
