Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
June 2017, Volume 21, Issue 2 
pp. 18–21 
NEWS  
 
 
Copyright © 2017 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
News from our sponsoring organizations 
 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center 
University of Hawai‘i Center for Language and Technology 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center 
(NFLRC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its many 
activities. 
2017 International Society for Language Studies (ISLS) Conference 
June 15–17, 2017 
The International Society for Language Studies (ISLS), co-sponsored by the University Hawai‘i at Mānoa, 
will hold a conference June 15–17, 2017 at the University Hawai‘i at Mānoa in Honolulu, HI. The theme 
of the conference will be “Intersections of Peace and Language Studies.” 
Peace is often defined as freedom from oppression, the end of conflict or even harmony in relationships. 
Whatever the definition, the word peace means different things to different people. Peace is an important 
concept that also connects to the focus of ISLS: the intersections and meeting places of language and power, 
identity, and social justice. 
The ISLS conference is a venue for individuals from all disciplines to come together and discuss language 
from a critical, interdisciplinary lens (i.e., language use, language learning, language teaching, critical 
language studies, etc.). 
2017 Assessment in Online Language Courses (Webinar Course) 
September 27–October 25, 2017 
Designed for in-service online language teachers, this course offered in Fall 2017, focuses on issues of 
assessment in online language courses. Successful completion of this course will earn a badge conferred by 
the National Foreign Language Resource Center (University of Hawai‘i). Badge earners will be eligible to 
earn a Continuing Education Unit (CEU) towards maintaining their professional qualifications. 
Registration is free. The last day to register for access to the live webinar series is September 25, 2017. 
Please note that a screencast of these webinar sessions will be recorded and made available as an open 
educational resource in TED-Ed. 
Join the NFLRC Listserv 
To get announcements and reminders on NFLRC news, publications, professional development events, and 
more, please subscribe to the official announcements email list for the National Foreign Language Resource 
News 19 
 
Center at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa. We may occasionally post announcements of other news and 
events of interest to our listserv subscribers, but in general, posts will be kept to a minimum. 
If you prefer social media, you could instead join our 3,700+ fans on Facebook or 800+ followers on 
Twitter. All key announcements will be posted there as well. 
  
20 Language Learning & Technology 
 
NFLRC Publications 
ScholarSpace 
 
NFLRC maintains a large searchable archive of free language research and 
teaching materials which currently contains over 350 items. These items 
include foreign language teaching materials (in print, audio, and video), 
language acquisition research papers, and collections of conference materials. 
 
Save the trees! Check out our other two online, open-access journals 
 
 
 
 
Language Documentation & Conservation (LD&C) is 
a refereed, open-access journal sponsored by the 
NFLRC and published by University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to 
language documentation and conservation, as well as 
book reviews, hardware and software reviews, and 
notes from the field. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed 
international journal of issues in foreign 
language reading and literacy, published twice 
yearly on the World Wide Web and sponsored 
by the NFLRC and the College of Languages, 
Linguistics, and Literature at the University of 
Hawai‘i at Mānoa. 
 
View all NFLRC Publications 
  
News 21 
 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research 
(CLEAR) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. Projects 
focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language research. 
Professional Development 
CLEAR is pleased to announce its professional development offerings for Summer 2017. The topics are as 
follows: 
• Assessment in a proficiency-based language classroom: June 26–28 
• Increasing proficiency through World Language Core Practices: June 29 (one-day workshop) 
• Reaching 21st century learners through unit design (Section 1): June 30 (one-day workshop) 
• Teaching language with technology: Basic tools and techniques: July 31–August 2 
• Reaching 21st century learners through unit design (Section 2): August 4 (one-day workshop) 
Online registration is open on our website. 
Conferences 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We enjoyed seeing many of you at the 
Central States Conference on the Teaching of Foreign Languages in Chicago in March and the conference 
of the Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium (CALICO) in Flagstaff in May. 
Newsletter 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe here. 
