Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/guichon.pdf 
February 2017, Volume 21, Number 1 
pp. 56–75 
 
Copyright © 2017, ISSN 1094-3501 56 
SHARING A MULTIMODAL CORPUS TO STUDY 
WEBCAM-MEDIATED LANGUAGE TEACHING 
Nicolas Guichon, Université Lumière Lyon 2, Laboratoire ICAR 
This article proposes a methodology to create a multimodal corpus that can be shared with 
a group of researchers in order to analyze synchronous online pedagogical interactions. 
Epistemological aspects involved in studying online interactions from a multimodal and 
semiotic perspective are addressed. Then, issues and challenges raised by corpus creation 
and sharing are examined with a particular focus on ethics. Basing my discussion and 
analysis around a particular research project, the steps involved in the creation of a 
multimodal and shareable corpus are described and the scientific benefits of a collective 
exploration of data and their subsequent multimodal representations are discussed and 
illustrated. It is finally claimed that corpus sharing can contribute vastly to the field of 
computer-assisted language learning by enhancing its scientific robustness as it favors a 
multidisciplinary, systematic, and in-depth analysis of multimodal data. 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: French 
Keywords: Corpus, Distance Language Learning and Teaching, Telecollaboration, 
Research Methods 
APA Citation: Guichon, N. (2017). Sharing a multimodal corpus to study webcam-
mediated language teaching. Language Learning & Technology, 21(1), 55–74. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/guichon.pdf 
Received: November 8, 2015; Accepted: July 19, 2016; Published: February 1, 2017 
Copyright: © Nicolas Guichon 
INTRODUCTION 
Webconferencing-based second language teaching continues to gain momentum as more courses are 
delivered using such tools (Kern, 2014). In order to describe and understand what is at stake in a 
pedagogical interaction that brings together language teachers and language learners via a 
webconferencing platform, computer-assisted language learning (CALL) researchers may benefit from 
sharing different theoretical and methodological perspectives on the same dataset. 
The present paper is one of the outcomes of ISMAEL, a collective project which brings together twenty 
specialists in technology mediated language teaching, interactions, and semiotics. The ISMAEL corpus 
(Guichon, Blin, Wigham, & Thouësny, 2014) is composed of data from a six-week telecollaboration 
project between teacher trainees and learners of French. It is made up of audio and video recordings of all 
the exchanges between teachers and trainees, group debriefing sessions with trainee teachers, and 
interviews with learners.  
To qualify as a corpus, these data were structured, transcribed, annotated, and contextualized. While most 
of these operations involving corpus creation are now widespread in linguistics (see Knight, Evans, 
Carter, & Adolphs, 2009), the interest of the present paper lies in the scientific stance towards building a 
multimodal corpus to inform given phenomena pertaining to the field of CALL and to sharing that corpus 
with a community of researchers. I contend that the aggregation of data into a coherent whole and the 
issues that are raised by its curation, sharing, and analysis are fundamental activities at the core of digital 
humanities (Burdick, Drucker, Lunenfeld, Presner, & Schnapp, 2012) that need to be explored further by 
the CALL field. 
This paper proposes a reflection organized into two parts. First, the epistemological aspects involved in 
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
studying online interactions from a multimodal and semiotic perspective will be addressed along with 
issues raised by corpus creation and sharing. Then, taking the ISMAEL project as a guiding thread, I will 
explore the steps involved in the creation of a multimodal and shareable corpus and show how the 
organization of a data session can make a powerful contribution to the socializing of a corpus. With such 
a description, the article aims to better understand the interaction between science and technique since any 
research process produces intermediary objects (Vinck, 1999) that are of interest when one wishes to 
examine the scientific practices related to the creation of corpora and their sharing. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
Although different theoretical frameworks and methodological approaches are already being used by 
researchers to explore the ISMAEL corpus, the framework chosen for this paper is rooted in the field of 
multimodal analysis of interactions (Jewitt, 2009; Norris, 2004; Sindoni, 2013). This semiotic approach 
will be briefly presented before issues involved in multimodal corpus creation and sharing are discussed. 
A Semiotic Approach to Webcam-mediated Language Teaching 
Most CALL research to date on webcam-mediated exchanges has focused on learners and has endeavored 
to study how they manage tasks in different conditions, usually comparing audio- and webconferencing 
(e.g., Guichon & Cohen, 2014; Yamada & Akahori, 2009; Yanguas, 2010). Such studies are usually 
experimental, punctual (participants are put in a situation that is unfamiliar), and seldom describe the 
activity itself but rather how participants report their online activity through post-task questionnaires or 
interviews. 
In parallel, an increasing number of researchers have been turning their interest towards online teacher 
activity and have started to take semiotic dimensions into account. This small but growing body of 
research usually draws on case studies and a limited collection of data. For instance, Satar (2012) includes 
screen recordings of webcam-mediated interactions between language learners and identifies five types of 
gaze involved in webconferencing. Develotte, Guichon, and Vincent (2010) concentrate on the use of the 
webcam during pedagogical interactions of five teacher trainees. Their study recommends teacher training 
which focuses on developing online teachers’ capacity to utilize their own image depending on 
pedagogical objectives and learner needs. 
Because online teacher activity is mediated by an array of technologies (in particular a webcam, a 
microphone, and text chat), one possible approach to studying this pedagogical situation is to focus on the 
multimodal aspects and uncover the many facets of the online teachers’ semio-pedagogical activity 
(Guichon, 2013). The semio-pedagogical dimension of teachers’ activity refers to their use of the various 
semiotic and technological resources and to the degree of professional competence they display in order 
to facilitate language learning.  
I contend that multimodal research (Jewitt, 2009) offers an ideal framework to study online teacher 
activity for three reasons. First, it allows one to take into account the whole repertoire of semiotic 
resources individuals use when they are engaged in an activity, and not only verbal language. Then, it 
includes in its analyses the process through which semiotic resources progressively contribute to 
meaning-making to enrich a socially shared repertoire. Lastly, it looks closely at the ways in which the 
semiotic modes are combined or dissociated in what Norris (2004) has called multimodal orchestration. 
At a micro level, the analysis of semio-pedagogical competence could thus include a moment-to-moment 
inspection of online teachers’ activity when they are performing pedagogical actions (e.g., giving 
instructions, providing feedback, etc.) while using the semiotic resources at their disposal (their voice, 
facial expressions, gestures) in the specific context of a webconferencing-based interaction. 
I suggest that a corpus-based approach makes the study of the development of semio-pedagogical 
competence possible as it enables the analysis of a series of interactions involving the same participants. 
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
Researchers may then examine whether the teachers’ management of the online synchronous interaction 
becomes progressively more appropriate and whether their interactional repertoire becomes richer. The 
tenets for building such corpora are presented in the next section. 
Principles Guiding the Creation of the ISMAEL Corpus 
Over the last decade, more and more researchers have called upon “a new generation of corpora” making 
it possible for linguists “to gain a more comprehensive view of the characteristics of language ‘beyond the 
text’” (Knight et al., 2009, p. 2). Besides, new communication and pedagogical practices 
(audioconferencing and videoconferencing) have created the need for CALL researchers to build corpora, 
gathering data in the different modes used by the actors involved in such synchronous mediated 
interactions. Indeed, a corpus-based approach provides the means of following the same individuals 
interacting over time and enables researchers to “reveal the inventive ways they are able to co-construct 
meaning with their interactional partners” (Seedhouse, 2005, p.265). 
Basing the present analysis around the ISMAEL project, I describe what is at stake when trainee teachers 
participate in online pedagogical interactions with language students. The research aim is to gain insights 
into the specificities of this techno-pedagogical situation and, ultimately, inform teacher education 
(Hampel & Stickler, 2012). Some of the questions that were explored by the researchers involved in the 
project can be formulated as follows: How do second language teachers in training harness semiotic and 
pedagogical resources in order to teach a foreign language online, more precisely to (a) engage students in 
meaningful and medium-appropriate exchanges, (b) manage feedback during the interactions, (c) manage 
communication breakdowns, (d) provide help to their students, (e) negotiate meaning, (f) provide rhythm 
to the exchange, and (g) enhance their online teaching presence? (see Guichon & Tellier, 2017). 
As the preceding list of research questions demonstrates, the focus of the research is placed on what 
actually happens rather than what should happen. In other words, it is descriptive rather than prescriptive. 
In order to investigate these questions, a corpus-based approach was adopted to provide researchers with a 
collection of data that were representative of the pedagogical situation under study. Four principles 
presided over the reflection on data collection in order to augment the validity of the approach: 
1. Multimodal quality: Because of the semiotic focus of the project, it was important to collect 
multimodal data that would provide information on the ways in which teachers and learners 
interacted in the verbal, visual, and written modes. Special attention was paid to ensure that sound 
and image quality of the captured online interactions was good enough for future multimodal 
enquiry (for an example, see Clip 1). 
2. Contextual integrity: It was decided that the ecology of the pedagogical situation around which 
the research protocol was designed should be altered as little as possible. All the captured data 
were included even if technical difficulties or other inevitable mishaps (e.g., absences) occurred. 
While these types problems made the data harder to interpret, a wealth of details that 
experimental approaches are bound to overlook were kept in the data. 
3. Developmental quality: Since the ISMAEL project aimed to study how novice teachers become 
attuned to teaching online, it was decided that the data would be collected over several 
consecutive weeks. Because it spanned six weeks, the ISMAEL data cannot be considered to be 
longitudinal per se but nonetheless provide enough opportunities to capture actors’ trajectories 
encompassing the discovery of new tools to the development of certain teaching practices. 
4. Participants’ diversity: Finally, it was important to include as many novice teachers as possible in 
the study because some features (e.g., age, gender, familiarity with computers, professional 
experience) could have an impact on the development of semio-pedagogical competence.  
In sum, the ISMAEL project involved putting together a corpus that could capture pedagogical 
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
interactions in their multimodal diversity and integrity and which would include a large enough collection 
of data involving several actors and spanning a significant period of time.  
Data Sharing and Shareability 
The approach of this project to corpus creation was in line with that of Chanier & Wigham (2016) who 
proposed the Learning and Teaching Corpora (LETEC) methodology, defined as a systematic collection 
and structuration of all the data from interactions that occur online and have an educational purpose. 
These authors explain how interactions can be (1) structured and standardized thanks to an XML protocol, 
(2) described with metadata and (3) made accessible on a repository in order to facilitate sharing with 
other researchers. Following Chanier & Wigham’s reflection, this section concentrates on the issue of 
data sharing which deserves a reflection closely linking practical and scientific aspects. 
Data sharing becomes possible—or desirable— only if a certain number of conditions have first been 
fulfilled. I propose to define shareability as the result of the practical, ethical, epistemological and social 
conditions that need to be met in order to enhance the possibility given to a group of researchers to share a 
dataset. Chanier and Ciekanski (2010) have underlined that the costs of producing shareable corpora can 
become acceptable only if the perspective of sharing becomes real. 
The trend towards data sharing (for their pioneering collective work on learner corpora, see Granger, 
Gilquin, & Meunier, 2015) implicates new scientific responsibilities: researchers and technical support 
involved in such ventures need to ensure the quality of the corpus itself (image, sound), its 
interoperability (making it possible to access the data with different operating systems and software), and 
its documentation (providing future collaborators with information about when and how the data were 
collected, who the participants were, and how ethical issues were addressed). In sum, because it brings 
real value to a dataset, attention devoted to corpus quality, access, and documentation are important steps 
to facilitate the re-use of data by other researchers for further analyses or even replication of published 
studies. 
For the CALL research community, sharing data presents a host of practical and scientific benefits. From 
a practical perspective, sharing allows the reduction of human and financial costs involved in the different 
stages of corpus creation. It especially permits the division of the time-consuming process of transcription 
and annotation (see section below on Core Data) among the researchers working on the same corpus. This 
allows more data to be processed, thus widening the empirical basis and scope of subsequent studies. 
From an epistemological perspective, sharing allows the corpus to be approached from different research 
perspectives, theoretical standpoints, and methodological approaches (Chanier & Ciekanski, 2010). More 
often than not, articles that are published in the field of CALL focus on data that have been gathered from 
a project in which the author was involved, which can create various biases. As underlined by Cappeau 
and Gadet (2007), the relationship of one researcher with a given context and his or her involvement in 
the research design and data collection may have a strong influence on the interpretation of the data, 
which can eventually be detrimental to the proposed analyses. I argue that there can be real benefits from 
gathering insiders (researchers who were closely involved in the project) because they can bring 
important insights about contextual and individual factors as well as outsiders (researchers who do not 
know the participants and the context) who can look at the data from a fresh perspective. 
Yet, despite its obvious interest for science, data sharing and re-use remain a rare practice in language 
research (Dybkjær & Ole Bernsen, 2004) and CALL research (Dooly, 2015). It may represent a cost, 
working with data that were gathered by others in unfamiliar contexts, that few researchers are willing to 
bear. However, the main obstacle to data sharing has been pinpointed by Lemke (2013) who deplores the 
permanence of “a strong individualist bias in our modernist traditions of research” which leads us “to 
define our objects of study in such a way that a single researcher could in principle come to understand 
them” (p. 287). 
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
I contend that making data sharing easier and more desirable requires the pursuit of different 
methodological strategies. The focus on shareability has been one defining aspect of the ISMAEL project. 
The rest of this article explores the different steps involved in the process of corpus creation and sharing. 
METHODOLOGICAL ASPECTS INVOLVED IN THE CREATION OF A MULTIMODAL AND 
SHAREABLE CORPUS 
Global Presentation of the ISMAEL Project and its Context 
In order to provide readers with elements pertaining to the context of the pedagogical situation that served 
as the source of data, a quick description of the training program and the participants is now proposed. 
The context for this study was a telecollaboration project that brought together French as a foreign 
language (FFL) trainee teachers and undergraduate business students in their third semester of learning 
French. Each trainee teacher was randomly assigned to one or two business students (see Figure 3 for an 
overview). The trainees were second-year students of the Master of Arts program in Teaching French as a 
Foreign Language at Université de Lyon 2. The telecollaboration project formed part of an optional 
module entitled Learning to Teach Online. The main objectives consisted of developing hands-on 
professional skills to teach FFL online by planning and mediating online interactions. For the lower 
intermediate (B1) language students from Dublin City University (DCU), the telecollaboration project 
formed part of a 12-week blended module entitled French for Business. 
The participants met weekly for six 40-minute online sessions in autumn of 2013 via the webconferencing 
platform Visu (Guichon, Bétrancourt, & Prié, 2012). Each online session focused on Business French 
objectives and ultimately prepared the students to apply for an internship in France. From the start, this 
telecollaboration project was also envisaged by the two instructors on both sides as an opportunity to 
research online language learning and teaching. Such an intimate link between training and research 
purposes created the basis for a fruitful collaboration, the involvement of researchers at both ends 
ensuring their equal commitment to corpus creation. 
Figure 1 presents the eight stages of corpus-based research that favors a semiotic approach and is strongly 
dependent on data sharing. All the steps will be dealt with in the rest of this paper, with varying degrees 
of depth, and the ISMAEL project will serve to illustrate how this methodological approach has been 
implemented. From the emission of research questions to the dissemination of analyses, the article will 
endeavor to show (1) why ethical issues have a crucial impact on many aspects of the process, (2) what 
steps are involved in the creation of a shareable corpus, and (3) how a community can be built around a 
corpus to explore online teaching from a semiotic perspective. 
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
Examine and 
solve ethical issues
2
Find suitable
framework(s)  and 
emit questions
1
Collect data
3
Structure data 
into corpus and 
organize access
4
Share corpus with
researchers
5
Analyze data and 
make transcripts
6
Make edited
versions of corpus 
and analyses 
available
7
Share and compare 
results and refine new 
research questions 
8
 
Figure 1. Stages of a collective and qualitative corpus-based research. 
Dealing with Ethical Issues 
More and more papers are written about the ethical dimensions involved in Internet-mediated research 
(IMR) in order to help researchers “with the process of ethical decision making in the context of 
specifying and implementing appropriate IMR research designs” (British Psychological Society, 2013, p. 
2). In this section I review the ethical considerations involved in collecting, sharing, and displaying 
multimodal data. These three aspects of a research project are highly sensitive since data are collected in 
an institutional setting and their prime interest for subsequent multimodal analyses comes from their 
visual nature, making the issues of confidentiality and privacy especially problematic. 
As stated by the British Psychological Society’s Ethics guidelines (2013), “A researcher should be clear 
about the extent to which their own collecting and reporting of data obtained from the internet might pose 
additional threats to privacy over and above those that already exist, and whether this might expose 
participants to potential harm of any sort” (p. 10). For instance, in the case of the ISMAEL project, the 
data involve teachers who were learning to teach online and could sometimes be clumsy; thus online clips 
displaying them in awkward situations can potentially harm their future employability. Furthermore, the 
language students involved in the telecollaboration project needed to be assured that withdrawing their 
consent would not have any impact on their course assessment. This was actually ensured by the fact that 
the researcher in Dublin did not know what the participants had decided about their participation until she 
had completed her students’ evaluation. Ethical considerations have an impact on several aspects of the 
research process as summarized in Table 1. I go through the different steps encountered in the ISMAEL 
project to solve ethical issues. 
  
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
Table 1. Ethical Issues 
Aspect Possible steps 
Data collection • Go through the ethics procedures in the institutions where the participants 
study (or work) before the data collection is set to begin 
• Design consent forms accordingly stating the research aims and how data 
will be used in published research, oral presentations and training 
material and inform participants of the levels of risk to the confidentiality 
of their data 
• Explain the aims of the research to participants and, if possible, examples 
of publications similar to those expected from the current research 
project, and offer opportunities to ask questions 
• Get all participants to sign the consent forms and clarify that they can act 
on their rights to withdraw consent at any time (see Appendix A) 
Data structuration • Put only one or two researchers in charge of the raw data and protect 
them with passwords 
• Keep in the data only those of the individuals who have agreed to 
participate in the research project 
Corpus sharing • Write a protocol stating what researchers involved in the project can and 
cannot do with the data, get them to sign the protocol and store the signed 
agreements as part of the data 
• Specify standardized corpus referencing in the protocol 
Transcripts and 
Dissemination 
• Ensure the transcripts and research outputs as they are disseminated are 
compliant with the consent forms as signed by participants and ethics 
procedures 
There are different ways of anonymizing the participants’ image in the data, their eyes usually being the 
most revealing feature of their identity. If we take the example of one trainee teacher (who did give her 
consent for this research), her eyes can either be covered with a black patch or her face can be pixelated. 
Another possibility is to use software capable of transforming the image into a drawing. 
  
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
  
  
Figure 2. Different ways of anonymizing participants’ data. 
As exemplified in Figure 2, the different ways of anonymizing the participants’ distinctive features do not 
provide the same apprehension of the data. For example, as Knight et al. (2009) remarked pixelating faces 
or using drawings “can blur distinctions between gestures and language forms rendering the data unusable 
for certain lines of linguistic enquiry” (p. 8). Since a semiotic approach was adopted for this research, 
facial expressions were of crucial importance. Thus only those participants (7 teachers and 12 learners) 
who had consented to having their images examined by researchers were included in the shared corpus. 
To conclude on the subject of ethics, it seems important to insist that ethics concerns not only how 
participants are treated in a research project but also how an ethics of sharing is encouraged among a 
group of researchers. Thus, for the ISMAEL project, a document was drawn up to state the researchers’ 
rights and obligations with the data. It included 
• information relating to the access of the data, 
• expectations concerning the respect of the participants’ ethical wishes (anonymization of data), 
• expectations concerning the obligation to add new annotations to the corpus in order to pool them 
with the rest of the group, and 
• expectations concerning the explicit and complete citation of the corpus. 
Ensuring that all researchers sign such a document is a useful way to formalize how everyone commits to 
the group and to spell out the meaning of data sharing. In brief, data sharing entails mutual responsibility: 
respect from the researchers to the participants and also respect among researchers. 
THE CREATION OF A MULTIMODAL CORPUS 
A prime reason for creating a corpus which brings together all the data from a project is to ensure long-
term accessibility for researchers. The Visu platform which was used for the telecollaboration project in 
2013 and stored all the online exchanges no longer exists. Retrieving all the video files and structuring 
them into a corpus became the safest means to ensure that the project could be sustained beyond the life 
of the teaching platform. In the following section, I explain how two categories of data were gathered to 
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
form a complex corpus and how special attention was paid to making these data as shareable as possible. 
Core Data 
In order to have access to the trainee teachers’ online activity, the core research data were made up of the 
traces of the interactions that were automatically collected and stored by Visu. To provide an illustration 
of the data, this 8-second clip shows three participants—one teacher trainee (Adèle, on the left of the 
screen) and two learners from DCU (Alannah at the top and Catriona)—involved in a role playing activity 
where the two learners had to plan a birthday party and suggest their ideas to their manager (role played 
by the trainee teacher). Adèle is trying to encourage the two learners to speak together (Try to talk, both of 
you, it’s your project) while she makes it clear she wants to remain in the background and play the role of 
the manager (and I’m grading you, I am the manager, I’m judging you). 
Adopting a semiotic approach entails paying attention to all the multimodal elements that make up the 
interactions. Software such as ELAN (Sloetjes & Wittenburg, 2008) can help researchers annotate the 
data. The second clip shows the same extract as Clip 1 but inserted into ELAN and annotated thanks to 
the functionalities offered by this software. ELAN’s functionalities include the possibility to replay a 
video extract repeatedly, a timeline aligned with media time that facilitates the navigation of the data, and 
the possibility of creating tiers to annotate each new element under scrutiny. This usually starts with the 
transcription of the verbal utterances of the participants and then any other elements (smiles, facial 
expressions, proximity to the screen) that are deemed relevant to the study. Although time-consuming to 
learn to use efficiently, such software is precious for exploring minutely how verbal and co-verbal 
resources interact, and on large data sets, to identify patterns in performance (for instance the production 
of smiles at certain points of the interactions, or a change in the ways teachers provide negative feedback 
over the period of the telecollaboration). 
Complementary Data 
The minute examination of verbal and co-verbal resources could provide invaluable insights as to how 
teachers manage an online interaction. Nevertheless, because CALL research seeks to bring insights that 
are valuable to the field of education, I contend that such micro analyses should be complemented with 
actors’ perceptions, institutional constraints, and technological constraints because they also contribute to 
shaping pedagogical interactions. The approach of the ISMAEL project thus not only involves an analysis 
of the recorded online interactions but combines it with the study of complementary data which make up 
“a dynamic constellation of resources” (Flewitt, Hampel, Hauck, & Lancaster, 2009, p. 44) in an effort to 
enhance the social validity of research that dwells on description but also seeks to devise possible modes 
of intervention. We follow Jones (2004) when he cautions researchers working in the computer-mediated 
communication (CMC) field not “to stop at the screen's edge” (p. 24) so as to gain a fuller understanding 
of context and not to separate what is going on online from what is going on around the participants. This 
is why the lesson plans that are included in the corpus can prove crucial for outsiders to understand the 
situation. 
Complementary data in the ISMAEL project are comprised of the following: 
• lesson plans to understand the pedagogical objectives pursued by the teachers; 
• transcriptions of group debriefing sessions with teacher trainees giving insight as to their 
pedagogical intentions and perceptions the day after each interaction; 
• field notes and photographs gathered during the interactions; and 
• post-interviews with teacher trainers, teacher trainees ,and language students to examine some 
aspects under scrutiny (e.g., how trainees reported how they provided feedback, how language 
students considered the interactions with their online teachers). 
 
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
From an Array of Multiple Data to a Shareable Corpus 
Multiple data can only qualify as a corpus once they have undergone a certain number of operations (i.e., 
annotation, structuration, contextualization, and accessibility) that are detailed in this section. One of the 
most time-consuming and costly operations involves annotating the data—that is, transcribing the verbal 
utterances of the participants and annotating the exchanges according to a coding scheme (see Clip 2 and 
the section on Core Data above). Adolphs and Varter (2013) point out the interest of developing coding 
schemes for transcription so that “they can be shared across different research communities and with 
different community cultures and different representational and analytical needs” (p. 155). Since one of 
the aims of the ISMAEL project was to analyze several novice teachers’ trajectories, it was thought 
essential to annotate the same session for all teachers and follow several teachers over six weeks (see 
Figure 3). Transcribed online data for the ISMAEL project totaled 15 hrs 23 mins and involved the work 
and time of Benjamin Holt, a doctoral student who was in charge of devising a coding scheme for 
transcribing the verbal exchanges, training up to ten research assistants to use ELAN, supervising their 
work, and ensuring the quality and the consistency of their annotations. Then, as Chanier and Ciekanski 
(2010) insist, data have to be structured, that is, each piece of the corpus has to be digitalized, labeled, 
and organized so that the researchers involved in the project can easily retrieve the elements that are 
needed for their analyses. Next, the data have to be contextualized with the provision of all the 
information required to understand fully who the participants were and in what pedagogical and technical 
environments the interactions took place as exemplified in Table 2. 
Table 2. Complementary information to contextualize primary data 
Types of complementary 
information 
Information 
Socio-demographics and 
profiles 
• age and gender of the participants 
• familiarity with tools used for the interaction 
• level in target language and motivations 
• experience in learning or teaching online 
Pedagogical dimensions • nature of tasks and themes  
• documents used 
• instructions given 
• place of the interactions within the curricula 
Temporal dimensions • length of each interaction, frequency of interactions (e.g. once a 
week) 
• duration of module (e.g. a semester) 
Technological dimensions • type of software and hardware used (e.g. desktop or laptop, devices 
used for recording, etc.) 
Finally, an additional semiotic layer can be useful to increase the accessibility of the data once they have 
been uploaded to an online repository. Even though researchers are more and more comfortable with 
databases, finding one’s way into a complex corpus can be daunting if one has to go through a list of long 
and confusing labels. For the ISMAEL project, it was decided to implement an html portal protected by a 
password to organize the access to the corpus repository as seen in Figure 3. The interface works as a 
table with two organizing entries: the online teacher trainees with their students (in ordinate) and the six 
sessions with a summary of their content (in abscissa). 
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
 
Figure 3. The interface to access the ISMAEL corpus. 
An interface like the one displayed in Figure 3 functions as a gateway to the structured data behind it. The 
whole corpus can thus be seen at a glance displaying what data are available for each session and for each 
group (video clips and verbal transcription) and the length of each interaction. The icons (detailed at the 
bottom of Figure 3) are hyperlinks that give access to either core or complementary data. Pictures (either 
the original images or conversions of these to line drawings) also remind researchers what the participants 
have agreed to in their consent forms so that data can be used accordingly, knowing from the outset 
whether or not they will be able to show participants’ faces clearly. 
Collecting data, structuring them into a corpus, providing contextual information, and facilitating their 
accessibility for research are thus the different steps involved in the creation of a shareable corpus. All 
these steps necessitate time and effort, efficient and strategic decision-making procedures, and a constant 
attention to ethical issues and to the researchers’ needs in order to maximize the interest and shareability 
of the corpus. Yet, creating such a corpus is not an end in itself and the potential for sharing has to lead to 
real sharing and scientific exploration as is exemplified in the next section. 
TOWARDS THE PRACTICE OF CORPUS SHARING 
Socializing the Corpus through a Data Session 
When a group of researchers is appropriating a corpus, the processes at work can be greatly facilitated 
through the organization of collective work sessions. Emanating from the field of conversation analysis, 
the format of the data session corresponds to an academic practice carried out by a group of researchers 
during which data recordings are projected so that the session’s participants can explore data collectively 
(Caria, 2010). As ten Have (1999) explains, what is at stake with a data session is not what any individual 
researcher can make of a data set per se, but “rather of sharable and shared understandings” (p. 123). Ten 
Have proceeds with the metaphor of the data session as a playground, both as an individual effort of 
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
grounding proposed analyses in the actual data (the rules of the game) and as a collective endeavor to 
reach a shared understanding of a corpus (the aim of the game). 
Caria (2010) details the progress of a data session through four steps: 
1. The data session leader projects an extract or a collection of extracts to his fellow researchers 
along with transcriptions of the verbal output. The projection is repeated as much as needed. 
2. Participants take a few minutes to gather their ideas and annotate their transcriptions. 
3. Participants take turns to formulate their observations, show their interest in a given phenomenon, 
and discuss methodological or theoretical aspects. 
4. Participants are then invited to react to what their colleagues have said, offer alternative 
interpretations, and propose additional comments or observations. 
For the ISMAEL project, a two-day workshop was organized in order to familiarize the various 
researchers with the corpus and the characteristics of the pedagogical situation. The data session was 
given a central place in the workshop because such an academic format was deemed important to 
facilitate the discovery of the corpus and encourage researchers from different backgrounds and 
experience to work collectively. Indeed, the original members of the ISMAEL group included researchers 
specialized in language education, teacher education, and conversation analysis. Most had worked in 
classroom language-teaching situations but had little or no experience with the specificities of 
synchronous online teaching. Before the workshop, four extracts from the ISMAEL corpus had been 
selected and sent to the participants because they were thought to provide opportunities to identify 
relevant characteristics of the pedagogical situation. 
To illustrate the process of appropriation that can take place around a corpus, I propose a multimodal 
analysis of one extract (see Clip 3) from the data session which brought together 14 participants 
(including the author of the present paper who was also the data session leader). All the researchers were 
seated around an oval table, which allowed them to see one another, and they took turns by raising their 
hands. A 360-degree camera placed in the middle of the table and a static camera were used to film the 
interactions. The captured interactions were transcribed according to conventions (see Appendix B) which 
gave an account of multimodality. Transcript 1 works as a mise en abîme: it starts with the projection of 
the extract from the ISMAEL corpus already presented earlier (see Clip 1) with a trainee teacher and her 
two students. It is then followed by the interpretations proposed by two researchers from the ISMAEL 
project. The transcript of this part of the data session helps to understand what is at stake when a group of 
researchers participate in the collective exploration of multimodal data. Although it lasts only eight 
seconds, the clip that is projected (see Line 1) is sufficient to trigger rich interactions, which I now 
analyze. 
  
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
Transcript 1. Extract from the data session 
1 
 
Adèle essayez de dire toutes les deux c'est votre [projet] 
try to talk both of you it’s your project 
Catriona                                                       [hum:] 
Adèle et moi je vous note\ ++ moi je suis le manager je                                     
[je vous juge] 
and I’m grading you ++ I am the manager I’m judging you 
Alannah [okay] 
Catriona [hum:] 
2 
 
NG: on peut peut-être arrêter dès maintenant je pense c’est le  
we can stop right there I think it’s the  
(glances around to see which of the participants wants to take the 
floor first)  
  silence and laughter 
3.1 
 
CW: alors moi je trouve intéressant le geste autour de je vous juge/ 
suivi d’un rire  
so I find interesting the gesture for I’m judging you/ followed by a 
laugh 
3.2  CW: est-ce que c’est pour essayer de faire passer le message 
d’évaluateur plus facilement/ 
is it to try to get the evaluative message across more easily 
4.1  FC: euh passer le message ++ il y a deux + il y a probablement + 
peut-être pas aller trop trop loin pour la signification du rire faut 
pas aller trop vite 
uh to get the message across + + there are two + there are 
probably + maybe not go too too far for the meaning of the laugh 
let’s not go too quickly 
4.2 
 
FC: moi j’y verrais deux choses + un elle atténue + c’est un signal 
d’atténuation puisqu’elle s’est mise en position haute je suis le 
manager/ 
 I would see two things + one she mitigates + it is an attenuation 
signal since she puts herself in an authoritative position I am the 
manager/  
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
4.3 
 
FC: et l’autre hypothèse peut-être pour le rire c’est que c’est 
fictionnel/ + et on sait ça enfin moi pour l’avoir beaucoup regardé 
que quand on change de régime + de régime fictionnel au régime 
sérieux/ + catégories de Bange/ + euh y a le rire qui montre + je 
suis le manager/ + c’est pas vrai/ + et on rit + oui oui c’est une 
marque euh + il a donc peut-être plusieurs euh + significations le 
rire là 
and the other hypothesis maybe for the laugh is that it’s fictional/ 
+ and we know that like for me having studied it a lot that when 
you change mode from a fictional mode to a serious mode + 
Bange’s categories/ + uh there’s the laugh that shows + I’m the 
manager/ +  it’s not true/ + and we laugh + yes yes it’s a mark uh 
+ it therefore maybe has many uh + significations that laugh there 
First, it can be noted that the two researchers, Ciara Wigham (CW) and Francine Cicurel (FC), weave the 
most salient features of the interaction into their own interpretations by repeating both parts of the 
teacher’s verbal message (je vous juge, je suis le manager) and some co-verbal aspects (the teacher’s 
raised finger [Line 3.1], her smile [Line 4.3]). Corpus exploration seems to require researchers to borrow 
from the studied interaction and subsequently cite relevant passages as if there were a need to inscribe the 
participants’ behaviors and words into their own bodies to appropriate them fully. 
Besides, the appropriation process also entails several operations: 
• Identifying salient features (Line 3.1), that is, the conjunction of the teacher’s raised finger and 
the quasi-synchronous production of a smile creating an oxymoronic message (I’m judging your 
oral production while I maintain a benevolent attitude). 
• Using some established notions, such as softeners (Line 4.2), to explain how the teacher is trying 
to reduce the asymmetry between her and her learners. 
• Using some references, as in Line 4.3, from the literature (Bange) and past research (having 
studied it a lot) to embed the interpretations that are proposed within a scientific tradition and 
thus augment their legitimacy. 
This collective exploration of the data proved crucial as it allowed participants who were not familiar with 
technology-mediated teaching to understand the didactic contract—that of online pedagogical 
conversation—which Guichon & Drissi (2008) define as a genre hybridizing classroom and social talk. 
Selecting such an episode for the data session and scrutinizing it collectively thus helped the group 
members to identify the specific type of communication and didactic contract that shaped the exchanges 
included in the corpus. The study of the whole data session also revealed that working collectively on 
some extracts was key to familiarizing the researchers with the participants (e.g., the trainees’ relative 
online teaching inexperience and the learners’ levels). It also gave insiders opportunities to provide 
outsiders with essential contextual explanations and point them to complementary data that could be used 
to enrich their understanding. 
Multimodal Representation and Dissemination 
Another outcome of socializing a corpus consists of collectively devising the different ways of 
representing the collected data in the transcripts that accompany future textual interpretations. Collective 
reflection and actual trials at making transcripts can prove invaluable to raise participants’ awareness of 
the multimodal aspects of the corpus and of the representational challenges posed by multimodal 
research. These include three issues: 
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
• what to include in the transcript and the necessary tradeoff between rendering all the aspects of 
the data and keeping the transcript readable; 
• how to represent the interaction between the multiple modes; and 
• how to represent the orchestration of semiotic resources by interactants. 
Ten Have (1999) puts forward the meditational function of transcripts and their contribution “to highlight 
specific phenomena and create a ‘shared focus’ among audience and analyst” (p. 33). In the making of a 
multimodal transcript, choices that are made by researchers (e.g., how to name the actors, whether or not 
to translate interactions, etc.) contribute to proposing one representation of the data. To retain the quality 
of online pedagogical interactions, transcripts which include screen casts facilitate the emergence of some 
dimensions that might otherwise be overlooked.  
In the first stage of our project, it was decided that the transcripts would not need to be homogenized so as 
not to curb the researchers’ creativity even if two main representations (one akin to a musical score as in 
Transcript 1 and the second organized as a vertical strip as in the Transcript 2) emerged from discussions. 
Transcript 2. Representation of the oxymoronic “je vous juge”  
(1) (2) (3) 
   
Adèle essayez de dire toutes 
les deux c'est votre [projet 
Alannah [okay] 
Catriona [hum:] 
Catriona [hum:] 
Adèle et] moi j[e vous note\] 
moi je suis le manager je [je 
vous juge] 
 
(laughter) 
Alannah [okay] 
Catriona [hum:] 
When put together collectively, transcripts work as intermediary objects that force participants to find 
common ground to analyze a given linguistic phenomenon. Thus, discussing the best ways to describe 
and represent an online interaction is a means of aligning researchers coming from different perspectives 
with the same scientific purpose and ultimately co-constructing a shared representation while building a 
community around the same object. 
Concerning dissemination, the CALL community would benefit from rethinking the way it communicates 
its results and analyses as is advocated by the proponents of digital humanities (e.g., Hayles, 2012). In 
line with this trend, I contend that published texts could be presented more systematically and be 
accompanied by multimodal documents in order to render the specificities of a given teaching or learning 
situation more holistically. To do so, such journals as Language Learning & Technology are adapted 
venues since they provide the (still rare) opportunity of publishing texts accompanied by relevant media. 
Such online multimodal publications could enable readers to “analyze the data themselves [and] test the 
analytical procedures which the author has followed and the validity of his/her analysis and claims” as is 
advocated by Seedhouse (2005, p. 254). A multimodal presentation of research results would not only 
contribute to improving their “intellectual accountability” (Markee & Stansell, 2007, p. 37) but also help 
build “communities of scholarly practice” (p. 36) among researchers by giving them a remote access to 
data that can then be shared and analyzed further (González-Lloret, 2015). 
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
Thanks to “the emotional affordances of these rich media” (Lemke, 2013, p. 68), edited video clips can be 
used to share with readers what research actually feels like, an endeavor all the more important when 
research is not only targeted at other scholars but aimed to reach out to teachers. As ethnographer Pink 
(2006) pointed out, images can be as meaningful as texts to give an account of a piece of research, and 
she insists that “images may not necessarily be the main research method or topic, but through their 
relation to the sensory, material, and discursive elements of the research images and visual knowledge 
will become of interest” (p. 5). When relevant, associating image and text in research dissemination is of 
prime importance for a semiotic approach. Online publication should contribute, even more than it does 
today, to communicating the outcomes of CALL research. 
Finally, reaching out to an audience beyond the sole research community through online versions of 
research outcomes could help fuel the reflection of current and future language teachers. Designing 
training resources in dialogue with research and enhancing their shareability with the multimodal means 
that are now available could thus continue reframing CALL research into a design-based endeavor 
whereby “theoretical issues get tested in the design of implementations, and implementations are loci of 
theoretical reflection and elaboration” (Burdick et al., 2012, p. 13). The edited book by Guichon and 
Tellier (2017) that is one of the outcomes of the ISMAEL project is accompanied by an online repository 
where clips from the corpus, definitions, and relevant resources have also been shared with the 
community of language teachers. 
CONCLUSION 
The main aim of this article is to show that a corpus-based approach used to gather a large dataset of 
online interactions could provide a pertinent methodological framework when carrying out research 
focusing on online teachers’ professional development. Such an approach is a fruitful avenue for CALL 
research as it provides researchers with the opportunity to scrutinize the intricate working of a mediated 
situation that can be reconstituted thanks to the traces left by the participants in that situation. A corpus-
based approach therefore requires that researchers become intimate with these traces and appropriate 
them through different operations of collection, transformation, analysis, and re-presentation that have 
been described in this article. This comprehensive process of appropriation is eminently ethical in that it 
turns the linguistic practice of corpus analysis into a relentless effort to reduce the strangeness of the 
traces produced by actors in situations where the researchers (and the future readers of the research) were 
not involved, without reducing the complexity of the situation itself. 
I have proposed the concept of corpus shareability and have used some aspects of the ISMAEL project to 
demonstrate that attention to ethics, data accessibility, and corpus socialization could all facilitate corpus 
sharing. I have claimed that corpus sharing can contribute vastly to the field of CALL by enhancing its 
scientific robustness as it favors a multidisciplinary, systematic, and in-depth analysis of multimodal data. 
Corpus sharing could also be extended beyond researchers who share the same epistemological stance. It 
is imaginable and even desirable that once a qualitative approach has been used, such as the one described 
in this paper, a corpus linguistics-based methodological approach could then be used to investigate the 
same data through another lens and thus reveal aspects that are overlooked by a qualitative approach, 
providing “a utility for [corpus] re-usability” (Knight et al., 2009, p. 9). 
Finally, this article devoted to methodology has endeavored to underline the human aspects of research. 
This emphasis on corpus creation, corpus sharing, and concrete illustrations of a research community 
involved in corpus-based research stems from a resolute wish to demonstrate that methodology is not a 
linear, recipe-like and disembodied process. On the contrary, it is caught in a web of sometimes 
conflicting scientific traditions, ethical constraints, technological affordances, and human activity and 
affect. While I do not suggest that research should become self-centered and unduly anecdotal, I believe 
that it might be important to provide the community of researchers—especially those in training—with 
glimpses of research in the making (Latour, 2005) and unveil some of the activity that takes place before 
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
dissemination. 
 
APPENDIX A. Extract form the Consent Form Used for the Project 
Participation in this research project is voluntary and your decision to take part or not will have no effect 
on your grades. If you decide not to take part, the data you authored will not be included in the corpus.  
Please complete the following (Circle Yes or No for each question) 
I have read the Plain Language Statement (or had it read to me) Yes No  
I understand the information provided Yes No  
I have had an opportunity to ask questions and discuss this study Yes No  
I have received satisfactory answers to all my questions Yes No  
I am satisfied that arrangements have been made to protect my anonymity as far as possible Yes No  
I am aware that the confidentiality of the information I provide is subject to legal limitations Yes No 
I give permission for my anonymised data to be included in the corpus. Yes No  
I am aware that the corpus may be shared with other researchers Yes No  
I give permission for extracts of the recordings where I appear to be shown at conferences and teacher 
training sessions:  
With my face in clear but with all other identity markers masked out Yes No  
With my face blurred and all other identity markers masked out Yes No  
I give permission for snapshots of the recordings where I appear to be published in academic articles 
With my face in clear but with all other identity markers masked out Yes No 
With my face blurred and all other identity markers masked out Yes No 
I give permission for selected anonymised quotes from my data to be used in academic publications 
Yes No 
I would be willing to take part in interviews/focus groups at a future date Yes No 
I have read and understood the information in this form. My questions and concerns have been answered 
by the researchers, and I have a copy of this consent form. Therefore, I consent / do not consent 
(strikethrough as appropriate) to take part in this research project under the conditions specified above. 
Participants Signature: __________________________________________ 
Name in Block Capitals: __________________________________________ 
Witness: __________________________________________ 
Date: _____________ 
 
APPENDIX B. Transcription Conventions 
[ ]  Overlapping talk 
/ \  Rising or falling intonation 
° °  Lower voice 
:::  Extension of the sound or the syllable it follows 
p`tit  Elision 
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
trouv-  Truncation of a word 
xxx  Incomprehensible syllabe 
=  Latching 
( )  Uncertain transcription 
(( ))  Comments 
&  Turn of the same speaker interrupted by an overlap 
(.)  Micro-pause 
(0.6)  Timed pause 
it was good Underlined segments to show the beginning and the end of a gesture 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The ISMAEL project was supported by the ASLAN project (ANR-10-LABX-0081) of Université de 
Lyon, within the program “Investissements d’Avenir” (ANR-11-IDEX-0007) of the French government 
operated by the National Research Agency. 
I am indebted to all the participants in Dublin and in Lyon and all the researchers who have taken part in 
the ISMAEL project and have added value to the article: Brahim Azaoui, Françoise Blin, Lucile Cadet, 
Francine Cicurel, Cathy Cohen, Isabel Colón de Carvajal, Thomas Debay, Charlotte Dejean, Eugénie 
Duthoit, Marie-Josée Hamel, Benjamin Holt, Justine Lascar, Cédric Sarré, Marion Tellier, Sylvie 
Thouësny, Daniel Valéro, Julie Vidal, and Ciara Wigham. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Nicolas Guichon is a professor in language sciences at the Université de Lyon and belongs to the ICAR 
(Interactions, Corpus, Apprentissages, Représentations) research team. His research interests include 
teacher education in CALL, the study of online interaction, and digital literacies. 
E-mail: nicolas.guichon@univ-lyon2.fr 
 
REFERENCES 
Adolphs, S., & Varter, R. (2013). Spoken corpus linguistics. From monomodal to multimodal. New York, 
NY: Routledge. 
British Psychological Society. (2013). Ethics guidelines for internet-mediated research. Retrieved from: 
http://www.bps.org.uk/system/files/Public%20files/inf206-guidelines-for-internet-mediated-research.pdf 
Burdick, A., Drucker, J., Lunenfeld, P., Presner, T., & Schnapp, J. (2012). Digital humanities. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Cappeau, P., & Gadet F. (2007). L’exploitation sociolinguistique des grands corpus. Maître-mot et pierre 
philosophale. Revue Française de Linguistique Appliquée, 121(1), 99–110. 
Caria, A. (2010). L’information ethnographique en analyse de conversation: Le cas de la data session. 
Cahiers de Praxématique, 54–55, 189–206. 
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
Chanier, T., & Ciekanski, M. (2010). Utilité du partage des corpus pour l’analyse des interactions en ligne 
en situation d’apprentissage: Un exemple d’approche méthodologique autour d’une base de corpus 
d’apprentissage. Alsic, 13. doi: 10.4000/alsic.1666 Retrieved from: http://alsic.revues.org/1666 
Chanier, T., & Wigham, C. R. (2016). A scientific methodology for researching CALL interaction data: 
Multimodal LEarning and TEaching Corpora. In M.-J. Hamel, & C. Caws, (Eds.), Learner computer 
interactions: New insights on CALL theories and applications. (pp. 215–240). New York, NY: John 
Benjamins. 
Develotte, C., Guichon, N., & Vincent, C. (2010). The use of the webcam for teaching a foreign language 
in a desktop videoconferencing environment. ReCALL, 23(3), 293–312. 
Dooly, M. (2015). It takes research to build a community: Ongoing challenges for scholars in digitally-
supported communicative language teaching. CALICO Journal, 32(1), 172–194. 
Dybkjær, L., & Ole Bernsen, N. (2004). Recommendations for natural interactivity and multimodal 
annotation schemes. Paper presented at the LREC 2004 Workshop on Multimodal Corpora, Lisbon, 
Portugal. 
Flewitt, R., Hampel, R., Hauck, M., & Lancaster L. (2009). What are multimodal transcription and data? 
In C. Jewitt, (Ed.), The Routledge handbook of multimodal analysis. (pp. 40–53). London, UK: 
Routledge. 
González-Lloret, M. (2015). Conversation analysis in computer-assisted language learning. CALICO 
Journal, 32(3), 569–594. 
Granger, S., Gilquin, G., & Meunier, F. (2015). The Cambridge handbook of learner corpus research. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Guichon, N. (2013). Une approche sémio-didactique de l’activité de l’enseignant de langue en ligne: 
Réflexions méthodologiques. Education & Didactique, 7(1), 101–115. Retrieved from 
https://educationdidactique.revues.org/1679 
Guichon, N., & Cohen, C. (2014). The impact of the webcam on an online L2 interaction. Canadian 
Modern Language Review, 70(3), 331–354. 
Guichon, N., & Drissi, S. (2008). Tutorat de langue par visioconférence: Comment former aux régulations 
pédagogiques. Les Cahiers de l'ACEDLE, 5(1), 185–217. 
Guichon, N., & Tellier, M. (2017). Enseigner l’oral en ligne. Une approche multimodale. Paris, France: 
Didier. 
Guichon, N., Bétrancourt, M., & Prié, Y. (2012). Managing written and oral negative feedback in a 
synchronous online teaching situation. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 25(2), 181–197. 
Guichon, N., Blin, F., Wigham, C. R., & Thouësny, S. (2014). ISMAEL LEarning and TEaching Corpus. 
Lyon, France: Laboratoire Interactions, Corpus, Apprentissages & Représentations. 
Hampel, R., & Stickler, U. (2012). The use of videoconferencing to support multimodal interaction in an 
online language classroom. ReCALL, 24(2), 116–137. 
Hayles, K. N. (2012). How we think: Transforming power and digital technologies. In D. M. Barry (Ed.), 
Understanding digital humanities (pp. 42–66). New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Jewitt, C. (2009). The Routledge handbook of multimodal analysis. London, UK: Routledge. 
Jones, R. H. (2004). The problem of context in computer-mediated communication. In P. Levine & R. 
Scollon, (Eds.), Discourse and technology—Multimodal discourse analysis (pp. 20–33). Washington, DC: 
Georgetown University Press. 
Nicolas Guichon Sharing a Multimodal Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
Kern, R. (2014). Technology as Pharmakon: The promise and perils of the Internet for foreign language 
education. Modern Language Journal, 98(1), 340–357. 
Knight, D., Evans, D., Carter, R., Adolphs, S. (2009). HeadTalk, HandTalk and the corpus: Towards a 
framework for multi-modal, multi-media corpus development. Corpora, 4(1), 1–32. 
Latour, B. (2005). La science en action. Introduction à la sociologie des sciences. Paris, France: La 
Découverte. 
Lemke, J. L. (2013). Thinking about feeling: Affect across literacies and lives. In O. Erstad & J. Sefton-
Green (Eds.), Identity, community, and learning lives in the digital age (pp. 57–69). Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Markee, N., & Stansell, J. (2007). Using electronic publishing as a resource for increasing empirical and 
interpretive accountability in conversation analysis. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 27, 24–44. 
Norris, S. (2004). Analyzing multimodal interaction—A methodological framework. New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Pink, S. (2006). Visual ethnography. Images, media, and representation in research. London, UK: Sage 
Publications. 
Satar, M. (2013). Multimodal language learner interactions via desktop videoconferencing within a 
framework of social presence: Gaze. ReCALL, 25(1), 122–142. 
Seedhouse, P. (2005). Conversation analysis as research methodology. In K. Richards & P. Seedhouse 
(Eds.), Applying conversation analysis (pp. 251–266). New York, NY: Palgrave McMillan. 
Sindoni, M. G. (2013). Spoken and written discourse in online interactions. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Sloetjes, H., & Wittenburg, P. (2008). Annotation by category—ELAN and ISO DCR. Paper presented at 
the 6th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, Marrakesh, Morocco. Retrieved 
from http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2008/pdf/208_paper.pdf 
ten Have, P. (1999). Doing conversation analysis. London, UK: Sage Publications. 
Vinck, D. (1999). Ingénieurs au quotidien. Ethnographie de l’activité de conception et d’innovation. 
Grenoble, France: PUG. 
Yamada, M., & Akahori, K. (2009). Awareness and performance through self- and partner’s image in 
videoconferencing. CALICO Journal, 27(1), 1–25. 
Yanguas, I. (2010). Oral computer-mediated interaction between L2 learners: It’s about time! Language 
Learning & Technology, 14(3), 72–93. Retrieved from: http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2010/yanguas.pdf 
