Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2017, Volume 21, Issue 3 
pp. 131–152 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2017 Gregory Hadley & Maggie Charles 
 
  
 
Enhancing extensive reading with 
data-driven learning 
Gregory Hadley, Niigata University 
Maggie Charles, Oxford University Language Centre 
Abstract 
This paper investigates using data-driven learning (DDL) as a means of stimulating greater 
lexicogrammatical knowledge and reading speed among lower proficiency learners in an extensive reading 
program. For 16 weekly 90-minute sessions, an experimental group (12 students) used DDL materials 
created from a corpus developed from the Oxford Bookworms Graded Readers, while a control group (10 
students) had no DDL input. Both classes were required to read a minimum of 200,000 words during the 
course. An embedded-experiment design (Edmonds & Kennedy, 2017) was adopted consisting of both 
qualitative and quantitative forms of investigation. Quantitative data from the Vocabulary Levels Test by 
Nation and Beglar (2007) and a C-test (Klein-Braley & Raatz, 1984) constructed from an upper-level 
Bookworms reader found statistically significant lexicogrammatical improvements for both groups, but 
greater improvement took place within the control group. Qualitative data derived from a repertory grid 
analysis of student constructs revealed several possible reasons for the experimental group’s lack of 
engagement with DDL. The study concludes that careful attention to students’ learning preferences and a 
softening of the DDL approach may ensure better results with lower proficiency learners. 
Keywords: Data-Driven Learning, Extensive Reading, Lower Proficiency Learners 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English 
APA Citation: Hadley, G., & Charles, M. (2017). Enhancing extensive reading with data-driven learning. 
Language Learning & Technology, 21(3), 131–152. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2017/hadleycharles.pdf 
Introduction 
Data-driven learning (DDL) is a student-centered inductive method of language learning, in which learners 
explore grammar and vocabulary issues using a corpus. A corpus is a large database of language that is 
searched with software called a concordancer, which typically provides key words in context (KWIC). 
Students learn through repeated exposure to authentic occurrences of the same lexical items or phrases (see 
Figure 1). 
The classic form of DDL advocates direct access to corpus data. Learners investigate language questions 
on their own, and develop a strong sense of autonomy (Johns, 1994, p. 296). Studies have found that DDL 
results in significant improvement among advanced and intermediate level language learners (e.g., Boulton 
& Cobb, 2017; Braun, 2007; Gordani, 2013; Granger, Hung, & Petch-Tyson, 2002; Hirata & Hirata, 2015; 
Sun & Wang, 2003). However, studies on the impact of DDL at the novice or intermediate-low level (e.g., 
Boulton, 2009; Hadley, 2002; Mizumoto & Chujo, 2015; St. John, 2001) have been mixed, due in part to 
the linguistic challenges presented by the corpus data itself. 
This article reports on the first stage of a 4-year funded research project exploring the applications of DDL 
with lower proficiency learners—which in the East Asian context, refers to students who have succeeded 
in attaining higher than average scores on standardized language tests, but whose proficiency in class tends 
to be either inconsistent or uneven in terms of the relative balance between receptive and productive 
132 Language Learning & Technology 
 
language skills. Building upon the findings of earlier research, we link DDL to extensive reading (ER) and 
investigate, using both statistical and qualitative measures, whether a comprehensible form of DDL can 
enhance the reading speed, vocabulary recognition, and grammatical improvement of lower proficiency 
students. First, however, we will consider a number of issues underpinning the rationale of this study. 
 
Figure 1. Example of corpus data using AntConc concordance software (Anthony, 2014) 
Review and Research Questions 
Starting with nascent ideas from the late 1960s (McEnery & Wilson, 1997, p. 12) and culminating with the 
work of Johns during the 1990s (Johns, 1991), DDL was initially dismissed by many as “the fringe activity 
of a few eccentrics” (Leech, 1997, p. 4). Today, however, “a substantial number of teachers are using 
corpora in their teaching” (Tribble, 2015, p. 55). The spread of DDL has resulted in it becoming more 
nuanced, so that it now operates within a spectrum of soft to hard instructional forms (see Bernardini, 2004; 
Gabrielatos, 2005; Gilquin & Granger, 2010). Hard DDL represents Johns’ (1991) classic approach, where 
the corpus consists of authentic texts and the students work individually in accessing the corpus and 
deducing answers from the data. Soft DDL, on the other hand, typically refers to teachers preselecting 
corpus data and using it in a purposeful way to raise student consciousness about specific lexicogrammatical 
items within the target language. 
While DDL has been found to positively impact the language development of learners with higher levels 
of proficiency, its results among lower proficiency learners have been mixed—in part because some lower 
proficiency learners find the KWIC presentation of lexical items to be distractingly decontextualized (see 
also Charles, 2007), and because considerable levels of scaffolding are needed for training learners in how 
to do DDL at lower levels (Hadley, 2001, 2002). A compounding difficulty is the linguistic challenge of 
corpora that are compiled from English sources that greatly exceed the lower proficiency level. Writing on 
the issue of linguistic difficulty, Chambers (2010) concludes that corpus linguists have not sufficiently 
heeded the input hypothesis (Krashen, 1989), the zone of proximal development (Vygotsky, 1978), or the 
cognitive load theory (Sweller, 1994)—all of which state that learnable second language input must be 
challenging, but comprehensible and integrated within a wide range of learning activities (Doughty, 2003; 
Loschky, 1994; Tomlinson, 2016). 
One rich, but largely overlooked, source of comprehensible input can be found in ER. First used within the 
context of second language learning by Palmer (Kelly, 1969, p. 139), ER has evolved to become an 
“approach to the teaching and learning of reading in which learners read large quantities of material that is 
Gregory Hadley and Maggie Charles 133 
 
within their linguistic competence” (Grabe & Stoller, 2013, p. 286). Dao’s (2014) summary of several years 
of ER research provides convincing evidence for ER’s capacity to improve many aspects of learners’ 
proficiency including grammatical accuracy, vocabulary comprehension, reading comprehension, and 
speed—though others rightly note that more research is still needed on the degree to which learning rates 
and vocabulary retention are affected (Waring & Takaki, 2003). 
Proponents of ER have traditionally stressed that reading should be for pleasure, that students should have 
access to a wide variety of graded readers, and that the use of dictionaries, chalk-and-talk teacher 
instruction, and testing should be scrupulously avoided (Day & Bamford, 2002, 2004). Nevertheless, 
questions are arising today as to whether the traditionally inductive approach of ER is the most efficient 
way for students to learn (e.g., Bieri, 2015; Waring & McLean, 2015). Grabe and Stoller (2013, p. 99) are 
representative of those calling for more research into how ER can be improved through other forms of 
instruction and learning resources such as dictionaries or word lists. 
The literature on DDL has been largely silent on whether it can be used to aid learners in vocabulary 
retention while reading for meaning. A notable exception, however, can be found in Allan (2009), who 
created a small corpus of graded readers in order to provide comprehensible language input for her 
intermediate learners. Though limited in terms of time, corpus size, and focus, Allan’s pioneering study 
provided evidence to suggest that DDL used with graded readers helped students to quickly acquire a 
number of lexical chunks. More significantly, she found that the simplified language in graded readers did 
not pose a threat to authenticity, because the lexical chunks in the graded readers were no different from 
those in texts created by native speakers for native consumption. “For the teacher looking for a way into 
DDL with lower-level learners,” she concludes, “it seems that graded corpora may offer a reasonable 
balance of accessibility and authenticity in the data it provides” (p. 30). 
Our research continues the work started by Allan (2009) and takes up the challenge of transcending a strictly 
inductive approach to ER. By combining the elements of DDL, lower proficiency learners, comprehensible 
input, and calls for ER enhancement within a study of longer and broader reach, we hope to provide further 
empirical evidence that would “not just show that DDL works, but in what conditions” (Boulton, 2007, p. 
14). This article reports on the first stages of this investigation by quantitatively studying test results and 
qualitatively investigating student affective responses to a semi-hard form of DDL. The qualitative aspect 
of this study is especially important because the tendency of many Japanese institutions is in coaxing, rather 
than compelling, learners to study. As a result, it has become increasingly necessary for teachers to discern 
what appeals to learners and craft their lessons accordingly. The research questions were formulated as 
follows: 
1. Does the use of comprehensible DDL in an ER program for lower proficiency learners lead to 
greater gains in reading speed, lexical knowledge, and grammatical improvement than achieved by 
comparable students in a non-DDL ER program? 
2. What are some possible affective concerns among lower proficiency learners that could influence 
the potential effectiveness of DDL? 
Methods 
Setting 
Our investigation took place at a Japanese national university in the spring semester of 2015, and was 
carried out within the university’s Applied English Course—an elective subject that encourages the use of 
innovative instructional methods. Student levels were mixed and it was not known in advance who would 
attend. Moreover, the course relied upon student interest; participants normally devoted time to similar 
courses only after satisfying the demands of required courses. Two classes participated in this study during 
the same semester, and met once a week for 90 minutes over 16 weeks. 
134 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Materials 
We approached Oxford University Press (OUP) for permission to use their Bookworms Graded Readers as 
corpus source material. This series consisted of 192 books divided into seven levels of increasing lengths 
and difficulty. The starter level featured short readings averaging around 1,400 words, often presented in a 
graphic novel type of format, while level six contained short versions of classic novels, with up to 2,500 
headwords and over 30,000 words of text. 
OUP agreed to our project proposal, and generously provided a full set of Oxford Bookworms for classroom 
use. Another set purchased by the university library’s Self-Access Learning Center (SALC) further ensured 
that students would have ample opportunities for ER both in and out of class. For security purposes, OUP 
created the corpus on our behalf, and omitted a small number of books for either copyright or technical 
reasons. The resulting Bookworms Corpus contains 186 books from all seven levels with a total of 
1,715,160 tokens (17,670 word types). Additional details regarding the corpus can be found in Table 1. In 
order to protect their proprietary rights, however, OUP stipulated that the corpus could be used only in 
class, and not placed on any electronic platform within the university’s network. This posed special 
challenges, which will be discussed shortly. 
Table 1. Breakdown of Bookworms Corpus 
Stages Number of Titles Average Words per Book Word Types Tokens 
Starter 28 1,412 1,727 40,794 
Stage 1 49 5,753 5,932 292,424 
Stage 2 41 6,508 6,146 275,424 
Stage 3 31 10,395 7,375 327,090 
Stage 4 22 16,327 7,765 363,691 
Stage 5 9 24,361 5,706 224,944 
Stage 6 6 31,195 6,066 191,086 
Methods and Instruments 
An embedded-experiment design—sometimes referred to as a concurrent, nested mixed-methods 
strategy—was adopted for this study. Edmonds and Kennedy (2017, pp. 189–191) explain this as a method 
used when exploring issues occurring within a real-world context, where both qualitative and quantitative 
data sources are available. The aim was to gather findings that could stimulate hypotheses on the efficacy 
of a particular treatment or intervention. In this case, the phenomenon was of lower proficiency learners 
studying English via ER, and the treatment was a semi-hard form of DDL. Embedded-experiment designs 
begin with a quantitative pre-test, and qualitative data is collected as the intervention is taking place. A 
quantitative post-test is administered, and follow-up qualitative analysis is used to further unpack the 
quantitative data. Rather than highly specific confirmation research or a more subjective case study, an 
evidence-based, mixed-methods approach of the type found in the embedded-experiment design facilitates 
a multi-layered understanding of what students learn, how they respond, and how they might best succeed 
in their studies (Hesse-Biber & Johnson, 2015). The qualitative and quantitative features of this 
investigation are shown in Table 2.  
Gregory Hadley and Maggie Charles 135 
 
Table 2. Methods and Instruments Used in this Investigation 
Research Question Method Instruments 
Does the use of comprehensible DDL in an ER 
program for lower proficiency learners lead to 
greater gains in reading speed, lexical knowledge, 
and grammatical improvement than achieved by 
comparable students in a non-DDL ER program? 
Quantitative Pre- and post-test of Vocabulary 
Levels Test, C-tests, and speed 
reading tests using t-test measures of 
dependent and independent means 
Cohen’s d 
What are some possible affective concerns among 
lower proficiency learners that could influence the 
potential effectiveness of DDL? 
Qualitative 
& Mixed 
Method 
Classroom observation 
Portfolio analysis 
Personal Construct Repertory Grids 
Quantitatively, pre-tests used t-tests of independent means to determine whether the control and 
experimental groups were the same or distinct statistical groups. Post-tests employed t-tests of dependent 
means to ascertain if each group had improved to the level of statistical significance during the course of 
the semester, and a t-test for independent means for investigating whether the DDL group had improved to 
the point where it had become distinct from the control group at a statistically significant level. Cohen’s d 
was used to measure the size of effect in the data. The statistical analyses were carried out using 
StatPlus:mac Pro (AnalystSoft, 2016). Qualitatively, a classroom observation log, photographs of student 
classroom activity, and student portfolio analyses were employed during DDL use. An instrument known 
as Personal Construct Repertory Grids, which enabled research participants to share thoughts and opinions 
with minimal researcher interference, was used following the post-test. 
Personal Construct Repertory Grids were developed over 50 years ago by Kelly, the founder of Personal 
Construct Psychology (Kelly, 1955, 1963). Fundamental to personal construct psychology are the notions 
of elements, constructs, and bipolar constructs. Elements are the “people, events, objects, ideas, institutions, 
and so on” (Cohen, Manion, & Morrison, 2003, p. 338), which are “well-known and personally meaningful” 
to research informants (Shaw, 1980, p. 10). Easterby-Smith (1981) explains that it is helpful “to think of 
elements as being the objects of people’s thoughts, and constructs as the qualities that people attribute to 
these objects” (p. 11). Kelly (1963) writes that mental constructs are bi-polar and that in order to discover 
how someone understands value-laden constructs such as sincere, cheerful, or refined, the analyst needs to 
learn something about the contrasting limits within which these values are framed (pp. 105–108). Although 
there have been numerous modifications to Kelly’s original procedure for conducting repertory grid 
interviews, all variations share the common goal of studying how individuals and groups see the world 
around them (Bannister & Fransella, 1986). In English language teaching (ELT), repertory grids have been 
used to discover the reasons why adults dropped out of an ESL class (Rowsell, 1992), as a means for 
exploring teachers’ perceptions of language education (Roberts, 1999), and as a tool for understanding the 
cultural expectations for good teachers in Japan (Hadley & Evans, 2001). 
Repertory grids first encourage informants to think about empirical issues specifically related to an area of 
research interest. Informants then go through several cycles of choosing a sample of these empirical events 
and affix value statements to them. A rating system is then used to link the empirical events to the value 
statements in a meaningful way. The resulting data can be analyzed in a number of ways, and a cognitive 
snapshot of informant notions can be developed (Figure 2). 
The specific procedures used for grid elicitation came from Shaw and McKnight (1981) and Jankowicz 
(2004). Each student received a repertory grid large enough for five elements and bipolar constructs. As 
can be seen in Figure 2, they were provided with some elements and asked to write other language learning 
activities across the top of the grid. Students then looked at three randomly chosen elements and identified 
what two of them had in common and what differentiated them from the third. This produced a set of mental 
constructs, which were written on the sides of the grid. Students rated each activity on a scale from 1 to 5 
according to how well it corresponded with each bi-polar construct. All of the students’ repertory grids 
136 Language Learning & Technology 
 
were combined into one large grid, and analyzed using GridSuite 4 (Fromm & Bacher, 2014) and RepGrid 
V (Shaw & Gaines, 2010). These programs use principle components analysis to locate the most strongly 
rated constructs, and chart the relationship of elements to constructs as a cluster map. Repertory grids 
enabled us to gain insight into which activities were liked and disliked, and the reasons behind students’ 
attitudes. 
 
Figure 2. Example of a completed repertory grid 
Participants 
An unexpectedly large number of international students joined both classes. In both the experimental and 
control groups, Chinese learners formed the majority, followed by Japanese, French, and Korean students 
(see Table 3). This provided an excellent opportunity to conduct research on DDL with various nationalities, 
mirroring the environment in many English language centers around the world. For this reason, the class 
with the most diversity in terms of nationality and gender was chosen as the experimental group. 
Table 3. Research Participants 
 Gender  Nationality 
Class Male Female  Chinese  Japanese French Korean 
Control Group (N = 10) 3 7  5 4 1 0 
Experimental Group (N = 12) 4 8  5 4 2 1 
In Japanese universities, nearly three quarters of ER classes are conducted with groups of 25 or fewer 
Gregory Hadley and Maggie Charles 137 
 
learners (Shimamoto, 2008; Yoshida, 2014, p. 21), meaning that our group sizes were fairly average for our 
context. Admittedly, however, the number of participants in this study is a potentially problematic issue 
that will be addressed later. 
Pre-Test Data Collection 
A series of pre-tests were administered to both the experimental and control groups in order to ascertain 
their levels in reading speed, vocabulary knowledge, and grammatical knowledge. Both groups took a speed 
reading test (Quinn, Nation, & Millett, 2007) and the Vocabulary Levels Test (VLT) for the 2,000-, 3,000-, 
5,000-, and 10,000-word levels from Nation’s resource website (Nation & Beglar, 2007). The speed reading 
test contained 563 words and 10 question items, and the VLT featured 30 items for each of the four word 
levels. We opted for these tests as exploratory tools at the beginning of this project, because they are widely 
used and have been tested for reliability and validity (Coxhead, 2000; Schmitt, Schmitt, & Clapham, 2001). 
Furthermore, VLT scores have been shown to correlate with overall L2 proficiency (Milton, 2013), which 
provided us with useful background information on our participants. 
Students also completed a 100-item partial deletion cloze, or C-test (Klein-Braley & Raatz, 1984), created 
from the Bookworms version of David Copperfield by Charles Dickens. C-tests are a modified form of 
cloze testing widely used to investigate a subject’s knowledge of written discourse items such as context 
cohesion, syntax, and strategic textual comprehension (Bachman, 1982). They correlate highly with 
grammar tests and reading tests (Alderson, 1979), and have been found to be ideal for testing 
lexicogrammatical proficiency (Bowen, Madsen, & Hilferty, 1985, p. 376). 
Post-Test Data Collection 
Student attrition occurred at two per class and their data were not included in the study. The post-tests were 
conducted following the same procedure as the pre-tests. In addition, repertory grids were administered to 
students in the experimental class. Each individual completed a grid according to the procedure described 
earlier. 
Instructional Procedures 
The ER program commenced with an orientation class that discussed the practices and instructional 
procedures employed. ER, the maintaining of portfolios, and in-class expansion activities were common to 
both classes. 
Extensive Reading 
All students were required to read a minimum of 200,000 words over the semester. Both classes read from 
the same sets of hard-copy Oxford Bookworms Graded Readers. Their progress was tracked using the 
MReader site administered by Kyoto Sangyo University and the Extensive Reading Foundation. This 
provided short online quizzes for the books that students had read, and gave them credit for the word 
amounts of each book after successfully passing each quiz. Students were trained in how to access the site, 
create individual MReader accounts, and take the online tests. Throughout the semester, student progress 
was monitored and anonymous progress lists were regularly presented in order to encourage regular 
reading. 
A selection of books from all levels of Oxford Bookworms Graded Readers was brought to each class, and 
30 to 45 minutes of each class was devoted to silent sustained reading. This was to ensure that students had 
at least one time in the week when we knew they had been reading. The principal investigator (PI) taught 
the students the five finger rule, which helped students to choose graded readers where no more than two 
or three unknown words were encountered on a page. During sustained silent reading sessions, the PI 
observed book choices and reading habits in order to enhance in-class activities. Outside class, students had 
free access to a wide range of graded readers in the university SALC, but in both classes, students bonded 
with the Bookworms Graded Readers and read solely from that series. 
138 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Portfolios and Expansion Activities 
All students kept a portfolio of vocabulary and grammatical items by using a vocabulary log worksheet (see 
Appendix A). Our vocabulary logs, which were modified versions of the vocabulary notebooks found in 
Schmitt and Schmitt (1995), required students to write down unknown words from their reading, and engage 
in short exercises, such as drawing a picture of the word and crafting their own sentence using the new 
item. Students in both classes also wrote one book report per week for a book they had read that week. 
In class, following Eichhorst and Shearon (2013), the typical format for each 90-minute class began with 
30 minutes devoted to an expansion activity. The control class would engage in various conversation 
activities of the type found in activity books designed for use with graded readers (e.g. Bamford & Day, 
2004; Greenwood, 1988). The experimental class participated in these activities and also in DDL-based 
activities using the Bookworms Corpus to stimulate further vocabulary comprehension. While DDL 
activities had a prominent place in the instructional procedures within the experimental class, a balance 
needed to be struck between DDL and other activities, because the PI learned from earlier attempts at using 
DDL with beginners that learners would quickly become either bored or overwhelmed when working with 
corpus-based materials (Hadley, 2001). Approximately 30 minutes of each class focused on silent sustained 
reading, and classes ended with a speed-reading test from Nation’s resource website. Students charted their 
progress at the end of each class, and their scores were recorded and monitored. 
To prepare the learners in the experimental group for DDL, they were given an introduction to corpora and 
DDL using the classroom screen projector and a laptop that had the Bookworms Corpus and AntConc 
(Anthony, 2014) concordance software installed. Initially, we wished to investigate a purely hard DDL 
approach for this stage of the investigation, but the stipulations from OUP precluded allowing students 
unfettered direct access to the corpus materials. This necessitated our semi-hard approach, in that corpus 
material was printed and provided for students, but we still adopted Johns’ (1991) procedure of identify, 
classify, generalise to structure the work, meaning that students were encouraged to interact with the 
concordance materials independently by finding patterns, categorizing them, and then developing 
hypotheses about the lexical items. Limiting class time for DDL meant that students in the experimental 
group were expected to spend a considerable time outside of class working with the corpus materials 
provided. This, we observed, resulted in a heavier workload than the control class. 
Results 
After a brief consideration of the pre-test findings, we summarize the qualitative observational data of both 
classes and our interventions, as the learners’ response to DDL was instrumental in understanding both the 
quantitative post-test scores and the results of the repertory grid analysis. 
Pre-Test 
An independent-samples t-test was conducted to compare the language proficiency of the experimental and 
control groups. Language proficiency was assessed in three areas: lexico-grammatical proficiency via the 
C-test, speed reading, and lexical knowledge as measured by the VLT. Maximum scores were 100 points 
for the C-test, speed reading was measured in words per minute (wpm) through the rubric provided by 
Nation and Beglar (2007), and the highest possible score for each level of the VLT was 30 points. 
No significant difference emerged from the C-test scores of the control class (M = 66.45, SD = 11) and 
experimental class (M = 64.23, SD = 12): t(22) = -0.466, p = .645; d = -0.18. No significant difference was 
found in the wpm scores for the control class (M = 134, SD = 19) and experimental class (M = 143, SD = 
23), as assessed on the speed reading pre-test: t(22) = 1.031, p = .313; d = 0.44. However, the high standard 
deviations indicate the degree to which proficiency was mixed in these classes, and even though the effect 
sizes by some estimations appear to be limited (see Plonsky & Oswald, 2014) it seemed clear to us that 
some in the experimental class had higher levels of proficiency in this area than those in the control class. 
Scores for the experimental and control classes for all levels of the VLT test, however, revealed no 
Gregory Hadley and Maggie Charles 139 
 
significant differences, suggesting that at the beginning of the study, both groups were essentially the same 
statistically (see Table 8). The VLT scores also show that the overall L2 proficiency of participants in this 
study was, on average, between the A2 and B1 levels (Milton, 2013) within the Common European 
framework of reference for languages (Council of Europe, 2001). 
Observed Student Response 
The affective response of the experimental group to the semi-hard DDL experience was disappointing. With 
the portfolio material, the performance of the experimental class was observed as less enthusiastic than the 
control class almost from the outset. While the average rate of return on weekly book reports over the entire 
semester was roughly similar for both classes (control class = 77%; experimental class = 74%), the quality 
of the experimental class reports was appreciably lower. This was determined not only by the physical 
appearance of the reports, but, with the exception of those written by the two French students, most of the 
experimental class reports were short and lacking in specificity. Many appeared to have been finished at 
the last minute. 
Both classes submitted similar totals in terms of vocabulary log sheets (experimental class = 44; control 
class = 40), but here again, over half of the log sheets in the experimental class came from four female 
students (two Japanese and two Chinese). The rest of the students in the experimental class completed only 
one to four sheets each over the semester, and these were only filled out partially. Students in the control 
class were fewer in number, produced almost the same amount in total as the larger experimental class, and 
each produced an average of five sheets during the semester, but these were in most cases completely 
finished and work was maintained on a regular basis throughout the semester. It should be noted that while 
students had a deadline for turning in book reports on Fridays (when they knew the PI made a note of who 
had and had not submitted work), we waited until the end of the semester to check the vocabulary logs. The 
lack of constant surveillance allowed space for students to follow the dictates of their personal levels of 
motivation. However, the students in the experimental class largely skimped on doing their logs, while the 
control class worked diligently on them. We believe this was a result of the time commitment needed for 
working with the DDL materials. 
With the DDL component, students were encouraged to ask questions, either in class or in writing. 
However, the PI received only one question per week, and this only after considerable coaxing. When the 
PI asked students about what they had learned from the concordance readouts, or if they had any questions, 
it was discovered that, with the notable exception of one Japanese female student, the rest of the students 
were doing little more than lightly reading over the sheets, folding them, and then slipping them away into 
a disorganized corner of the portfolio. 
As an intervention, we further softened our semi-hard approach by creating a worksheet that we called the 
research matrix (see Appendix B). The intention here was to give students more structure in order to more 
explicitly guide them in the process of inductive learning, which is a major feature of DDL. In subsequent 
lessons, the research matrix helped them create hypotheses in class. Outside of class, they were asked to 
write samples gleaned from the corpus data, and then expand upon these to create their own sentences. 
Unfortunately, however, the matrix had the opposite effect in eliciting questions from the learners. With 
the exception of one female Japanese student and one male Chinese student, the experimental group ceased 
asking questions. Of the two who would ask questions, neither completed the out-of-class work on their 
research matrix sheets. 
Given this lack of success, we next attempted to emulate the approach of the co-principal investigator, who 
used DDL in her classes at a UK university language center. We brought the corpus into the classroom, 
projected the concordance software on screen, and made it available for students to consult in class. The PI 
fielded questions from the students, and using the concordance software in class, they explored the answers 
together. A few students were willing to give this approach a chance, but for most, working on something 
that could be seen by everyone in the class was threatening, and many demonstrated an aversion to using 
the laptop for technical reasons. It became clear that the experimental class lacked commitment and 
140 Language Learning & Technology 
 
engagement with DDL, and had shifted towards what Schlecty (2011, p. 16), describes as “retreatism.” 
In both the experimental and control classes, students displayed more visible energy and enthusiasm when 
engaged in more traditional expansion activities. It was observed that the energy of the students in the 
experimental group picked up even more when they were given activities for sharing their personal insights, 
or when discussing what they had learned from their reading. Therefore, we created classroom discussion 
tasks: as homework, students were given some corpus data and a research matrix worksheet, which they 
were asked to complete before the next class. In the following class, students then formed small groups and 
taught each other what they had learned from their corpus data studies. This had a better effect, but the 
overall response at best reached only what Schlecty (2011, pp. 16–19) describes as “ritual compliance”, in 
that the class did only the minimum necessary to avoid any possible negative consequences. 
Possible reasons for the student response to DDL will be considered later in the qualitative findings of this 
project. First, however, let us consider whether semi-hard DDL had an appreciable effect on the learners’ 
lexicogrammatical proficiency and reading rates. 
Post-tests: Research Question 1 
C-Test 
C-test post-test results (see Table 4 and Table 5) indicate that, while both groups improved significantly 
after approximately 10 weeks of ER, the control group improved more, with means comparisons indicating 
that they became distinct from the experimental group (one-tail) at a statistically significant level, which 
was also confirmed by p-value analysis. The effect size in the independent means post-test analysis, was 
negligible, and the slight shift into negative territory suggests that, if this study had continued, the mean 
change might have gone in the opposite of the predicted direction. Regardless, on the C-test, the 
experimental class did not improve more than the control class.  
Table 4. C-Test Paired Post-Test Results with Dependent Means 
Post-test df M SD t 
t Two-Tail 
(.05) 
t Two-Tail 
(.01) p d Conclusion 
Control Class 9 82 8.87 5.661 2.262 3.25 < .001 1.62 H1 
Experimental Class 11 75 9.59 6.649 2.200 3.11 < .001 1.38 H1 
Table 5. C-Test Combined Post-Test Results with Independent Means 
Post-test df M SD t 
t One-Tail 
(.05) 
t One-Tail 
(.01) p d Conclusion 
Control Class 20 82 8.87 1.826 1.725 2.846 0.041 -0.82 H1 
Experimental Class  75 9.59       
Speed Reading 
Speed reading means were based on wpm levels measured on Nation’s Speed Reading Test Key. Pre-test 
analysis suggested that the experimental class had more readers who were faster, with an average speed of 
143 wpm. This was due, however, to a few quick readers in the experimental class, and a few exceptionally 
slow students in the control class, which is confirmed by the relatively small effect size. Apart from these 
students, p-levels suggest that acceptance of the null hypothesis was reasonable. Again, in both groups 
reading speed improved over the semester, with a significant effect. However, the control class here did 
better again, with double the effect (see Table 6 and Table 7).  
Gregory Hadley and Maggie Charles 141 
 
Table 6. Speed Reading Paired Post-Test Results with Dependent Means 
Post-test df M SD t 
t Two-Tail 
(.05) 
t Two-Tail 
(.01) p d Conclusion 
Control Class 9 174 18 6.203 2.262 3.25 < .001 2.06 H1 
Experimental Class 11 168 23 4.538 2.200 3.11 < .001 1.13 H1 
Table 7. Speed Reading Combined Post-Test Results with Independent Means 
Post-test df M SD t 
t One-Tail 
(.05) 
t One-Tail 
(.01) p d Conclusion 
Control Class 20 174 18 -0.638 1.725 2.846 .041 -0.30 H0 
Experimental Class  168 23       
Lexical Measures 
Lexical measures (see Table 8) were generated using the VLT, which investigated the probability of lexical 
knowledge at the 2,000-, 3,000-, 5,000-, and 10,000-word levels (Nation & Beglar, 2007). The results here 
were unremarkable, because the students had mastered most words at the 2,000 level, while conversely 
having very little knowledge of words at the 10,000-word level. It is no surprise that little movement took 
place. The control class showed significant improvement, however, in the 3,000- and 5,000-word levels. 
Table 8. Lexical Measures 
 
VLR 2000  VLR 3000  VLR 5000  VLR 10,000 
 
M t  M t  M t  M t 
Pre-test (Independent)            
Control Class 29 -1.163  24 0.032  19 0.182  5 -0.197 
Experimental Class 28  24  20  4 
Post-test (Paired)            
Control Class 29 1.176  26 3.222  22 2.508  5 0.348 
Experimental Class 28 1.076  25 1.604  20 1.160  5 1.134 
Post-test (Independent)            
Control Class 29 -1.179  26 -1.346  22 -0.991  5 -0.044 
Experimental Class 28  25  20  5 
Note. t-Scores in bold indicate significance (p < .05) 
Total Words Read 
Word amounts in Table 9 were calculated within the MReader Platform. The averages of the experimental 
class seem higher due primarily to one student, who read over 511,736 words. If this student were omitted, 
the experimental class average would be 203,618 words—slightly lower than that of the control group.  
142 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Table 9. Total Words Read 
Class Total (Mean) 
Control Class 209,511 
Experimental Class 230,334 
Qualitative Investigation: Research Question 2 
In order to obtain Personal Construct Repertory grids, 144 bipolar constructs were elicited from the learners. 
In order for graph readouts to be presented legibly, only numbered designations (e.g., C6 meaning Construct 
#6) were entered into the analysis software packages. Figure 3 shows a graphical representation of the 
correlations between the elements and the constructs using Principal Components Analysis. The elements 
were Activity I hate, Book reports, Activity I love, Vocabulary log, and Research matrix - corpus. Corpus 
was used instead of DDL because it has entered the Japanese language primarily due to the work of Tono, 
who appeared on a nationally syndicated educational program on Japanese television and produced a 
number of teaching materials to supplement Japan’s NHK educational programs (e.g., Tono, 2003, 2005). 
The specifics of liked and disliked activities will be mentioned shortly, but from the 144 elicited bipolar 
constructs, Figure 3 features the two which were most strongly rated by the experimental group, and which 
provided a correlational matrix for 80.2% of the data. 
 
Figure 3. Most highly rated constructs for experimental group 
These constructs were Talking together as opposed to Silent (no talking), and Pronunciation as opposed to 
Focusing on skills. We confirmed later with this class that what they meant by pronunciation referred to 
learning how to emulate high status American or British accents—something that was outside the purview 
of a reading class. Nevertheless, when viewed two-dimensionally, it appears that virtually every element of 
the DDL class clustered between the negatively valued constructs. Flattening out the data in this manner, 
however, distorts relations much as a Mercator map distorts the globe, so a more nuanced view is gained 
by adding the third most strongly rated bipolar construct, that of Useful and challenging as opposed to 
Boring and meaningless. This reveals that the DDL activities were construed as almost identical to the 
vocabulary logs, and that while these activities were seen to make students silently focus on skills, DDL 
was also generally accepted as both useful and challenging (see Figure 4). 
Gregory Hadley and Maggie Charles 143 
 
 
Figure 4. Multidimensional graph of experimental group constructs and elements 
Figure 5 reveals a wider sample of the more heavily weighted constructs. The snapshot indicates that even 
as some students saw DDL as useful and challenging (C35), others felt that it was simply searching for 
rules (C96). With DDL, one had to work hard to find an answer (C46), but it was still felt as if one was 
only studying words (C55), or engaged in rote vocabulary learning (C58). Although seen as mechanical 
(C65), there was tacit recognition that it helped in learning how to use new vocabulary (C73). While 
students had to write, though thankfully not a book report (C75), and that it entailed writing in isolation 
(C99), something that was patently boring (C94), students also recognized it as good for memorization 
(C97), which in an East Asian context, is a term thought to be synonymous with learning. 
 
Figure 5. Constellation of highly rated constructs for the experimental group 
The mixed response to a semi-hard approach to DDL is supported by the expressed likes and dislikes of 
this particular group. Individual elements of activities that students loved were those such as reading books, 
pair work activities, singing songs, group work, and role-play. These are the activities that elicited 
144 Language Learning & Technology 
 
constructs such as talking together (C6), sharing opinions through conversations (C44), cooperative work 
with friends (C92), and expressing oneself through conversations (C103). Bridging preferences were those 
such as thinking in English (C7), reflecting upon new knowledge (C14), drawing pictures (C16), and 
learning pronunciation through singing (C24). Other constructs in this quadrant’s cluster emphasized 
having the chance to just read (C116), which was also expressed by other students as focusing on reading 
(C138), and simply reading (C144), because, as one student put it, reading is what I love (C140). 
Practices that were strongly disliked were those of writing compositions, grammar practice, reading in 
front of the class, giving presentations, practicing English with someone who speaks the same mother 
tongue, and reading textbooks or encyclopedias. These clustered around constructs such as silent (no 
talking) (C5), studying just for information (C8), and getting dry information from a book (C43). They 
disliked having to think about the unknown (C15), working on skills (C23), and having to do some sort of 
exercise after reading (C139). This not only included having to study word meanings (C71), but also writing 
book reports (C137), writing things out for people (C115), writing on paper (C91), or doing activities that 
are both simple and boring (C104), such as having group discussions based on the book report (C142) or 
other discussion activities based on what one has read (C143). 
Discussion 
It can be seen quantitatively that while the lexicogrammatical proficiency of both the experimental and 
control groups significantly improved over the semester, the control group showed greater improvement. 
The qualitative data clearly indicates resistance on the part of the experimental group to even a semi-hard 
approach to DDL. Even though it was seen as useful, the learners deemed it not worth the investment of 
time needed to make it work, preferring instead to focus on learning activities that are more in line with the 
classic ER approach—that is, simply reading and discussing their books with classmates. 
This lack of student engagement with DDL raises the question of whether anything, either positive or 
negative, can be said about its effects in this study. However, it was ironically the control group, who was 
far more engaged in regularly keeping vocabulary logs, who were able to demonstrate greater improvement, 
suggesting that Ellis (2003, p. 573) may be correct in his assertion that any focused form of supplementary 
study is better than reading alone. 
One of the stated aims of this study was to identify the conditions within which DDL might be 
contextualized for lower proficiency learners. This study finds that hard DDL (or even a semi-hard version 
of the approach using comprehensible corpus data) is inappropriate for young undergraduate learners at 
lower levels. DDL, as used by Johns (1991) at the University of Birmingham and by the second author at 
the University of Oxford, was carried out with graduate students, most likely to be in their late 20s and 30s. 
They were self-starters, worked on their own, and formulated questions as they developed hypotheses and 
carried out empirical investigations. Dispositions such as these fit well with hard DDL, because, in terms 
of data-driven learning, it is not only the data, but also the learners that drive the educational process. In 
such circumstances, the affective appeal of the materials is less important, and students are more willing to 
work with technology going through blocks of KWIC data to find answers to their questions. 
Younger undergraduates in the ELT context, on the other hand, often expect more in the way of teacher 
direction, and tend to work from pre-packaged foreign language materials emphasizing fluency, group 
work, and self-discovery. Many have yet to be trained in inductive or deductive styles of learning. 
Therefore, we surmise that even if a corpus features language that is comprehensible to undergraduate 
learners, educational training in higher-level academic skills also seems to be a vital element in the potential 
success of a hard DDL approach. In addition, for learners at this stage of maturity and development, the 
affective element is key, as indicated by the qualitative data in this study. With regard to this, we feel the 
technology and unfamiliarity of DDL compounded the discomfort that students felt regarding the inclusion 
of the computer in the classroom. What we saw as a helpful tool, they construed as a space similar to one 
where they would be in front of the class, and where their questions or lack of skill in using the computer 
Gregory Hadley and Maggie Charles 145 
 
might result in their losing face in front of their peers. Although we initially feared that the lack of online 
corpus access, as stipulated by OUP, would preclude adequate exposure to the Bookworms data and lead 
to student dissatisfaction, we now believe this factor is less likely to have had a major impact on their 
response to DDL. For these students, the most engaging learning activities involved group or pair work, 
interacting, sharing feelings and other emotive activities. Convenient access to the corpus would therefore 
not necessarily make DDL more appealing to such learners. Rather, it is necessary to take account of their 
clear learning preferences by, in this case, designing DDL materials which promote affective engagement. 
From our observations of the improved responses to the inclusion of group-based DDL activities within an 
ER context, we believe that a repackaged, recontextualized form of soft DDL might be more effective, one 
that is data-directed rather than data-driven; one which is directed by the teacher for the learners in an 
explicit, structured way, and is as affectively engaging as possible. The impression of solitary hard study 
needs to be masked by purposeful activities that foster enjoyable social interaction in a non-threatening 
environment. Indeed, we have already been implementing this approach with students in our continuing 
investigation of this subject, and have found far more promising results that suggest that soft DDL is more 
effective with lower proficiency learners. These findings will soon be presented. 
Most studies involving classroom research face shortcomings, and ours is no exception. While all of the 
analyses were undertaken in accordance with established research practices, the small sample sizes should 
be considered. The first thing that should be mentioned is that size alone does not necessarily undermine 
results that are statistically significant. The significant findings in this study indicate that something worth 
noticing has taken place. Nevertheless, the small number of participants also required us to approach our 
findings with humility, and with the hope that they might pave the way for further replication research. 
Also, while Nation and Beglar’s (2007) VLT is a highly respected tool for exploring the lexical proficiency 
of English language learners, we suspect that that the lexical items do not fully represent the lexis contained 
within the Bookworms Graded Readers. We are creating a test instrument that follows the same structure 
and format as the VLT, but which uses vocabulary based on word frequencies derived from the Bookworms 
Corpus. We believe this will provide a far more sensitive and focused indicator of lexical learning in 
subsequent studies. Related to the lexical dynamics of this study, we suspect that the inclusion of vocabulary 
log sheets impeded a clearer snapshot of DDL’s effects. In the studies that we will present later, we compare 
the use of soft DDL in an ER class without the use of vocabulary logs or other forms of explicit grammatical 
or lexical guidance. We believe this will allow for clearer investigation of the claims made both for ER free 
from explicit lexicogrammatical guidance and for the learning potential of DDL with lower proficiency 
learners. 
Conclusion 
In the search for greater insight into ways of improving second language instruction, discoveries of what 
does not work are as important as finding out what does work. Both represent progress. The findings of this 
study suggest that use of comprehensible semi-hard DDL in an ER program for lower proficiency learners 
did not lead to greater gains in reading speed, lexical knowledge, or grammatical improvement than those 
achieved by comparable students in a non-DDL ER program. Affectively, learners found semi-hard DDL 
to be useful but ultimately unattractive, preferring instead to focus on reading for pleasure and enjoying 
conversations of self-discovery with classmates. Based upon these findings, research is underway into ways 
of further softening DDL in an attempt to discover the conditions within which it might have the greatest 
impact for lower proficiency learners in the ELT context. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported in part by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP16K2878. Appreciation is expressed 
to Oxford University Press for permission to use their materials in this research. 
146 Language Learning & Technology 
 
References 
Alderson, J. (1979). The cloze procedure and proficiency in English as a second language. TESOL 
Quarterly, 13(2), 219–226. 
Allan, R. (2009). Can a graded reader corpus provide ‘authentic’ input? ELT Journal, 63(1), 23–32. doi: 
10.1093/elt/ccn011 
AnalystSoft. (2016). StatPlus:mac Pro [Computer software]. Walnut, CA: AnalystSoft Inc. 
Anthony, L. (2014). AntConc (Version 3.4.3m) [Computer software]. Tokyo, Japan: Faculty of Science 
and Engineering, Waseda University. 
Bachman, L. (1982). The trait structure of cloze test scores. TESOL Quarterly, 16(1), 61–70. 
Bamford, J., & Day, R. (2004). Extensive reading activities for teaching language. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Bannister, D., & Fransella, F. (1986). Inquiring man: The psychology of personal constructs. Kent, UK: 
Croom Helm. 
Bernardini, S. (2004). Corpora in the classroom: An overview and some reflections on future 
developments. In J. M. Sinclair (Ed.), How to use corpora in language teaching (pp. 15–38). 
Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Bieri, T. (2015). ER definitions and practice: Instructor voices. Extensive Reading in Japan, 8(1), 4–6. 
Boulton, A. (2007). But where’s the proof? The need for empirical evidence for data-driven learning. In 
M. Edwardes (Ed.), BAAL annual conference 2007 (pp. 13–16). Edinburgh, UK: Scitsiugnil Press. 
Boulton, A. (2009). Data-driven learning: Reasonable fears and rational reassurance. Indian Journal of 
Applied Linguistics, 35(1), 81–106. 
Boulton, A., & Cobb, T. (2017). Corpus use in language learning: A meta-analysis. Language Learning, 
67(2), 1–46. doi: 10.1111/lang.12224 
Bowen, J., Madsen, H., & Hilferty, A. (1985). TESOL: Techniques and procedures. Rowley, MA: 
Newbury House Publishers. 
Braun, S. (2007). Integrating corpus work into secondary education: From data-driven learning to needs-
driven corpora. ReCALL, 19(3), 307–328. doi: 10.1017/S0958344007000535 
Chambers, A. (2010). What is data-driven learning? In A. O’Keeffe & M. McCarthy (Eds.), The 
Routledge handbook of corpus linguistics (pp. 345–358). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Charles, M. (2007). Reconciling top-down and bottom-up approaches to graduate writing: Using a corpus 
to teach rhetorical functions. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 6(4), 289–302. 
Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2003). Research methods in education (5th ed.). New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Council of Europe. (2001). Common European framework of reference for languages: Learning, 
teaching, assessment. Strasbourg, France: Language Policy Unit. Retrieved from 
http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/linguistic/Cadre1_en.asp 
Coxhead, A. (2000). A new academic word list. TESOL Quarterly, 34(2), 213–238. doi: 10.2307/3587951 
Dao, T. N. (2014). Using internet resources for extensive reading in an EFL context. Hawaii Pacific 
University TESOL Working Paper Series, 12, 72–95. 
Day, R., & Bamford, J. (2002). Top ten principles for teaching extensive reading. Reading in a Foreign 
Language, 14, 136–141. 
Gregory Hadley and Maggie Charles 147 
 
Day, R., & Bamford, J. (2004). Extensive reading in the second language classroom. New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Doughty, C. (2003). Instructed SLA: Constraints, compensation, and enhancement. In C. Doughty & M. 
Long (Eds.), The handbook of second language research (pp. 256–310). Oxford, UK: Blackwell 
Publishing. 
Easterby-Smith, M. (1981). The design, analysis, and interpretation of repertory grids. In M. L. G. Shaw 
(Ed.), Recent advances in personal construct technology (pp. 9–30). London, UK: Academic Press. 
Edmonds, W. A., & Kennedy, T. (2017). An applied guide to research designs: Quantitative, qualitative, 
and mixed methods (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
Eichhorst, D., & Shearon, B. (2013). ER@TU - 多読のすすめ The Tohoku University extensive reading 
manual. Sendai, Japan: Tohoku University Higher Education Development Center. 
Ellis, R. (2003). The study of second language acquisition. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Fromm, M., & Bacher, A. (2014). GridSuite 4 [Computer software]. Stuttgart, Germany: University of 
Stuttgart. 
Gabrielatos, C. (2005). Corpora and language teaching: Just a fling, or wedding bells? TESL-EJ: The 
Electronic Journal for English as a Second Language, 8(4), 1–37. 
Gilquin, G., & Granger, S. (2010). How can data-driven learning be used in language teaching? In A. 
O’Keeffe & M. McCarthy (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of corpus linguistics (pp. 359–370). New 
York, NY: Routledge. 
Gordani, Y. (2013). The effect of the integration of corpora in reading comprehension classrooms on 
English as a foreign language learners’ vocabulary development. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 26(5), 430–445. 
Grabe, W., & Stoller, F. (2013). Teaching and researching reading (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Granger, S., Hung, J., & Petch-Tyson, S. (Eds.). (2002). Computer learner corpora, second language 
acquisition, and foreign language teaching. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Greenwood, J. (1988). Class readers. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Hadley, G. (2001). Concordancing in Japanese TEFL: Unlocking the power of data-driven learning. In K. 
Gray, M. Ansell, S. Cardew, & M. Leedham (Eds.), The Japanese learner: Context, culture, and 
classroom practice. Oxford, UK: Oxford University, Department of Continuing Education. 
Hadley, G. (2002). An introduction to data-driven learning. RELC Journal, 33(2), 99–124. 
Hadley, G., & Evans, C. (2001). Constructions across a cultural gap. In J. Edge (Ed.), Action research 
(pp. 129–143). Alexandria, VA: TESOL. 
Hesse-Biber, S., & Johnson, R. (2015). The Oxford handbook of multimethod and mixed methods 
research inquiry. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Hirata, Y., & Hirata, Y. (2015). Data-driven learning and semi-structured interviews in tertiary language 
education in Japan. International Journal of Innovation and Learning, 18(3), 313–332. 
Jankowicz, D. (2004). The easy guide to repertory grids. Chichester, UK: Wiley. 
Johns, T. (1991). Should you be persuaded: Two examples of data-driven learning materials. English 
Language Research Journal, 4, 1–16. 
148 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Johns, T. (1994). From printout to handout: Grammar and vocabulary teaching in the context of data-
driven learning. In T. Odlin (Ed.), Perspectives on pedagogical grammar (pp. 293–313). Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Kelly, G. A. (1955). A theory of personality. New York, NY: Norton. 
Kelly, G. A. (1963). A theory of personality: The psychology of personal constructs. New York, NY: 
Norton. 
Kelly, L. (1969). 25 centuries of language teaching. Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Klein-Braley, C., & Raatz, U. (1984). A survey of research on the C-Test. Language Testing, 1, 134–146. 
Krashen, S. (1989). We acquire vocabulary and spelling by reading: Additional evidence for the input 
hypothesis. Modern Language Journal, 73(4), 440–464. doi: 10.2307/326879 
Leech, G. (1997). Teaching and language corpora: A convergence. In A. Wichmann, S. Fligelstone, T. 
McEnery, & G. Knowles (Eds.), Teaching and language corpora (pp. 1–24). New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Loschky, L. (1994). Comprehensible input and second language acquisition. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 16(3), 303–323. doi: 10.1017/S0272263100013103 
McEnery, T., & Wilson, A. (1997). Teaching and language corpora (TALC). ReCALL, 9(1), 5–14. doi: 
10.1017/S0958344000004572 
Milton, J. (2013). Measuring the contribution of vocabulary knowledge to proficiency in the four skills. In 
C. Bardel, C. Lindqvist, & B. Laufer (Eds.), L2 vocabulary acquisition, knowledge, and use: New 
perspectives on assessment and corpus analysis (pp. 57–78). Colchester, UK: EuroSLA. Retrieved 
from http://www.eurosla.org/monographs/EM02/EM02tot.pdf 
Mizumoto, A., & Chujo, K. (2015). A meta-analysis of data-driven learning approach in the Japanese 
EFL classroom. English Corpus Studies, 22, 1–18. 
Nation, I. S. P., & Beglar, D. (2007). A vocabulary size test. The Language Teacher, 31(7), 9–13. 
Plonsky, L., & Oswald, F. (2014). How big is “big”? Interpreting effect sizes in L2 research. Language 
Learning, 64(4), 878–912. doi: 10.1111/lang.12079 
Quinn, E., Nation, I. S. P., & Millett, S. (2007). Asian and Pacific speed readings for ESL learners: 
Twenty passages written at the one thousand word level. Wellington, New Zealand: University of 
Wellington, English Language Institute. 
Roberts, J. (1999). Personal construct psychology as a framework for research into teacher and learner 
thinking. Language Teaching Research, 3(2), 117–144. doi: 10.1177/136216889900300203 
Rowsell, L. (1992). Adults dropping out? Try Repgrid! ELT Journal, 46(4), 362–372. doi: 
10.1093/elt/46.4.362 
Schlecty, P. (2011). Engaging students: The next level of working on the work. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass. 
Schmitt, N., & Schmitt, D. (1995). Vocabulary notebooks: Theoretical underpinnings and practical 
suggestions. ELT Journal, 49(2), 133–143. 
Schmitt, N., Schmitt, D., & Clapham, C. (2001). Developing and exploring the behaviour of two new 
versions of the Vocabulary Levels Test. Language Testing, 18(1), 55–88. 
Shaw, M. L. G. (1980). On becoming a personal scientist: Interactive computer elicitation of personal 
models of the world. London, UK: Academic Press. 
Gregory Hadley and Maggie Charles 149 
 
Shaw, M. L. G., & Gaines, B. (2010). Rep 5 (Version 1.04) [Computer software]. Cobble Hill, BC: 
Centre for Person-Computer Studies. 
Shaw, M. L. G., & McKnight, C. (1981). Think again: Personal problem-solving and decision-making. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Shimamoto, T. (2008). Anketo chosa kekka, daigaku [Results of university questionnaire]. In A. 
Yamazaki (Ed.), Eigoryouku o takameru tame no tadoku jugyou no suishin [Extensive reading to 
improve learners’ English language proficiency] (pp. 54–65). Yokohama, Japan: Musashi Kogyo 
University. 
St. John, E. (2001). A case for using a parallel corpus and concordancer for beginners of a foreign 
language. Language Learning & Technology, 5(3), 185–203. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num3/stjohn/default.html 
Sun, Y.-C., & Wang, L.-Y. (2003). Concordancers in the EFL classroom: Cognitive approaches and 
collocation difficulty. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 16(1), 83–94. doi: 
10.1076/call.16.1.83.15528 
Sweller, J. (1994). Cognitive load theory, learning difficulty, and instructional design. Learning and 
Instruction, 4(4), 295–312. doi: 10.1016/0959-4752(94)90003-5 
Tomlinson, B. (2016). Achieving a match between SLA theory and materials development. In B. 
Tomlinson (Ed.), SLA research and materials development for language learning (pp. 3–22). New 
York, NY: Routledge. 
Tono, Y. (2003). 100-go de Start! Eikaiwa [Let’s start English with 100 words!] (USA ed.). Tokyo, 
Japan: NHK Publishing. 
Tono, Y. (2005). Supa Corpus Renshucho [Super corpus practice books]. Tokyo, Japan: NHK 
Publishing. 
Tribble, C. (2015). Teaching and language corpora: Perspectives from a personal journey. In A. Leńko-
Szymańska & A. Boulton (Eds.), Multiple affordances of language corpora for data-driven learning 
(pp. 37–62). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
Waring, R., & McLean, S. (2015). Defining extensive reading. Extensive Reading in Japan, 8(1), 7. 
Waring, R., & Takaki, M. (2003). At what rate do learners learn and retain new vocabulary from reading 
a graded reader? Reading in a Foreign Language, 15(2), 130–163. 
Yoshida, H. (2014). An approach to extensive reading: Active involvement during sustained silent 
reading. The Language Teacher, 38(6), 19–22. 
150 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Appendix A. Example Vocabulary Log 
 
Gregory Hadley and Maggie Charles 151 
 
Appendix B. Research Matrix 
 
152 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
About the Authors 
Gregory Hadley is a Professor of Applied Linguistics and Western Cultural Studies at Niigata University, 
and a Visiting Fellow at Oxford University. His latest book is Grounded theory in applied linguistics 
research: A practical guide (Routledge, 2017). 
E-mail: ghadley@human.niigata-u.ac.jp 
Maggie Charles is a Tutor in EAP at Oxford University Language Centre, where she teaches academic 
writing to graduates. She has published widely on academic discourse and corpus pedagogy. Recent books 
are Introducing EAP with Diane Pecorari (Routledge, 2015) and Corpora, grammar, and discourse with 
Nick Groom and Suganthi John (John Benjamins, 2015). 
E-mail: maggie.charles@lang.ox.ac.uk 
