Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/scholzschulze.pdf 
February 2017, Volume 21, Number 1 
pp. 100–120 
 
Copyright © 2017, ISSN 1094-3501 100 
DIGITAL-GAMING TRAJECTORIES AND SECOND LANGUAGE 
DEVELOPMENT 
Kyle W. Scholz, University of Waterloo 
Mathias Schulze, University of Waterloo 
Recent research in digital game-based language learning has been encouraging, yet it 
would benefit from research methods that focus on the gaming processes and second-
language development (Larsen-Freeman, 2015) rather than learner/player reflection or 
individuals’ beliefs about the validity of gameplay. This has proven challenging as 
research methods which provide insight into the gameplay experiences and its many 
factors are needed. Having the gameplay experience occur extramurally is desirable, but 
makes the direct observation of the learners’ activities by a researcher difficult. For this 
reason, we suggest approaching digital game-based language learning through complex 
adaptive systems research (Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008a) and employing Dörnyei’s 
(2014) retrodictive qualitative modeling to capture the complex synchronic and diachronic 
variability of the learners and their individual nonlinear gaming trajectories with requisite 
data density and over a considerable period of time. 
This article draws on a study examining language learners playing the online role-playing 
game World of Warcraft over four months. We will focus on the data collection in this 
observational study and the methods of analysis of a complex adaptive system, which 
helped to better understand the role of extramural digital gaming for the purpose of 
second-language development. 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: German 
Keywords: Game-based Learning and Teaching, Research Methods, Virtual 
Environments 
APA Citation: Scholz, K. W., & Schulze, M. (2017). Digital-gaming trajectories and 
second language development. Language Learning & Technology, 21(1), 99–119. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/scholzschulze.pdf 
Received: November 12, 2015; Accepted: August 18, 2016; Published: February 1, 2017 
Copyright: © Kyle Scholz & Mathias Schulze 
ON THE USEFULNESS OF DIGITAL GAME-BASED LANGUAGE LEARNING  
Digital game-based language learning (DGBLL) has been theorized and analyzed using a diverse range of 
theories and methods. A similar trend is evident in computer-assisted language learning (CALL) research 
in general, as CALL has benefitted from scholarship applying many theoretical frameworks (Hubbard, 
2009) such as the interaction hypothesis (Chapelle, 2005; Smith, 2003), activity theory (Blin, 2004), and 
sociocultural theory (Thorne, 2008). DGBLL has yet to be analyzed with this level of diversity; research 
has focused either on the qualities of games which are most relevant to language learning (e.g., Gee, 
2008, Sykes & Reinhardt, 2012) or on the language learner’s self-reported perceptions of the efficacy of 
gameplay for second-language development (SLD; see Larsen-Freeman, 2015) purposes (e.g., Allen, 
Crossley, Snow, & McNamara, 2014; Peterson, 2012). The growth of DGBLL is impressive (see 
Cornillie, Clarebout, & Desmet, 2012; Peterson, 2013; Reinders, 2012; Sykes & Reinhardt, 2013). 
Various studies examined either vernacular massive multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPG) 
or their educational-variety, synthetic immersive environments (Sykes, Ozkoz, & Thorne, 2008). In the 
majority of these studies (e.g., Peterson, 2012; 2013; Rankin, McNeal, Schute, & Gooch, 2008; Reinders 
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 101 
& Wattana, 2012; Suh, Kim, & Kim, 2010; Zheng, Newgarden, & Young, 2012; Zheng, Young, Wagner, 
& Brewer, 2009), participants are being observed by researchers while playing the game. This potentially 
detracts from the authentic and common experience of gameplay at the player’s leisure and at a preferred 
location, while at the same time limits the amount of time a player could potentially want to play (for an 
example see Bytheway, 2014). Research by Rama, Black, Van Es, and Warschauer (2012) is one 
exception to the majority of these studies; the authors allowed participants to play the game at their own 
discretion. With gameplay session lengths being restricted by the amount of time the researchers can 
afford or the amount of scheduled time in the classroom, it is very challenging to determine trajectories of 
gameplay and SLD, robust learning outcomes, and diachronic and synchronic learner variability. Peterson 
(2012) called for studies that are removed from the classroom to be conducted. 
SLD that occurs while playing and interacting with a digital game must not only be useful in the game 
itself. Rather, the learner-centric nature of game-based learning can facilitate the transfer of linguistic 
constructions to other contexts. This transfer of knowledge and skills or abilities has been observed since 
the early days of game design—for example, with game skills leading to a better mastery of scientific 
simulations (Prensky, 2001). Separated into two distinct categories, transfer can be defined either as far 
transfer (transfer to a dissimilar context or topic) or near transfer (transfer to a similar context or topic; see 
Barnett & Ceci, 2002). Text-heavy DGBLL lends itself well to the transfer of linguistic constructions. 
Although the environments vary, the ability being developed—second-language proficiency—is 
applicable independent of the context. As Tobias and Fletcher (2011) stated, “transfer of knowledge, 
skills, and attitudes from games to tasks in school or training contexts, or to activities in life generally, is 
of central significance for the effectiveness of games in delivering instruction” (p. 161). To argue for the 
usefulness of DGBLL is therefore to argue the efficacy of transfer from the game environment to various 
external contexts. Transfer is, however, ultimately difficult to substantiate and is multi-determined: 
“although various forms of transfer occur…success depends on certain aspects of the situation, including 
the content to be transferred and the context to which it is transferred” (Barnett & Ceci, 2002, p. 632). In 
our study, we focus primarily on the near transfer of linguistic constructions from the game play to a 
group conversation about gaming experiences. 
Piirainen-Marsh and Tainio (2009) focus primarily on how learners playing digital games and embodying 
the characters can transfer the language from the game environment to in-person conversations with one 
another. Specifically, “by repeating, anticipating, and recontextualizing the avatars’ lines, or creating their 
own lines, the players demonstrate not only their close attention to detailed features of the game language, 
but also the relevance of language expertise to the competent management and enjoyment of the game” 
(p. 172). These iterations are integral to the successful transfer between contexts. What begins as 
repetition is found to extend to actual transfer through multiple iterations, as players frequently borrow 
the in-game language in subsequent conversations with one another removed from the synchronous 
gameplay experience. 
In various studies (Jakonen, 2014; Kobayashi, Kobayashi, & Fujimura, 2014; Neville, Shelton, & 
McInnis, 2009), near transfer is operationalized differently, although overwhelmingly it is through 
students’ gains in vocabulary. The studies which examine other transferable aspects from gaming to non-
gaming contexts, such as strategy use (Peterson, 2010) and more general skills within educational settings 
(Delwiche, 2006), appear to find it challenging to explicitly define and observe the near transfer that 
occurred during the study, especially when the gameplay is confined to a classroom setting without the 
possibility for extended gameplay sessions. 
In our study of volunteer university students playing World of Warcraft in German over four months to 
further their SLD, we are using the near transfer of linguistic constructions as a robust indicator of SLD 
that emerges from the individual gameplay trajectories. In our article, we will present only a sketch of the 
conceptualization of both game-playing and SLD as complex adaptive systems (CAS; see Larsen-
Freeman & Cameron, 2008a). Here we will focus mainly on the methods of analysis of CAS and will 
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 102 
instantiate these in our discussion of this study. The main research question that guided our analysis is as 
follows: How do language learners’ trajectories of gameplay interact with their trajectories of SLD? 
AN APPROPRIATE THEORETICAL PARADIGM 
Larsen-Freeman (1997) has introduced CAS to researchers in applied linguistics. Since about 2007, we 
have seen a proliferation of theoretical essays and empirical studies that conceptualize instructed 
language-learning processes and SLD as CAS. However, there has been little CAS research in CALL, 
although a number of scholars have stated the importance of such approaches and their appropriateness to 
CALL research (e.g., Colpaert, 2013; Schulze & Scholz, 2016). Prior CAS research in CALL can be 
summarized briefly. Sockett (2013; see also Sockett and Toffoli, 2012) studied the strategies of students 
learning English online informally and based the analysis on the characteristics1 of CAS. Thorne, Fischer, 
and Lu (2012) analyzed texts in online multiplayer games and their affinity spaces (subordinated wikis, 
chats, discussion boards, etc.; see Gee, 2005) as complex semiotic ecologies. Liou (2012) conceptualized 
learners’ interactions in Second Life as a CAS; and Marek and Wu (2014) claim that a CAS approach 
should be used in CALL instructional design. These are examples of CAS having made inroads in CALL 
research. We submit that research on CAS in CALL can provide an integrative, non-reductionist, and 
contextualized perspective on technology-mediated SLD. 
Technology-mediated SLD in CALL is a complex, nonlinear process. It is complex because of its 
multiple variables, components, and actors. These are interconnected, interact with one another, and often 
change dynamically in the process. CALL processes are nonlinear because their trajectories reflect sub-
processes such as developmental spurts, backsliding, and plateaus. Teachers and learners alike have 
known this all along, but many research studies and pedagogic interventions have relied and still rely on 
assumptions of binarity (in the end there are always only two—erroneous and correct, effective and not 
effective, or pre-test and post-test, etc.—and these two are clear opposites) and linearity (there is a 
proportionate relationship of cause and effect and processes move in one clear direction; see also Dörnyei, 
2014; Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008b). The conceptualization of processes in CALL—game playing, 
collaborative online writing, chat, interacting in a virtual world, and so forth—as CAS means we are 
moving away from reductionist binary and linear views of SLD. Of course, language and language use are 
also CAS. Language use and language development on both the individual plane and the social plane are 
inextricably interconnected. 
Conceptualizing SLD and second-language processes in CALL—in our case the individual learner’s 
gaming interactions in World of Warcraft—as CAS is central to our research. A thorough understanding 
of the nature of CAS is therefore an essential prerequisite. As a brief introduction to CAS, we list its main 
characteristics (de Bot & Larsen-Freeman, 2011; for a detailed discussion in the context of CALL see 
Schulze & Scholz, 2016; Sockett, 2013): 
• sensitive dependence on initial conditions; 
• complete interconnectedness; 
• nonlinearity in development; 
• change through internal reorganization and interaction with the environment; 
• dependence on internal and external resources; 
• constant change, with chaotic variation sometimes, in which the systems only temporarily settle 
into attractor states; 
• iteration, which means that the present level of development depends critically on the previous 
level of development; and 
• emergent properties 
Extrapolating from these characteristics, SLD in CALL has to be considered in context and over time; the 
variability of the development of individual learners over time and within groups always has to be taken 
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 103 
into account and should not be leveled. Language and development are emergent phenomena; the 
interaction of smaller variables and components can result in change into a larger entity of different 
quality. Change that occurs in these processes and that is often reflected in process outcomes is a complex 
phenomenon. It depends on complex configurations of variables, and the relationship between the 
conditions and the results of change is disproportionate, resulting in nonlinear developmental trajectories. 
We can observe the behavior of individual language learners—in their groups—over time and distinguish 
developmental patterns and infer information about individual cognitive variables, but we need to be 
aware of the limitations of these inferences. Although we view CAS as deterministic, we are aware that 
their cause–effect relationships are complex and often disproportionate. Individual developmental 
trajectories are, therefore, frequently unpredictable by observers (Dörnyei, 2014). In other words, it is 
impossible to predict all future states of a CAS or the state in which the system comes to a rest—that is, 
the end state of language learning. Thus, the predictive power of complex systems theory is limited, 
certainly in such complex social systems as digital gaming and SLD. However, this theory has 
considerable explanatory power. 
METHODS FOR THE ANALYSIS OF COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS 
CAS theory welcomes the variability of actors, components, and variables in a system and its context and 
the change that results, so a commensurate set of methods have to embrace this variability and change, 
not eliminate it through experimental design or statistical computation or level it in cross-sectional 
considerations of arithmetic means. Consequently, a research design of experimental and control group is 
seldom necessary, and pre- versus post-test designs are often insufficient to capture the nature of complex 
developmental processes. Instead, analyses have to go through a number of iterations and data sets have 
to be gathered over time and include data of sufficient density. Individual learners are considered 
individually and in the context of their group. The different states of one learner’s CAS are investigated 
and compared iteratively. Commonalities and differences matter in that both provide clues about where 
and how the change was induced and influenced. These individual processes (e.g., digital gaming 
sequences and episodes of second language use) are then compared again iteratively with similar states of 
the CAS of other learners. 
Investigating Individual CAS Characteristics and Collective Variables 
CAS analysis is detecting, localizing, describing, explaining, and interpreting change. Therefore, we can 
identify the specific instantiations of the eight CAS characteristics of the system under investigation: 
1. What are the initial conditions for each technology-mediated language-learning activity? What 
aspects of change in the interaction showed sensitivity to or depended on the conditions that 
influence the CAS during the most iterations? 
2. What collective variables, actors, artifacts, and other components induced, influenced, and 
sustained change and development of aspects of each language-learning activity? In which way 
are the variables, actors, artifacts, and components connected with each other? 
3. What are the trajectories of the activity as a whole and of (research-relevant) collective variables 
specifically? Which (fractal) patterns of change can be identified in the trajectory of an individual 
and across individuals? 
4. What change occurred during the CALL activity? What were the processes and outcomes of the 
corresponding self-organization of the CAS and of its interaction with the environment? 
5. Which internal and external resources led to change in this activity and how did they do so? 
6. What is the general nature of the change in the CAS? Which attractor and repellor states can be 
identified? What can these phase spaces tell us about the nature of the CAS? 
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 104 
7. What are important iterative sub-processes of the technology-mediated language-learning 
activity? How does a particular iteration introduce change? 
8. What properties of the activity emerge in its course, and how do they change? 
All eight question complexes require the definition and operationalization of CAS-essential and research-
relevant variables. Although all variables may not receive equal attention in an analysis of a specific CAS, 
they are potential factors to consider. Indeed, attempting to analyze everything that occurs within a CAS 
may be challenging (see Marek & Wu, 2014). To reduce the high number of degrees of freedom of the 
CAS, we—as Larsen-Freeman and Cameron (2008a)—adopt a technique from molecular dynamics: 
collective variables.  
It is frequently the case that the progress of some…process can be followed by following the 
evolution of a small subset of generalized coordinates in a system. When generalized coordinates 
are used in this manner, they are typically referred to as reaction coordinates, collective variables, 
or order parameters, often depending on the context and type of system. (Tuckerman, 2008, n.p., 
emphasis added) 
Collective variables, such as proficiency and motivation, are thus dynamic configurations of smaller 
variables and are essential to describing the developmental change of the CAS. Although collective 
variables consist of a number of smaller variables, they can be operationalized as a unit. Observing a few 
collective variables in their context while paying attention to significant occurrences of change in the 
CAS, we get a reasonably comprehensive depiction. The only downside is that the resulting depiction 
might be of coarser granularity. 
Retrodictive Qualitative Modeling 
Two considerations are particularly important when it comes to identifying commensurate methods: (1) 
long-term, multivariate analyses of language-learning processes are necessary and (2) the complexity of 
CAS and, consequently, the difficulty with and the low likelihood of predicting its future states accurately 
mean that we need to employ (qualitative) retrodictive methods of analysis (Dörnyei, 2014). Retrodictive 
(an adjective neologism that denotes the opposite perspective of predictive) methods reverse the process 
of analysis so that the outcomes of the CAS are considered first, and then their development is traced 
back to determine which components and variables induced or caused change. Dörnyei proposes a three-
step analysis in retrodictive qualitative modeling and uses his classroom-based research as an example. In 
Step 1 and Step 2, the learners in class are assigned to types that are research-relevant. He describes that 
researchers determine types in a collective thought experiment based on prior experience first (Step 1) 
and then assign individual participants to these types (Step 2; see Dörnyei, 2014, pp. 86–87). We prefer 
the reverse process: Based on configurations of relevant learner characteristics, we clustered participants 
into groups or pairs that shared a configuration of characteristics and then assigned a type to this group 
(for more details see below). In either case, the first two steps reduce the number of cases the researcher 
needs to analyze. This can be thought of as reducing the number of tokens to the number of types; the 
data becomes more manageable but the within-group variability is retained. At the same time, the data 
density for each learner type is higher than that for an individual learner. 
In Step 3, Dörnyei (2014) proposes to identify “the most salient system components and the signature 
dynamic of each system” (p. 87). To identify the signature dynamic, the attractors and repellors of the 
system need to be identified and relevant developmental trajectories identified. Attractors are states of the 
CAS, in which the CAS finds itself frequently and often for a longer period of time. This is so because it 
is in such states that the CAS has reached a relative equilibrium and additional internal (e.g., motivation) 
or external (e.g., instruction) resources are necessary for the CAS to be able to leave this state. Because of 
this temporary equilibrium and an ostensible stability of attractor states, it is more fruitful for the 
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 105 
researcher to investigate the CAS at such a state. Repellor states, on the other hand, are states in which the 
CAS could find itself theoretically, but it has never been observed to enter such states. Thus repellor 
states limit somewhat the degrees of freedom of the CAS that the researcher would have to study. In 
developmental trajectories, we identify overall patterns as well as segments that occur frequently in one 
trajectory or across trajectories of learners of the same type and we contrast trajectories of learners of 
different types. 
Clustering and Pairwise Comparison 
As stated above, we identify research-relevant learner types by clustering study participants. We will 
discuss clustering using the operationalization of the collective variables for the initial conditions of the 
CAS in our study as an example. We applied similar procedures to the analysis of in-game variables and 
the perception data of the exit interviews. 
We operationalized the initial conditions of the CAS as four collective variables: rationale for studying 
German, previous language-learning experience, gaming proficiency, and computer proficiency. For each 
variable, students answered a number of free-form questions on the entrance survey. Through textual 
analysis, we turned the verbal answers into an emerging set of categorical data. We then ranked the 
categories according to their potential impact on the CAS. For example, under gaming proficiency, we 
ranked experience with World of Warcraft in English higher than experience with other online games and 
these higher than board games. Each rank was then assigned a binary number as a value, starting with 20, 
and giving rank 2 the binary number 2-1, rank 3 received 2-2, and so on. Since multiple answers were 
possible in each category, using binary numbers allowed us to again deconstruct the sum of values 
unambiguously, to facilitate our qualitative analysis.2 Having a numeric value for each variable, enabled 
us to conduct a clustering analysis of the complex initial conditions of our 14 participants, by computing 
the non-parametric correlations between all possible 91 pairs of participants (for the resulting 13 cluster 
pairs, see Figure 1Figure 1). 
In the self-termed pairwise comparison, we started with the participant pair for whom we could expect 
greatly similar characteristics because of their high correlation values (Pair P02–P07). We conducted a 
retrodictive qualitative analysis for these two learners focusing on commonalities and similarities, 
because it was these that made them a pair. We then identified an adjacent pair (P06–P14) and conducted 
our comparison again, focusing mainly on similarities. In our third pairwise comparison, we focused on 
both pairs. We also needed to focus on the differences between pairs because these underlie their 
clustering in two different pairs. This analysis was then continued iteratively. Through the clustering 
analysis, we had reduced the number of pairs to investigate from 91 to 13. Depending on research 
questions and goals, the number of pairwise comparisons could be reduced further and thus made more 
manageable by skipping adjacent pairs that would not have yielded further new information about an 
individual CAS in the group. For our study, whose complete description is beyond the confines of this 
article, we conducted a comprehensive qualitative analysis of four pairs. Because the pairwise 
comparisons were preceded by an analysis of the group in its entirety and because it was based on a prior 
clustering analysis, identifying the most research-relevant pairs, each qualitative analysis of an individual 
CAS was studied comprehensively and in context of the whole group of participants. 
THE STUDY: EXTRAMURAL PLAYING OF WORLD OF WARCRAFT IN THE SECOND 
LANGUAGE 
With our methodology outlined, and the pertinence of examining DGBLL with a CAS theoretical 
framework argued, we now look to its implementation, which demonstrates the applicability of this 
approach to studying gaming for SLD purposes. The data came from a research study undertaken at a 
large Canadian university over the course of four months in the winter of 2013. Volunteers—
undergraduate and graduate students from a variety of programs at the university—were asked to play the 
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 106 
massive multiplayer online role-playing game World of Warcraft in German3 for a minimum of ten hours 
during their leisure time. World of Warcraft, like other MMORPGs, offers players a vibrant, online 
environment in which one can explore, meet others playing the game, and band together to accomplish 
challenging tasks and progress through the game (Sundqvist & Sylvén, 2012). Due to the importance 
placed on collaboration between players and the challenging nature of the game itself, language and 
communication is at the forefront of a player’s experience. On-screen commands provide immediate 
feedback alerting the player to the efficacy and relevance of his or her actions, quests provided by 
computer-controlled characters instruct players to embark on extraordinary adventures with specific and 
often nuanced goals, and interaction between players provides strategic intervention that is often required 
to succeed in group tasks. 
All gameplay occurred in the extramural context, removed from the presence of an instructor and the 
potential limitations of the classroom. Language learners were given initial instruction as to how to 
operate the game, but otherwise were given complete freedom to play the game when, with whom, and 
however they chose to play. Three times throughout the study, participants met in small groups to discuss 
their gameplay experiences in German. At the conclusion of the study, each learner participated in a 
concluding interview, reflecting on the gameplay experience and the language proficiency development 
that they detected. A total of 24 participants out of a larger group of volunteers elected to begin the study, 
and we acquired complete data sets for 14 language learners. 
Our study sought to understand how a language learner’s trajectory of gameplay (his or her interactions 
and progression in the game environment) interacts with his or her trajectory of SLD, that is, what 
language development emerges as a result of engaging in this experience. To do so, we looked for 
examples of near transfer of linguistic constructions between gaming and non-gaming contexts. If we 
detected evidence of a language learner having observed an unfamiliar linguistic construction while 
playing the game and then being able to produce it in a non-gaming context, we argue that the learner has 
developed further second language (L2) proficiency by playing the game in the foreign language. 
The data collected reflect the learner and his or her disposition towards gameplay and language learning 
at the beginning (entrance survey) and end of the study (exit interview). Throughout the study, all game 
activity was logged and the logs were sent to the researcher after completing a session. All in-group 
conversations about gaming experiences were video-recorded and transcribed. Although we collected 
survey data pertaining to each participant’s individual language learning characteristics as well as their 
prior experience playing games, we made no effort to hypothesize at the beginning of our study how the 
gameplay and SLD trajectories of these individuals would be influenced by their own learner 
characteristics. To do so would be to prematurely suggest certain initial conditions being influential to 
one’s level of success. Rather, these data were only utilized to structure the pairwise comparisons to be 
able to focus on specific sets of learners who share (or in some cases, share very little) characteristics with 
one another. This was done during the cluster analysis and enabled us to identify the study participants, at 
whose experience we needed to look in our retrodictive qualitative modeling. 
Applying Retrodictive Qualitative Modeling to DGBLL 
Retrodictive qualitative modeling requires the researcher to begin at the end. To do so, we looked first to 
the results of this study as a means of understanding how the CAS had progressed and how gameplay and 
SLD had emerged over time. Only once this had been completed, we examined the initial conditions of 
the CAS (as well as the various stages, events, and learning opportunities that emerged through the study) 
in an attempt to determine which conditions may have induced change. 
As we focused on pairwise comparisons, we examined a number of data points that are utilized to 
understand individual language-learning and gameplay experiences as best as possible. Participants were 
given a vocabulary test at the end of the study (see Appendix A), incorporating many of the common 
linguistic constructions that they would have been exposed to when playing the game. Each participant 
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 107 
was asked to translate a list of constructions and indicate whether or not they knew them already, or how 
likely it was that the construction was developed while playing the game. We then examined the 
responses gathered in the concluding interview, where each participant reflected on the DGBLL 
experience, both in terms of the gameplay itself, but also its relevance for SLD. A questionnaire (see 
Appendix B) was administered as well, which was adapted from Peterson (2012) and modified slightly to 
account for the extramural nature of this gameplay experience. 
As can be observed, the two participants listed in Appendix B evidently experienced the gameplay and its 
effects in relation to SLD quite differently. Their results suggest that although from a gameplay 
perspective the experience was largely similar, its efficacy for SLD was less convincing. Making claims 
about a game’s affordances to assist in developing L2 proficiency on the basis of these results alone, 
however, is misleading and masks potential variables that resulted in these divergent experiences. To 
determine how these trajectories of SLD and gameplay emerged, we looked to the initial conditions of the 
CAS and how the individuals portrayed themselves as language learners and gamers. 
The Initial Conditions 
Due to our reliance on retrodictive qualitative modeling, we returned to the initial conditions of this CAS 
to see what attributes or characteristics of the system (the game, its participants, and a myriad of other 
factors) had influenced the gameplay and SLD trajectories that emerged. All participants were asked to 
complete an entrance survey, focusing on four main areas: rationale for studying German, previous 
language-learning experience, gaming proficiency, and computer proficiency. Individual responses were 
then converted to a score as described above. Each of the four areas—collective variables that function as 
robust indicators of each student’s initial conditions—was operationalized through multiple survey 
questions. The ranked scores for each answer for one initial condition were averaged for ease of 
processing. With each participant given a score for the four aforementioned areas, first comparisons 
between participants could be made (see Figure 1). 
  
Figure 1. Dendrogram of participants' clustered initial conditions 
As we mentioned earlier, CAS theoretical frameworks seek to be non-reductionist, instead examining all 
potential variables which may have caused change in the system. It is therefore necessary to examine not 
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 108 
only the learners or participants who completed the study, but also those who had initially elected to 
participate but, for numerous and various reasons, could not finish it. Eliminating this source of data 
simply masks potential variables which elicit change in the system. For this reason, we first examined the 
ten participants who could not finish the study (Appendix C), and then compare these to the group of 14 
participants who did complete the study (Appendix D). 
It is immediately evident when examining the average response of participants in both sets of data that the 
majority of individuals with incomplete data sets displayed less than ideal results (those falling below the 
mean value of all participants’ responses) in two or more of the various categories encompassing the 
initial conditions of the CAS. Learners who are willing to invest time in extramural SLD opportunities 
evidently either needed to have a clear and relevant rationale for studying the foreign language or they 
needed to have ample previous experience learning languages in general, likely alluding to the necessary 
time commitment that prior language learners would be able to relate to through experience. Computer 
and gaming proficiency, while not as crucial, still led to better motivation and a willingness to continue 
playing the game and to become accustomed to it. The 14 individuals who maintained participation in the 
study and completed a minimum of 10 hours of gameplay over the course of four months largely had pre-
existing motivation to invest time in the pursuit of learning the German language, either due to their 
current rationale for studying the language, or due to ample experience learning other languages. Their 
computer and gaming proficiency, by and large, were above the average as well. 
We gained further insight into who the participants were and how similar they were to one another at the 
start of the study, yet we still could not make claims based upon the initial conditions alone as they may 
suggest different trajectories depending on how similar or divergent certain participants are to one 
another. Rather, these initial comparisons and analyses serve merely as a data point in the CAS, as well as 
a means (as was discussed previously) of conducting the pairwise comparisons which helped structure our 
analysis. In order to truly understand the gameplay and SLD trajectories of each participant, we needed to 
understand what has occurred between the end point of our analysis and the initial conditions of the CAS. 
Gameplay Outcomes: Near Transfer of Linguistic Constructions 
The very nature of MMORPGs such as World of Warcraft involved ample language production and 
reception through gameplay. Players of these games were exposed to huge amounts of text, whether 
through the quests they completed, the on-screen commands that emerged as sources of immediate 
feedback signifying that the player did something right or wrong, or the communication between players. 
All of this language was recorded automatically during the game, resulting in detailed accounts of all 
language encountered in the game world. 
The resulting text log represented the complex nature of the CAS very well. All potential variables within 
the game environment that may have impacted SLD are documented and analyzable. To make sense of 
the wealth of text that was observed by each player, we looked to ways in which we can closely examine 
the language that most likely led to change and growth in SLD, and the experiences that may have most 
influenced their gameplay trajectories. 
Two approaches assisted in comprehending this wealth of data. In the first approach, in-person 
conversations between participants in a group setting encouraged them to speak about their experiences in 
German, reflecting on which were most meaningful and engaging. Not only did these conversations 
provide the researcher with insight into the CAS of gaming and SLD, but they also served the crucial 
purpose of providing learners with a venue to share their experiences and utilize the language encountered 
in-game in non-gaming settings, providing evidence of their ability to transfer language between these 
two near contexts. The second analytical approach entails the comparative analysis of the game log texts 
and the conversation transcript for each learner, mainly to identify the lexical and grammatical 
constructions that are likely to have been developed through gameplay. To do so, we first compared the 
language that the learner produced out-of-game in conversational settings or as part of the vocabulary test 
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 109 
administered at the conclusion of the study with the language encountered and produced in-game. This 
resulted in a list of linguistic constructions that are found in both contexts, and helps to analyze the 
transcript efficiently. Afterwards, we use timestamps on each linguistic construction (in the game logs) to 
determine whether or not the learner had encountered it in game before using it conversationally. If so, it 
remained subject of our analysis, and if not, it was evident that the learner understood the construction 
before encountering it in-game. Finally, we utilized a list of the 1000 most frequent words in the German 
language (Das Wortschatz-Lexikon; Quasthoff & Wolff, 1999) in order to establish which constructions 
are infrequent enough that their development through gameplay is likely. We also compared the resulting 
list to a set list of linguistic constructions that the learners considered at the end of the study (see 
Appendix A). They were asked whether or not they believed that they emerged through gameplay 
factors—either as a result of experiences in-game, or conversations about the game. 
These steps ensured that for each learner we had a list of all linguistic constructions that were likely 
developed by playing the game (for an example, see Appendix E). Although we cannot definitively state 
that the gameplay experience and conversations about the game led to the development of these linguistic 
constructions, we have ample evidence that supports these claims. These steps also align with the 
principles of retrodictive qualitative modeling, as we aim to understand exactly when and why certain 
linguistic constructions might have been developed, and how they had been further utilized both in-game 
and outside of game as the gameplay experience continues. How the constructions were developed was 
analyzed further by classifying the factors which had influenced development into three categories: 
gameplay (constructions which are the focus of quests or items related to progress), communication 
(related to the interaction between players either in or out of the game), and iteration (constructions with a 
very high frequency and that are used in various instances in the game). 
In order to make sense of the variability between learners and the amount of language they produced 
throughout the study relative to the number of linguistic constructions developed through gameplay, an 
efficacy score was calculated. The efficacy score is represented through the following equation: 
ES = UC/WP × LC 
The efficacy score (ES) considers the following variables: First, we take into account the number of 
unique constructions (UC) produced by the player when discussing the game in non-gaming contexts, 
which fall outside of the 1K frequency list range and which are likely to have been developed during the 
gameplay experience. Second, the number of lexical constructions produced in out-of-game situations 
(WP) is calculated to understand how often and freely the individual spoke in general in the conversation 
groups. Last, we take into account the total number of linguistic constructions produced outside of the 1K 
frequency list (LC), a number which includes the linguistic constructions which are understood as unique 
constructions, but also those which were not developed by gameplay, ultimately providing an indicator of 
the language learner’s L2 proficiency level. The efficacy score is then calculated by dividing the number 
of unique constructions by the number of words produced in out-of-game situations and multiplied by the 
total number of linguistic constructions produced outside of the 1K frequency list. This order of 
operations ensures that the SLD of each learner is appropriately contextualized as a factor of all 
communication in the out-of-game context while simultaneously taking into account how much German 
was known beforehand. This score, when combined with the comprehensive list of all linguistic 
constructions developed through gameplay, results in a wide-ranging understanding of how each learner 
progressed in their individualized gameplay experiences. This level of data is necessary to know exactly 
when linguistic constructions have emerged and how the language learner is able to notice them and 
utilize them in communication or simply to discern their meaning. 
Linguistically Relevant Gaming Trajectories 
Finally, we analyzed the amount of language exposure each participant had while playing the game from 
multiple perspectives, again, to portray and understand as best as possible how exactly each learner’s 
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 110 
trajectories of gameplay and SLD emerge. This is accomplished by examining the transcripts of each 
player’s gameplay experiences for all instances of language exposure. We then, again relying on pairwise 
comparisons, depicted these trajectories graphically to demonstrate both the complexity of the experience 
and the general trends in terms of how learners over time became accustomed (or lost interest) in the 
game and, by extension, in SLD through gameplay. 
By examining progress chronologically (Figure 2), on a session-by-session basis (Figure 3), and in ten-
minute intervals (Figure 4), we observed precisely how and when learners were most engaged in the 
experience. When analyzed in conjunction with the list of linguistic constructions developed in game 
(Appendix E), we can argue convincingly how each learner’s L2 developed as a result of gameplay in the 
target language. 
 
 
Figure 2. Chronological language exposure (P02 and P07). 
 
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
N
u
m
b
er
 o
f 
ch
ar
ac
te
rs
Dates within study timeline
P02 P07
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 111 
 
Figure 3. Exposure to language per session played (P02 and P07). 
 
Figure 4. Exposure to language over 10-minute intervals (P02 and P07). 
Each depiction of a participant’s gameplay trajectory emphasizes the complexity and nonlinearity of the 
experience and how specific events acted as growth conditions and led to SLD. Joining guilds (groups of 
like-minded individuals who form a group with whom to communicate and play) led to increased 
opportunities for language exposure and showed a willingness to engage in conversation. Undertaking 
lengthy, convoluted quests could involve an initial increase in exposure to language, but due to the 
difficulty of the quest, a subsequent stark decline in exposure to language occurred at times, while the 
player was involved in scouring the game environment for clues, rather than being engaged with the 
-20000
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
N
u
m
b
er
 o
f 
ch
ar
ac
te
rs
Sessions played
P02 P07 Linear (P02) Linear (P07)
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
10 50 90
13
0
17
0
21
0
25
0
29
0
33
0
37
0
41
0
45
0
49
0
53
0
57
0
61
0
65
0
69
0
73
0
77
0
81
0
85
0
89
0
93
0
97
0
10
1
0
10
5
0
10
9
0
11
3
0
11
7
0
12
1
0
12
5
0
N
u
m
b
er
 o
f 
C
h
ar
ac
te
rs
 
Time in 10 minute intervals
P02 P07 Linear (P02) Linear (P07)
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 112 
language itself. 
These examples of how the gameplay trajectory can subsequently and directly impact the SLD trajectory 
are but initial forays into the multitude of experiences and variables that could result in change in the 
CAS. Relying on participant retrospection—albeit necessary—at the end of the study is not sufficient to 
capture the extent to which SLD occurred as a result of gameplay; rather, by adopting retrodictive 
qualitative modeling and analyzing empirical and exact data of the gameplay and SLD experience of each 
learner, we gain a thorough and comprehensive perspective of each learner’s trajectories of development. 
Brief Summary of Results 
Our overall analysis—as illustrated above—suggests that the language observed in the gaming 
environment is indeed transferable to non-gaming contexts, especially when the context to which the 
language is being transferred is directly related to the in-game experiences of each learner, as is the case 
where learners will share their gameplay experiences in the L2 in non-gaming contexts. Regardless of the 
trajectories of gameplay in which each learner participates, SLD will occur. Factors such as time-in-game, 
willingness to communicate in game, reflection on in-game experiences act as (potential) growth 
conditions for the CAS of SLD. With the efficacy score, which indicates the overall effectiveness and 
quality of the gameplay experience and its implications for SLD outside of the game, we can determine to 
what degree the experience was impactful for the player while considering the multitude of learner and 
gaming-related factors that impact the process. 
CONCLUSION 
Due to the nature of MMORPGs such as World of Warcraft, and the wide variety of potential ways in 
which learners interact with the game, it is necessary to take an approach such as retrodictive qualitative 
modeling to understand digital gaming for SLD purposes as a CAS. Aspects such as the emergence of  
learners’ L2 as they engage in the process of playing the online game, the many iterations of sub-
processes in the system, and the internal and external resources that led to change in the system are all 
crucial components of a CAS of playing in an MMORPG like World of Warcraft. Examining the learners’ 
disposition towards DGBLL at the end of the study and determining how it has evolved from the learners’ 
initial positioning towards language learning and gameplay only serve to indicate the edges of the 
immense change that occurred. Considering and analyzing each learner’s gameplay and SLD trajectories 
comprehensively and in context, however, helps to understand how and why each learner engages with 
the game in a unique fashion. 
 
APPENDIX A. Word List for the Exit Vocabulary Test 
Questions for each of the below item: 
• Do you know this word/construction? 
• What is it in English? 
• In what context/where did you learn this word? 
o Learned already?  
▪ Maybe 
▪ Probably 
▪ Definitely 
▪ Already knew it but game reinforced it 
Greif Verkäuferin bekommen 
Ausdauer Erfahrung sterben 
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 113 
Stärke Ruf ihr habt eine neue Fähigkeit gelernt 
Waffe abgeschlossen erhalten 
Rüstung ihr fühlt Euch normal zur Kontaktliste hinzugefügt 
Reittier annehmen seid gegrüßt 
Beute entdeckt ihr müsst euch näher an diesem Ziel befinden 
abbrechen plündern ablehnen 
erstellen zurückkehren Belohnung 
Beweglichkeit   
 
APPENDIX B. Concluding Interview Questionnaire (P02 & P07) 
Question (Strongly Agree = 5, Strongly Disagree = 1) P02 P07 
1. The game was easy to play. 4 4 
2. The chat system was easy to use 4 2 
3. It was difficult to follow the quests/communication from other players 3 3 
4. The quests were too difficult. 3 1 
5. I actively tried to comprehend the text of the quests. 4 5 
6. I experienced technical communication problems in the game. 2 2 
7. There was not much feedback from other players. 4 3 
8. Other players were helpful. 4 3 
9. I could express my opinion more freely than in a regular class. 3 1 
10. Having my own avatar made me feel more involved in the game. 4 4 
11. Most of the discussion was not useful. 2 4 
12. I could learn new vocabulary. 4 5 
13. The game made me use my German more than in a regular class. 3 3 
14. I enjoyed interacting in the game. 4 2 
15. Chatting in the game was a good way to improve my German. 4 2 
16. I would like to play the game again in the future. 4 2 
 
  
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 114 
APPENDIX C. Learner-related Characteristics and Results (Incomplete Data Sets) 
 G Age Y Languages R (M = 
0.42) 
L (M = 
0.53) 
G (M = 
0.63) 
C (M = 
0.68) 
P15 F 23 4U German; English 0.19 0.40 0.98 1.10 
P16 F 19 2U German; English; French 1.00 0.58 0.42 0.32 
P17 F 20 3U German; English; French; Spanish 0.08 1.10 0.54 0.57 
P18 F 26 PhD German; English 0.02 0.15 0.38 0.67 
P19 F 37 PhD German; English; French; Farsi 0.25 0.38 0.19 0.59 
P20 M 20 2U German; English; French 1.02 0.24 0.48 0.44 
P21 F 18 1U German; English; French; Mandarin 0.11 1.45 1.00 0.84 
P22 M 23 3M German; English; Korean; Japanese 0.02 0.44 0.79 0.43 
P23 F 23 1M German; English; Mandarin 0.02 0.37 0.16 0.20 
P24 F 21 2U German; English; French; Spanish 1.00 0.05 0.40 0.45 
Notes. G = Gender; Y = Year of study; R = Rationale for studying German; L = Language learning experience; G = Gaming 
proficiency; C = Computer proficiency; U = Undergraduate; M = Master’s 
 
APPENDIX D. Learner-related Characteristics and Results 
 G Age Y Languages R (M = 
0.42) 
L (M = 
0.53) 
G (M = 
0.63) 
C (M = 
0.68) 
P01 M 22 3U German; English; Mandarin 1.27 0.15 0.67 1.23 
P02 M 15 Grade 
10 
German; English 0.02 0.71 0.88 0.84 
P03 M 28 6M German; English 0.75 0.20 0.70 0.92 
P04 M 37 4U German; English; French; Spanish 0.52 0.61 0.57 0.93 
P05 M 21 4U German; English; French; Mandarin 0.50 0.65 0.93 0.71 
P06 F 19 2U German; English; French 0.13 0.76 0.94 0.86 
P07 M 30 2M German; English; French; Spanish; 
Italian 
0.02 0.95 0.79 0.68 
P08 M 23 4U German; English; French 0.58 0.38 0.85 0.78 
P09 M 24 2M German; English; French 0.02 0.29 0.50 0.35 
P10 F 26 1M German; English; Slovak; Czech 0.02 0.70 0.56 0.34 
P11 M 28 2M German; English; French; Spanish 1.20 1.13 0.80 0.82 
P12 M 20 3U German; English; French 0.52 0.40 0.45 0.70 
P13 M 25 2M German; English; Arabic 0.25 0.25 0.27 0.54 
P14 M 18 2U German; English; French; Spanish 0.52 0.45 0.79 0.69 
Notes. G = Gender; Y = Year of study; R = Rationale for studying German; L = Language learning experience; G = Gaming 
proficiency; C = Computer proficiency; U = Undergraduate; M = Master’s 
 
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 115 
APPENDIX E. P02’s Linguistic Constructions (UC = 48; LC = 178; WP = 3628; ES = 2.35) 
Construction Exposure Example Production Example 
Gameplay factors 
Ausdauer Senku bekommt Beute: Stürmischer Umhang der 
Ausdauer. 
Vocabulary test 
Belohnung The reward for each quest is expressed as the 
Belohnung. 
Vocabulary test 
Beute Ihr erhaltet Beute: Erfrischendes Quellwasser. Vocabulary test 
Beweglichkeit Beute: Waldmannsaxt der Beweglichkeit Vocabulary test 
Dungeonquests Srfroggy hat den Erfolg "5 Dungeonquests 
abgeschlossen" errungen! 
instances machen and und dann kannst 
du dungeonquests machen 
Gegenstände Eure angelegten Gegenstände verlieren 10% 
Haltbarkeit. 
gegenstände ja uh die sind halt 
stärkere sachen 
Greif Encountered frequently when riding griffons 
throughout the game world. 
Vocabulary test 
heilen Entsetzliche Monstrositäts Wunden beginnen zu 
heilen. 
und uh ich kann mich dann selber 
heilen wenn ich zum not mich selber 
heilen muss 
Hexenmeister Name of class played by player and constantly 
referred to on abilities that the player uses. 
Vocabulary test 
ihr fühlt Euch 
normal 
Often repeated when having rested in an inn while 
taking a break. 
Vocabulary test 
ihr habt eine 
neue Fähigkeit 
gelernt 
Ihr habt eine neue Fähigkeit erlernt: 
Kochfeuerstelle. 
Vocabulary test 
ihr müsst euch 
näher an 
diesem Ziel 
befinden 
Pop-up message signifying the player is too far 
away from his or her goal. 
Vocabulary test 
Leerwandler Ihr habt einen neuen Zauber erlernt: Leerwandler 
beschwören. 
haben sie mich mir immer gesagt 
meine leerwandler also der tank  
Platte Harukâ-Garrosh flüstert:  Verstärkte 
Palisadenschulterstücke Polierter Helm der Ehre 
Brünierte Brustplatte der Macht 
ahh platte 
plunder Plündern in "Plündern als Gruppe" geändert. Vocabulary test 
Priesterin König Varian Wrynn ergeht hiermit an alle 
tauglichen Mitglieder der Allianz der Befehl, sich 
umgehend bei Priesterin Dentaria 
uh dann würde ich schon als frau 
priesterin spielen 
Reittier Ihr habt das Reittier Teufelsross zu Eurer 
Sammlung hinzugefügt. 
Vocabulary test 
Rüstung Beute: Rüstung des Giftzahns Vocabulary test 
Schutz Wir sollten dorthin gehen und in der Masse Schutz 
suchen. 
wenn ich jetzt ein schutz werden 
schützen Die Armee meines Vaters im Gefängnisviertel wird 
sie besser schützen können. 
Hat dieser server mehr dps schützen 
oder heiler 
Wut Die besänftigende Energie des Totems wird die 
Elementare langsam umspülen, bis ihre Wut 
wut ja 
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 116 
abgeklungen ist. 
Zwerg Südwestlich von hier, hinter der Meistergleve, sind 
ein paar Ausgrabungsleiter der Zwerge 
Vocabulary test 
Communication factors 
Händler Harukâ-Garrosh flüstert: beim händler wo kann ich ein Händler finden 
Heiler [2. Handel] Ferin: Suchen noch 2 Heiler für RBG. 
Bitte nur mit Erfahrung und Gear. Für weitere Infos 
/w me! 
und uh dann brauch ich normalerweise 
ein heiler aber ich bin ein paladin  
heilt Paladinosius-Terrordar: steht da ein !@#$%^& heal 
und heilt mich greif ich an is er weg 
Warum heilt mir keiner :O 
Instanz [2. Handel] Leecu: Für Instanzenlaufen,Questen 
und Leveln.Raids sind später nicht ausgeschlossen. 
also instanz war neu für mich  
leveln [2. Handel] Leecu: Für Instanzenlaufen,Questen 
und Leveln.Raids sind später nicht ausgeschlossen. 
und wenn du ganz schnell leveln will 
Levels Nixnux flüstert: Hallo..die gilde 
"Sonnenanbeter"sucht nette member allen 
levels..die helfen wollen die gilde auf zu bauen 
die levels würden immer langsamer 
und  
moin Pointer-Azshara: moin solche neue sagen einfach mir gesagt 
haben also moin zum beispiel  
seid gegrüßt Said in passing by NPCs Vocabulary test 
Iteration factors 
abbrechen Wenn Ihr eingeloggt bleiben möchtet, klickt auf den 
Abbrechen-Button. 
Vocabulary test 
abgeschlossen Abgeriegelt! abgeschlossen. Vocabulary test 
ablehnen Found in all quest texts as a means to cancel the 
quest. 
Vocabulary test 
anlagen Wird beim anlegen gebunden. Wie kann ich sachen anlegen? 
Dungeons Schwierigkeitsgrad des Dungeons wurde auf 
'Normal' gesetzt. 
und uh was ich schon erlebt uh meine 
erfahrung uh die dungeons sind toll  
entdeckt Militärviertel entdeckt: 15 Erfahrung erhalten. Vocabulary test 
Erfahrung Erhaltene Erfahrung: 80. und uh was ich schon erlebt uh meine 
erfahrung uh die dungeons sind toll  
erhalten Erhalten: 15 Kupfer. Vocabulary test 
Gegner Es gefällt mir zwar nicht, dass meine Gegner 
Artillerie in die Stadt geschmuggelt haben. 
und das war ganz schön uh gegner 
töten 
Goblins Ein paar Goblins haben es irgendwie geschafft, sich 
als blinde Passagiere in den Frachträumen unserer 
beiden Schiffe zu verstecken. 
und jetzt hab ich zuletzt eine neue 
dungeon gemacht das war mit solche 
goblins 
Klasse [2. Handel] Shadowthorn: Die 25er Raidgilde 
ASCENDING sucht für Mists of Pandaria(9/16) 
noch Member aller Klassen!  
Klasse 
Quest Quest angenommen: Da stimmt was nicht.  weil er hat mich gesehen wie ich 
immer so von quest zum quest 
gegangen bin  
questen [2. Handel] Leecu: Für Instanzenlaufen,Questen 
und Leveln.Raids sind später nicht ausgeschlossen. 
also ich würde sagen ja es ist okay weil 
es weil nicht alle questen für gewalt 
Quests Die täglichen Quests wurden zurückgesetzt! ich habe schon lang nicht mehr solche 
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 117 
quests durchgeschafft uh  
Schaden Die Überlebenden suchen in den Ruinen 
Unterschlupf und fügen der Ausgrabung mehr 
Schaden zu 
und uh ja also der ist mein schaden pro 
sekunde 
Silber Erhalten: 1 Silber. und na ja ich hab schon das meisten 
silber also brauch ich das  
Stärke Ihr erhaltet Beute: Räuberbeinschützer der Stärke. Vocabulary test 
Stufe Srfroggz hat den Erfolg "Stufe 10" errungen! ja ich bin jetzt stufe zwanzig und ja  
 
NOTES 
1. The characteristics are introduced below. They are based on de Bot and Larsen-Freeman (2011). For a 
discussion in the context of CALL, see Schulze and Scholz (2016). 
2. 20+2-1+2-2=1+0.5+0.25=1.75 and 1.75 can only be the sum of these three numbers, if each binary 
number is only used once. 
3. Participants went on the German registration page for World of Warcraft, allowing them to play on 
the German servers. 
 
REFERENCES 
Allen, L. K., Crossley, S. A., Snow, E. L., & McNamara, D. S. (2014). L2 writing practice: Game 
enjoyment as a key to engagement. Language Learning & Technology, 18(2), 124–150. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2014/allenetal.html 
Barnett, S. M., & Ceci, S. J. (2002). When and where do we apply what we learn? A taxonomy for far 
transfer. Psychological Bulletin, 128(4), 612–637. 
Blin, F. (2004). CALL and the development of learner autonomy: Towards an activity-theoretical 
perspective. ReCALL, 16(2), 377–395. 
Bytheway, J. (2014). In-game culture affects learners’ use of vocabulary learning strategies in massively 
multiplayer online role-playing games. International Journal of Computer-assisted Language Learning 
and Teaching, 4(4), 1–13. 
Chapelle, C. A. (2005). Interactionist SLA theory in CALL research. In J. L. Egbert & G. M. Petrie 
(Eds.), CALL research perspectives (pp. 53–64). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Colpaert, J. (2013). Peripatetic consideration on research challenges in CALL. In P. Hubbard, M. Schulze, 
& B. Smith (Eds.), Learner–computer interaction in language education (pp. 272–279). San Marcos, TX: 
CALICO. 
Cornillie, F., Clarebout, G., & Desmet, P. (2012). Between learning and playing? Exploring learners’ 
perceptions of corrective feedback in an immersive game for English pragmatics. ReCALL, 24(3), 257–
278. 
Das Wortschatz-Lexikon. (2001). Retrieved from http://wortschatz.uni-leipzig.de/Papers/top1000de.txt 
De Bot, K., & Larsen-Freeman, D. (2011). Researching second language development from a dynamic 
systems theory perspective. In M. H. Verspoor, K. de Bot, & W. Lowie (Eds.), A dynamic approach to 
second language development (pp. 5–24). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 118 
Delwiche, A. (2006). Massively multiplayer online games (MMOs) in the new media classroom. 
Educational Technology & Society, 9(3), 160–172. 
Dörnyei, Z. (2014). Researching complex dynamic systems: “Retrodictive qualitative modeling” in the 
language classroom. Language Teaching, 47(1), 80–91. 
Gee, J. P. (2005). Semiotic social spaces and affinity spaces: From the age of mythology to today’s 
schools. In D. Barton & K. Tusting (Eds.), Beyond communities of practice: Language, power, and social 
context (pp. 214–232). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Gee, J. P. (2008). Learning and games. In K. Salen (Ed.), The ecology of games: Connecting youth, 
games, and learning (pp. 21–40). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Hubbard, P. (2009). Computer-assisted language learning: Critical concepts in linguistics. London, UK: 
Routledge. 
Jakonen, T. (2014). Building bridges - How secondary school pupils bring their informal learning 
experiences into a content and language integrated (CLIL) classroom. APPLES: Journal of Applied 
Language Studies, 8(1), 7–28. 
Kobayashi, E., Kobayashi, M., & Fujimura, T. (2014). A functional analysis of EFL students’ discourse in 
the social practice of learning to play a board game. Retrieved from https://gair.media.gunma-
u.ac.jp/dspace/bitstream/10087/8827/1/2014-kobayashi.pdf 
Larsen-Freeman, D. (1997). Chaos/complexity science and second language acquisition. Applied 
Linguistics, 18(2), 141–165. 
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2015). Saying what we mean: Making a case for ‘language acquisition’ to become 
‘language development’. Language Teaching, 48, 491–505. 
Larsen-Freeman, D., & Cameron, L. (2008a). Complex systems and applied linguistics. Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press. 
Larsen-Freeman, D., & Cameron, L. (2008b). Research methodology on language development from a 
complex systems perspective. Modern Language Journal, 92(2), 200–213. 
Liou, H.-C. (2012). The roles of Second Life in a college computer-assisted language learning (CALL) 
course in Taiwan, ROC. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 25(4), 365–382. 
Marek, M. W., & Wu, W.-C. V. (2014). Environmental factors affecting computer assisted language 
learning success: A complex dynamic systems conceptual model. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 
27(6), 560–578. 
Neville, D. O., Shelton, B. E., & McInnis, B. (2009). Cybertext redux: Using digital game-based learning 
to teach L2 vocabulary, reading, and culture. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 22(5), 409–424. 
Peterson, M. (2010). Learner participation patterns and strategy use in Second Life: An exploratory case 
study. ReCALL, 22(3), 273–292. 
Peterson, M. (2012). Language learner interaction in a massively multiplayer online role-playing game. In 
H. Reinders (Ed.), Digital games in language learning and teaching (pp. 70–92). Basingstoke, UK: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
Peterson, M. (2013). Computer games and language learning. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Piirainen-Marsh, A., & Tainio, L. (2009). Collaborative game-play as a site for participation and situated 
learning of a second language. Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research, 53(2), 167–183. 
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital game-based learning. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 119 
Quasthoff, U., & Wolff, C. (1999). Korpuslinguistik und große einsprachige Wörterbücher. Linguistik 
Online, 3(2), 1–9. 
Rama, P. S., Black, R. W., Van Es, E., & Warschauer, M. (2012). Affordances for second language 
learning in World of Warcraft. ReCALL, 24(3), 322–338. 
Rankin, Y., McNeal, M., Shute, M. W., & Gooch, B. (2008). User centered game design: Evaluating 
massive multiplayer online role playing games for second language acquisition. In Sandbox ’08: 
Proceedings of the 2008 ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on Video Games (pp. 43–49). New York, NY: 
ACM. 
Reinders, H. (2012). Introduction. In H. Reinders (Ed.), Digital games in language earning and teaching 
(pp. 1–8). Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Reinders, H., & Wattana, S. (2012). Talk to me! Games and students’ willingness to communicate. In H. 
Reinders (Ed.), Digital games in language learning and teaching (pp. 156–188). Basingstoke, UK: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
Schulze, M., & Scholz, K. W. (2016). Complex adaptive systems in CALL research. In C. Caws & M.-J. 
Hamel (Eds.), Learner–computer interactions: New insights on CALL theories and applications (pp. 65–
88). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Smith, B. (2003). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction: An expanded model. Modern Language 
Journal, 87, 38–58. 
Sockett, G. (2013). Understanding the online informal learning of English as a complex dynamic system: 
An emic approach. ReCALL, 25(1), 48–62. 
Sockett, G., & Toffoli, D. (2012). Beyond learner autonomy: A dynamic systems view of the informal 
learning of English in virtual online communities. ReCALL, 24(2), 138–151. 
Suh, S., Kim, S. W., & Kim, N. J. (2010). Effectiveness of MMORPG-based instruction in elementary 
English education in Korea. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 26(5), 370–378. 
Sundqvist, P., & Sylvén, L. K. (2012). World of VocCraft: Computer games and Swedish learners’ L2 
English vocabulary. In H. Reinders (Ed.), Digital games in language learning and teaching (pp. 189–
208). Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Sykes, J., & Reinhardt, J. (2012). Conceptualizing digital game-mediated L2 learning and pedagogy: 
Game-enhanced and game-based research and practice. In H. Reinders (Ed.), Digital games in language 
learning and teaching (pp. 32–49). Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Sykes, J., & Reinhardt, J. (2013). Language at play: Digital games in second and foreign language 
teaching and learning. New York, NY: Pearson. 
Sykes, J., Ozkoz, A., & Thorne, S. L. (2008). Web 2.0, synthetic immersive environments, and mobile 
resources for language education. CALICO, 25(3), 528–546. 
Thorne, S. L. (2008). Mediating technologies and second language learning. In J. Coiro, M. Knobel, C. 
Lankshear, & D. J. Leu (Eds.), Handbook of research on new literacies (pp. 417–449). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Thorne, S. L., Fischer, I., & Lu, X. (2012). The semiotic ecology and linguistic complexity of an online 
game world. ReCALL, 24(3), 279–301. 
Tobias, S., & Fletcher, J. D. (2011). Computer games and instruction. New York, NY: State University of 
New York. 
Kyle Scholz and Mathias Schulze Digital-gaming Trajectories 
 
Language Learning & Technology 120 
Tuckerman, M.E. (2008). Reaction coordinates. Retrieved from 
https://www.nyu.edu/classes/tuckerman/stat.mechII/lectures/lecture_9/node5.html 
Zheng, D., Newgarden, K., & Young, M. F. (2012). Multimodal analysis of language learning in World 
of Warcraft play: Languaging as values-realizing. ReCALL, 24(3), 339–360. 
Zheng, D., Young, M. F., Wagner, M. M., & Brewer, R. A. (2009). Negotiation for action: English 
language learning in game-based virtual worlds. Modern Language Journal, 93, 489–511. 
