Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/chencargersmith.pdf 
February 2017, Volume 21, Number 1 
pp. 28–41 
Copyright © 2017, ISSN 1094-3501 28
MOBILE-ASSISTED NARRATIVE WRITING PRACTICE FOR YOUNG 
ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS FROM A FUNDS OF KNOWLEDGE 
APPROACH 
Yan Chen, Northern Illinois University 
Chris Liska Carger, Northern Illinois University 
Thomas J. Smith, Northern Illinois University 
As a nation of immigrants with diverse cultures and nationalities, one of the most striking 
occurrences in the United States educational system is the rapidly increasing enrollment of 
English Language Learners (ELLs). In view of their multicultural backgrounds, the 
multiliteracies education of ELLs is intertwined with their diverse socioeconomic, 
cultural, linguistic, and ethnic backgrounds, as well as their technological experiences. 
This 4-week research implemented an instrumental case study approach using funds of 
knowledge (FoK; see González, Moll, & Amanti, 2005) to explore the learning effects of 
scaffolding young ELLs’ narrative writing skills through the use of tablet computers 
(iPads) and a digital handwriting app (Penultimate). Research findings showed that ELLs’ 
learning motivation and quality of narrative writing abilities were enhanced through the 
use of this mobile technology. The culture-based writing topics based on FoK mirrored the 
ELLs’ multicultural backgrounds and provided ELL teachers a creative way to incorporate 
students’ prior knowledge into their English as second language learning through a 
culture-based instructional model. Parents also played a potential role in young ELLs’ 
mobile-assisted language learning. Future studies should be directed toward extending 
multiliteracies curricula through FoK to actively engage ELLs in narrative writing 
activities through the use of emerging mobile technology. 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English 
Keywords: Mobile Learning, Language Teaching Methodology, Writing 
APA Citation: Chen, Y., Carger, C. L., & Smith, T. J. (2017). Mobile-assisted narrative 
writing practice for young English language learners from a funds of knowledge 
approach. Language Learning & Technology, 21(1), 28–41. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/chencargersmith.pdf 
Received: June 1, 2016; Accepted: August 12, 2016; Published: February 1, 2017 
Copyright: © Yan Chen, Chris Liska Carger, & Thomas J. Smith 
INTRODUCTION 
The rapidly increasing enrollment of English Language Learners (ELLs) is becoming one of the most 
striking phenomena in the educational system of the United States. These ELLs reflect a wide variety of 
cultural backgrounds, ethnicities, and ages. ELLs attending schools vary widely in native languages, with 
more than 400 spoken languages represented among this population. During the 2012–13 school year, 
9.2% of students enrolled in the public school system nationwide were ELLs (an estimated 4.4 million), 
which was higher than the 8.7% in 2002–03 (National Center for Education Statistics, 2016). The most 
common languages in 2013–14 included Spanish, Arabic, Chinese, Vietnamese, and Haitian or Haitian 
Creole (National Clearinghouse for English Language Acquisition, 2015). Most ELLs were from recent 
immigrant families or were born in the United States to immigrant families. ELLs are a highly 
heterogeneous group of students with diverse gifts, educational needs, educational backgrounds, and 
learning objectives (National Council of Teachers of English, 2008). They have brought a wide range of 
Yan Chen, Chris Liska Carger, and Thomas J. Smith Mobile-assisted Narrative Writing Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology 29 
educational and academic experiences and have reshaped the terrain of multiliteracies education with 
their diverse socioeconomic, cultural, linguistic, and ethnic backgrounds as well as their technological 
experiences. 
Taking note of this ongoing shift and drawing on the perspective of postmodern educational philosophy, 
Taylor, Bernhard, Garg, and Cummins (2008) suggested a new approach to studying the impact of social 
and educational theory on current literacy practices for ELLs’ multiliteracies education. This approach 
incorporated newly emerging information, communication, multimedia pedagogies, and culturally 
specific literacy resources. 
Among the four macro-skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing, learning to write in a second 
language has become one of the most urgent issues in ELLs’ educational practice due to its complexity 
and recursiveness. ELLs’ writing ability in English is critical for future academic performance and career 
development. However, Cloud, Genesee, and Hamayan (2009) stated that writing is the least-developed 
English language skill among ELLs. ELLs’ scores on national writing assessment were much lower than 
non-ELL peers (Maxwell, 2012). Samway (2006) posited four deficits for ELLs: “they can’t write; they 
have writing problems; they are reluctant writers; [and] they need to be taught the skills of writing before 
being asked to write independently” (p. vii). Samway’s study also exposed several obstacles to the 
development of ELLs’ writing skills, including language barriers, writing motivation, and appropriate 
teaching strategies and curriculum design. 
While acknowledging the writing skill deficits of ELLs, Newman (2012) argued that all students have 
something to write about in the classroom: 
Students’ Funds of Knowledge serve as a vast treasure trove of writing possibilities for writers of 
all ages—and of all backgrounds. Teaching strategies, such as well-chosen mentor texts, all-
inclusive language enrichment activities, and lessons in generative writing, help adolescents find 
their voices, share their stories, and participate meaningfully and successfully in our increasingly 
culturally diverse classroom. (p. 25) 
A teaching framework based on funds of knowledge (FoK) is about “using students’ knowledge and prior 
experiences as a scaffold for new learning” (González, Moll, & Amanti, 2005, p.135). It provides students 
with opportunities to choose writing topics on their own (Street, 2005). Hedges, Cullen, and Jordan 
(2011) proposed using FoK as a conceptual framework to improve curriculum in the early years. These 
studies identify insightful approaches to extend multiliteracies curriculum design through the perspective 
of FoK and to motivate ELLs to engage themselves in writing activities. 
To facilitate the development of ELLs’ multiliteracies education, previous studies have attempted to 
integrate various instructional technologies—from computer-assisted language learning (CALL) to 
mobile-assisted language learning (MALL). The flexibility that MALL offers to the learner has expanded 
the possibilities for CALL, and the use of MALL has the potential to exceed that of non-mobile CALL 
(Ballance, 2012). However, previous research involving MALL and ELLs’ multiliteracies education has 
been limited at the methodological, pedagogical, and technology-facilitating levels. 
At the methodological level, overviews of MALL studies (e.g., Burston, 2013; Kukulska-Hulme & 
Shield, 2008; Miangah & Nezarat, 2012) have substantiated that most have utilized college students or 
adult learners as participants (Oberg & Daniels, 2013; Stockwell, 2010), while studies in K–12 settings 
have been quite rare (Lan, Sun, & Chang, 2013; Nah, White, & Sussex, 2008). Among 345 MALL 
implementation studies included in an annotated bibliography from 1994 to 2012 (Burston, 2013), less 
than 16% were related to the K–12 settings, even though learning through mobile technology is rapidly 
expanding at all school levels. It is important to address the gap between the number of MALL studies in 
higher education versus the number carried out in K–12 settings, and it is also important that the research 
literature be enhanced through the inclusion of empirically-based studies. 
Yan Chen, Chris Liska Carger, and Thomas J. Smith Mobile-assisted Narrative Writing Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology 30 
At the pedagogical level, MALL has facilitated the language teaching–learning process in specific 
language skills such as listening (Liu, 2009), speaking (Kiernan & Aizawa, 2004), reading (Sung, Chang, 
& Huang, 2008), phrasing (Morita, 2003), vocabulary (Lu, 2008), spelling (Kemp & Bushnell, 2011), 
grammar (Moreira & Gomez, 2011), and phonological awareness (Plester & Wood, 2009). However, 
innovative pedagogy grounded in culturally and linguistically inclusive approaches to curriculum design 
also is needed (Taylor et al., 2008), particularly for developing ELLs’ writing skills (Miller & McCardle, 
2011). FoK might provide a framework for developing such innovative pedagogies for this population, 
particularly for teaching narrative writing, which is recognized as the most suitable genre to teach in the 
classroom because of its versatility (Gutiérrez, Puello, & Galvis, 2015). 
At the level of technology facilitation, a technology-integrated language-learning map for ELLs’ writing 
development has evolved from traditional computers (Foulger & Jimenez-Silva, 2007), to Web 2.0 tools 
(Woo, Chu, Ho, & Li, 2011), to mobile-based technologies (Billings & Mathison, 2012). Mobile phones 
(Sandberg, Maris, & Geus, 2011), PDAs (Hwang, Chen, Shadiev, Huang, & Chen, 2014), iPods (Billings 
& Mathison, 2012), netbooks (Lin & Wu, 2010), and the prototype of a mobile application (Kanala, 
Nousiainen, & Kankaanranta, 2013) each have been used in developing students’ writing skills 
individually or with other language skills. To date, there is a lack of research into the use of tablet 
computers (e.g., iPads) and mobile apps to facilitate ELLs’ multiliteracies development. 
Therefore, to address the gaps in existing MALL research, the present study took a qualitative 
instrumental case study approach (Stake, 1995) based on the conceptual framework of FoK (González et 
al., 2005) to explore the learning effects of scaffolding young ELLs’ narrative writing skills through the 
use of tablet computers (iPads) and a digital writing app (Penultimate). The research questions addressed 
in this study were as follows: 
1. How does the use of a tablet computer (iPad) and a digital writing app (Penultimate) facilitate the 
development of young ELLs’ narrative writing skills? 
2. How do the FoK of young ELLs facilitate the development of their narrative writing skills when 
using a tablet computer (iPad) and a digital writing app (Penultimate)? 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
Conceptually grounded in Vygotsky’s theories in cultural-historical psychology, FoK provide a platform 
for bilingual teachers to acquire more information about their students’ prior knowledge, experiences, and 
cultural backgrounds (Petrone, 2013; Wei, 2014). Using a big picture perspective of the culture of human 
activities, González et al. (2005) elaborated on the hybridity of FoK through an ethnographical view. 
González et al. contended that culture can be divided into mentalist and materialist segments. It can also 
be viewed as systems of ideas, structural systems, and systems of knowledge. Those vivid perspectives of 
culture motivated anthropologists to explain educational achievement disparities among various student 
groups. FoK can be viewed as a set of cultural patterns that hide in the lived experiences of students. 
Teachers are expected to be researchers and should take a processual approach to look beyond the school 
boundaries—in particular, by examining the households and communities of poor and minoritized 
students—and to assess the impact of these contexts on students’ schooling. The cultural disparity of 
different student groups should exist not as a problem but rather as a catalyst for teachers to construct a 
panorama for student learning from the perspective of FoK. 
Prior research about FoK has been conducted in Spanish and teaching mathematics (González et al., 
2005), learning science (Barton & Tan, 2009), teaching ethics (Sugarman, 2010), creating literacy plans 
(Johnson, 2004), and being integrated into writing classrooms (Schwartz, 2015). Using a case study 
methodology, Larrotta and Serrano (2012) discussed adult learners’ FoK in English learning. McLaughlin 
and Barton (2013) explored pre-service teachers’ use of students’ FoK in science learning. Fox-Turnbull’s 
(2012) research identified the potential application of using FoK in technology education. Students in the 
Yan Chen, Chris Liska Carger, and Thomas J. Smith Mobile-assisted Narrative Writing Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology 31 
digital world can bring rich technological knowledge acquired from home and community to their formal 
technology education. This knowledge can then support them and contribute to their understanding as 
they collaboratively develop technological outcomes. Concomitantly, FoK pertaining to ELLs’ diverse 
linguistic and cultural capital should be advocated as resources to enrich ELLs’ multiliteracies 
development, although these FoK have often been ignored (Taylor et al., 2008). ELLs have particular 
ways of forming sentences and discourse to create meaning in their native languages. FoK—the skills and 
know-how that exist in a family and community—have the potential to provide engaging writing topics 
that can facilitate the growth of ELLs’ multiliteracies development. 
METHOD 
By connecting FoK to young ELLs’ narrative writing practices, this MALL study employed an 
instrumental case study as the inquiry strategy. Based on Stake (1995), the instrumental case study was 
used to address the need to generate a “general understanding and get an insight into the question by 
studying a particular case” (p. 3) and “serve[d] to help us understand phenomena or relationships within 
it” (p. 77). This study explored how this MALL study assists the development of young ELLs’ narrative 
writing skills using an iPad and Penultimate based on their FoK. 
PARTICIPANTS 
Five ELLs (2 boys and 3 girls, ages 9–13) from four ELL families participated in this 4-week mobile-
assisted narrative writing project through random selection. The five ELLs inculded three US citizens 
with Mexican heritage (Mexican-American), one US citizen with Chinese heritage (Chinese-American), 
and one Chinese citizen from a short-term (one year) visiting Chinese family in the United States. The 
participants were enrolled in a local school district’s ELL program in the Midwestern United States. 
DATA COLLECTION 
The trustworthiness of the data collection was verified by triangulation of the home-visits, interviews, 
questionnaires, pre- and post-essays, informal observations, and field notes. The specific data process 
mainly included three stages: 
Stage 1. Before the narrative writing practice, each ELL’s family was provided with a home-visit and 
interview so that their FoK could be ascertained. To facilitate the home-visits, the ELLs and their parents 
were each asked 20 questions. These queries were primarily focused on the age, educational background, 
and educational goals of both the students and parents; the parents’ occupations and interests; the 
neighborhood where the family resided; family activities and after-school activities (e.g., watching 
movies, television, or reading books); artifacts used at home; family social and cooperative practices; and 
opinions on technology use at home. The FoK writing topics were finalized for each ELL through this 
stage. 
Stage 2. During the narrative writing practice, the participating ELLs completed one pre-essay using pen 
and paper. One week later, an iPad2 and Penultimate (a free digital writing app) were used as scaffolding 
tools in the post-writing activities. The interactive functions (inserting images; changing the background, 
the color, and the size of the font; and drawing) were emphasized during the project. 
Stage 3. After the writing activities, the ELLs were interviewed informally for 15 minutes to share their 
reflections about participating in the study. The collected pre- and post-essays were graded using the 
IMAGE Writing Summary Rubric (Illinois State Board of Education, 1999). 
DATA ANALYSIS OF TWO CHOSEN REPRESENTATIVE CASES  
Among the five participants, two ELLs (a 14-year-old girl from a visiting Chinese family and a 13-year-
Yan Chen, Chris Liska Carger, and Thomas J. Smith Mobile-assisted Narrative Writing Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology 32 
old boy from a Mexican-American family) were selected to represent the data analysis because both of 
the ELLs were seventh-graders. 
Case 1. Liliana: An ELL from a Visiting Chinese Family in the United States 
Liliana (pseudonym) was the daughter of a Chinese visiting scholar at a state university in the Midwestern 
United States. By the date of the present study, Liliana had lived in the United States for five months. 
Well-educated in China at a graduate level, Liliana’s parents held high expectations for Liliana to 
improve her English skills incrementally and study abroad after completing her college education in 
China. As an ELL in the school, Liliana was interested in learning English, but she was shy and reticent. 
Liliana’s drawing received several awards at school. Liliana had owned and used an iPad for more than a 
year prior to the study (See Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1. An example of a drawing award won by Liliana (left) and Liliana playing at home with her iPad 
(right). 
Case 2. Larry: An ELL from a Mexican-American Family in the United States 
Larry (pseudonym) was a seventh-grade ELL. He named himself “Larry” in the present study because of 
a famous American television character, Larry the Cable Guy. Larry is from a Mexican family. Larry’s 
family came to the United States 17 years ago and began making a living in construction. Larry’s father 
speaks English very well, but his mother speaks English poorly. There is no Internet in Larry’s home. 
Larry and his sister do not have their own mobile devices. Larry is good at math and hopes to work in 
construction when he grows up. The family speaks both Spanish and English. 
Data Coding 
Based on the categorization of Hedges et al. (2011), the home-visit field notes were coded to ascertain 
ELLs’ FoK for the mobile assisted writing topics (See Table 1). ELLs’ writing essays were evaluated 
using adapted IMAGE Writing Summary rubric dimensions: (a) language production; (b) focus; (c) 
support/elaboration; (d) organization; and (e) mechanics, along with six levels of a continuum. The 
language production dimension reflected the second language acquisition process, while the other 
dimensions reflect the state writing rubric (Illinois State Board of Education, 1999). 
  
Yan Chen, Chris Liska Carger, and Thomas J. Smith Mobile-assisted Narrative Writing Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
Table 1. FoK Analysis for Liliana and Larry 
Categories ELL1: Liliana ELL2: Larry 
Family-based 
FoK 
Parents were well educated and both 
had doctoral degrees from China. 
Parents had academic jobs in China and 
a good salary. 
Parents had studied English formally for 
years. 
Liliana’s mom, who lived with her in 
the United States, was good at reading 
literature and doing research but had 
difficulties communicating in the 
United States. 
Both Chinese and English were spoken 
at home, but mainly English. 
Parents were educated with a high 
school diploma. 
Father worked in construction. Mom 
had no formal job. 
Father spoke English, while his mother 
spoke little English. 
Both Spanish and English were spoken 
at home, but mainly Spanish. 
Family was Catholic. 
Center-based 
FoK 
A white bulletin board was prepared on 
the refrigerator for Liliana’s to-do list 
every day. 
English word cards from her teachers 
were used every day. 
Extra exercise sheets from the Internet 
were downloaded for practicing. 
Chinese storybooks (in English) were 
borrowed from the library. 
A few literacy books in English and 
Spanish from the church were randomly 
kept. 
An English–Spanish dictionary was 
bought by his parents as a birthday gift. 
A few pieces of English newspaper 
from the community were randomly 
kept. 
An old calendar was randomly kept. 
Community-based 
FoK 
Liliana went to school with her mom. 
Liliana and her mom went to church on 
Sundays to practice English and make 
American Friends. 
Liliana and her mom went to a weekly 
International Café at the University to 
practice English and make American 
friends. 
Liliana and her mom went to the library 
to study for one to two hours every day. 
Liliana and her mom went to the mall 
for shopping sometimes. 
Liliana liked going to restaurants, 
especially for fried chicken on 
Tuesdays. 
Liliana and her mom traveled around 
the United States during breaks. 
Larry walked to school with his 
classmates from Mexican-American 
families. 
Larry went to church in a Mexican-
American community on Sundays. 
Larry and his family went to the movie 
theater one in a while. 
Larry liked going to restaurants for 
Mexican foods. 
Larry enjoyed working, such mowing 
the yard or helping with his father’s 
construction work, in the neighborhood 
for money during break times. 
Larry and his family travelled to 
Mexico to meet their relatives every two 
or three years. 
Yan Chen, Chris Liska Carger, and Thomas J. Smith Mobile-assisted Narrative Writing Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
Technology-based 
FoK 
Liliana’s mom used a laptop to keep in 
touch with Liliana’s father in China, 
school, and updated news. 
Liliana played language games such as 
Starfall and PBS on the laptop for 20–
30 minutes every day. 
Liliana had her own iPad and iPhone. 
Larry and his sister shared one laptop at 
home. They used it for homework and 
off-line computer games because there 
was no Internet connection at home. 
FINDINGS 
FoK Writing Topics 
Throughout the present study, the ELLs’ FoK played active roles in developing their narrative writing 
skills. Specifically, the writing topics emerged from the ELLs’ family-based and community-based FoK 
and provided the ELLs with guidance about what to write. The center-based FoK, such as the literacy 
resources at home, encouraged the ELLs to overcome their learning barrier to demonstrate that they 
indeed could write. The technological-based FoK, such as computer- or language-game playing, enabled 
the ELLs to become accustomed to the Penultimate app quickly and transformed them from reluctant 
writers to active writers. The ELLs were not afraid of using emerging mobile technology, but showed 
great intrinsic motivation in writing with English independently. 
Within the two chosen cases, the information obtained during the home-visit revealed that one of the 
unique aspects of Liliana’s FoK was her travel experiences in China. Thus, Liliana was encouraged to 
write an essay about her travels in China using the Penultimate app. Larry worked in the neighborhood in 
the summer, mowing the yard and cleaning up the trash every week. Therefore, a writing topic of mowing 
in the backyard was chosen for Larry. 
When asked about writing the story of her travels in China, Liliana expressed interest in participating in a 
mobile-assisted cross-cultural writing community to share her culture, study, and life experiences with 
other ELL students from different cultures. Liliana stated, “it is really interesting because we can learn 
from each other… for example, history and culture from different countries. We will have more 
opportunities to talk with each other.” Larry thought that it was easy to write about his mowing 
experience. Although he did not write well, he believed he could if he had a better language arts teacher. 
Development of Narrative Writing Skills 
By comparing the ELLs’ pre- and post- essays, the language production, support/elaboration, and 
organization dimensions showed great improvement; while the focus dimension remained the same. 
In Liliana’s case, she spent two hours on her 124-word pre-essay to describe her travel experiences in 
China. It was difficult and she did not know what to write. During the post-essay, Liliana’s writing 
motivation greatly improved with the intervention of the iPad and the Penultimate app. While waiting at 
the airport for her trip, she completed and submitted her five-page post-writing in less than one hour 
through her iPad, which enabled her to completed this mobile assisted learning activity of writing at any 
time at home or during her travels. By comparing the pre-and post-essays, the language production and 
support/elaboration dimensions showed great improvement (See Figure 2). 
Yan Chen, Chris Liska Carger, and Thomas J. Smith Mobile-assisted Narrative Writing Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
 
Figure 2. Samples from Liliana’s post-essays. 
In Larry’s case, he completed the pre-essay writing after mowing the backyard. He wrote less than 40 
words for the entire story and only used bullets. For the post-essay, Larry was surprised to be able to write 
his story on an iPad. While the researchers demonstrated the Penultimate app to him, Larry did not say 
anything, but he did focus on the app. He learned to use the app quickly and rewrote his story. He did not 
use bullets in the post-essay, which demonstrated an improvement in organization and mechanics 
according to the IMAGE Writing Rubric. He also kept saying “Wow, I don't even need an eraser.” “May I 
change a different color?” At the end of the writing, he asked, “May I draw myself?” It was a big surprise 
because he never said anything about his interest in drawing before (See Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. Samples from Larry’s post-essay. 
Yan Chen, Chris Liska Carger, and Thomas J. Smith Mobile-assisted Narrative Writing Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology 36 
Using an iPad and the Penultimate App 
The two chosen ELLs showed great interest in writing using the iPads and the Penultimate app. Liliana 
preferred the post-essay, as she felt finishing the pre-essay was a heavy task. However, when using the 
iPad and the Penultimate app, Liliana thought the post-essay activity was more fun, 
I can insert pictures. I can draw. I added more feelings in my story. I want to write more than last 
time. I feel I am making progress…I do like the e-paper background options to write my story. If 
possible, I would add some music to my story next time because the paper is like a staff…I would 
also use iPads to learn Chinese and Mathematics. 
Liliana stated that she used the online dictionary to look up new vocabulary and Evernote to refer to her 
previous notes. However, Liliana pointed out that “the stylus is not natural sometimes. If my fingers touch 
the iPad screen accidently, it will affect the story writing... My mom does not allow me use iPad for a 
long time because she is worrying about my eyesight.” 
When asked about his refection, Larry said:  
I really love writing with iPad. It can save money for buying notebooks and pencils. I don't even 
need to buy erasers any more…I can search more pictures online by using iPads. It will be helpful 
to remind me about what to write in my story…I want to have my own iPad. Many of my 
classmates have one, although we are not allowed to use at school. 
ESTABLISHING TRUSTWORTHINESS OF QUALITATIVE DATA 
Triangulation was achieved through the in-depth interviews during the home-visits, ELLs’ pre- and post-
essays, reflections, and informal observations to “see if what we are observing and reporting carries the 
same meaning when found under different circumstances” (Stake, 1995, p. 113). Additionally, member 
checking was used to triangulate the researchers’ observations and interpretations with the facilitation of 
the collaborators. 
DISCUSSION 
These research findings demonstrate that ELLs are willing to incorporate mobile technology into their 
second language learning through writing because of their English writing deficiency. Young ELLs are 
accustomed to having technology in their daily lives and they are quick learners. ELLs’ curiosity can be 
satisfied with the instant, attractive, and lifelike audio, video, images, and animations provided by apps 
like Penultimate. Mobile devices provide ELLs with an effective way to improve their writing ability, 
which is essential to their future academic performance and career development. ELLs’ learning 
motivation as well as the quality of their narrative writing abilities were enhanced through the use of 
mobile technology. The ELL teacher in the school district said the following: 
Most of them [ELLs] are good at conversational English but they still make a lot of grammar 
errors. I don’t have any real strong writers. Most of the kids are still in the ELL program because 
of writing because usually they pass the listening and speaking test by now and some of them 
have passed the reading test by now but it's still the writing test that is keeping them in the 
program. The use of iPad and penultimate motivated them to keep writing. 
The sample size was too limited to generalize the research findings. However, the chosen instrumental 
case study represented two unique ELL groups. Particularly, Spanish and Chinese are among the top-five 
common languages in the U.S. public schools (National Clearinghouse for English Language Acquisition, 
2015). The research findings are instrumental not only to understanding these two ELLs’ mobile-assisted 
Yan Chen, Chris Liska Carger, and Thomas J. Smith Mobile-assisted Narrative Writing Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
writing activities, but also to delineating a generic picture to demonstrate how using FoK can facilitate 
young ELLs’ language development through mobile writing. The ELL teacher mentioned the following: 
A lot of their [ELLs] funds of knowledge are things related to outside of the school and a lot of it 
doesn’t involve reading and writing. I know it can be more interesting to them when we are 
reading or writing about something that they know about, and if we’re reading and writing about 
something that they have no idea about, I know it’s a lot harder for them. 
The culturally-embedded writing topics based on FoK could mirror the ELLs’ multicultural backgrounds 
and provide ELL teachers with a creative approach to incorporate ELLs’ prior knowledge into their 
multiliteracies education. The findings concurred with Franquiz and Brochin-Ceballos (2009), who 
advocated that ELL teachers should incorporate their students’ cultural backgrounds into the classroom, 
foster cultural preservation through engagement with culture-based activities, and encourage students to 
speak and write about their culture, values, and beliefs. These findings also provided constructive insights 
into the deficit views about ELLs’ writing discussed by Samway (2006)—namely, that ELLs are able to 
perform effective writing through the scaffolding of FoK. Based on the findings, a mobile-assisted FoK 
narrative writing instructional model (shown in Figure 4) was proposed to encourage ELLs to share their 
household culture through digital writing in English through five steps (discovering, connecting, writing, 
sharing, and preserving culture) from four aspects (family-based, center-based, community-based, and 
technology-based FoK). The ELL teacher also showed great interest in applying this mobile-assisted FoK 
narrative writing model for ELLs to practice their narrative writing skills as well as share their FoK-based 
experiences with students from other groups. 
 
Figure 4. A mobile-assisted FoK narrative writing instructional model. 
Improving technology literacy has been an important educational aim for 21st century students, 
particularly ELLs. Schools, teachers, and even parents should make effective use of FoK to facilitate 
ELLs’ formal learning through emergent mobile technology. Major advances in understanding of ELLs’ 
writing skills can best be facilitated by learning through mobile technology and the integration of FoK. 
Potential advantages and disadvantages of alternative writing apps should be explored and assessed for 
their capacity to facilitate development of ELLs’ writing skills. 
 
Yan Chen, Chris Liska Carger, and Thomas J. Smith Mobile-assisted Narrative Writing Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology 38 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the 2015 Spring Research Grant from Golden Key 
International Honour Society and Gail Jacky, director of the University Writing Center at Northern 
Illinois University, for editing the manuscript, without which the present study could not have been 
completed. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Yan Chen is a Doctoral Candidate of Department of Educational Technology, Research, and Assessment 
at Northern Illinois University. Her research interests focus on technology integration in second language 
acquisition and multicultural and multiliteracies education. 
E-mail: ychen@niu.edu 
Chris Liska Carger was a Professor of Department of Literacy and Elementary Education at Northern 
Illinois University. Her research interests focused on narrative inquiry, ethnography, and multicultural 
education. 
Thomas J. Smith is a Professor of Educational Research and Evaluation at Northern Illinois University. 
His research interests focus on quantitative research methodology and large-scale data analysis. 
E-mail: tjsmith@niu.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Ballance, O. J. (2012). Mobile language learning: More than just “the platform.” Language Learning & 
Technology, 16(3), 21–23. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2012/ballance.pdf 
Barton, A. C., & Tan, E. (2009). Funds of knowledge and discourses and hybrid space. Journal of 
Research in Science Teaching, 46(1), 50–73. 
Billings, E. S., & Mathison, C. (2012). I get to use an iPod in school? Using technology-based advance 
organizers to support the academic success of English learners. Journal of Science Education and 
Technology, 21(4), 494–503. 
Burston, J. (2013). Mobile-assisted language learning: A selected annotated bibliography of 
implementation studies 1994–2012. Language Learning & Technology, 17(3), 157–225. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2013/burston.pdf 
Cloud, N., Genesee, F., & Hamayan, E. (2009). Literacy instruction for English language learners: A 
teacher’s guide to research-based practices. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 
Foulger, T. S., & Jimenez-Silva, M. (2007). Enhancing the writing development of English language 
learners: Teacher perceptions of common technology in project-based learning. Journal of Research in 
Childhood Education, 22(2), 109–124. 
Fox-Turnbull, W. (2012). Funds of knowledge in technology education. Paper presented at the PATT 26 
Conference: Technology Education in the 21st Century, Stockholm, Sweden. Retrieved from 
www.ep.liu.se/ecp/073/021/ecp12073021.pdf 
Franquiz, M., & Brochin-Ceballos, C. (2009). Teachers should help preserve their students’ culture. In C. 
Nasso & E. D. Chenes (Eds.), English language learners (pp. 109–116). Farmington Hills, MI: 
Greenhaven Press. 
Yan Chen, Chris Liska Carger, and Thomas J. Smith Mobile-assisted Narrative Writing Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology 39 
González, N., Moll, L. C., & Amanti, C. (Eds.). (2005). Funds of knowledge. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Gutiérrez, K. G. C., Puello, M. N., & Galvis, L. A. P. (2015). Using picture series technique to enhance 
narrative writing among ninth grade at Institutción Educativa Simón Araujo. English Language Teaching, 
8(5), 45–71. 
Hedges, H., Cullen, J., & Jordan, B. (2011). Early years curriculum: Funds of knowledge as a conceptual 
framework for children’s interests. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 43(2), 185–205. 
Hwang, W. H., Chen, H. S. L., Shadiev, R., Huang, R. Y. M., & Chen, C. Y. (2014). Improving English 
as a foreign language writing in elementary schools using mobile devices in familiar situational contexts. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 27(5), 359–378. 
Illinois State Board of Education. (1999). The language proficiency handbook: A practitioner’s guide to 
instructional assessment. Springfield, IL: Illinois State Board of Education. 
Johnson, S. I. (2004). Using funds of knowledge to create literacy lessons. Retrieved from 
http://www.aps.edu/language-and-cultural-equity/newsletters/december2004.pdf 
Kanala, S., Nousiainen, T., & Kankaanranta, M. (2013). Using a mobile application to support children’s 
writing motivation. Interactive Technology and Smart Education, 10(1), 4–14. 
Kemp, N., & Bushnell, C. (2011). Children’s text messaging: Abbreviations, input methods, and links 
with literacy. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 27(1), 18–27. 
Kiernan, P. J., & Aizawa, K. (2004). Cell phones in task based learning: Are cell phones useful language 
learning tools? ReCALL, 16(1), 71–84. 
Kukulska-Hulme, A., & Shield, L. (2008). An overview of mobile assisted language learning: From 
content delivery to supported collaboration and interaction. ReCALL, 20(3), 271–289. 
Lan, Y. J, Sung, Y. T., & Chang, K. E. (2007). A mobile-device-supported peer-assisted learning system 
for collaborative early EFL reading. Language Learning & Technology, 11(3), 130–151. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num3/lansungchang 
Larrotta, C., & Serrano A. F. (2012). Adult learners’ funds of knowledge: The case of an English class for 
parents. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 55(4), 316–325. 
Lin, J. M. C., & Wu, Y. J. (2010). Netbooks in sixth-grade English language classroom. Australasian 
Journal of Educational Technology, 26(7), 1062–1074. 
Liu, T. Y. (2009). A context-aware ubiquitous learning environment for language listening and speaking. 
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 25(6), 515–527. 
Lu, M. (2008). Effectiveness of vocabulary learning via mobile phone. Journal of Computer Assisted 
Learning, 24(6), 515–525. 
Maxwell, L. A. (2012). ELLs trail significantly on national writing exam. Retrieved from 
http://blogs.edweek.org/edweek/learning-the-language/2012/09/ells_trail_significantly_on_na.html 
McLaughlin, D. S., & Barton, A. C. (2013). Preservice teacher’s uptake and understanding of funds of 
knowledge in elementary science. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 24(1), 13–36. 
Miangah, T. M., & Nezarat, A. (2012). Mobile-assisted language learning. International Journal of 
Distributed and Parallel Systems, 3(1), 309–319. 
Miller, B., & McCardle, P. (2011). Reflections on the need for continued research on writing. Reading 
and Writing, 24(2), 121–132. 
Yan Chen, Chris Liska Carger, and Thomas J. Smith Mobile-assisted Narrative Writing Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology 40 
Moreira, S. C., & Gomez, I. A. (2011). Do u txt? Using “txting” to learn maternal language: A Portuguese 
case study. International Journal of Innovation and Learning, 9(3), 298–310. 
Morita, M. (2003). The mobile-based learning (MBL) in Japan. In Y. Kambayashi, S. Konomi, & K. Rose 
(Eds.), Proceedings of the first conference on creating, connecting, and collaborating through computing 
(pp. 128–129). Tokyo, Japan: IEEE Computer Society. doi: 10.1109/C5.2003.1222348 
Nah, K. C., White, P., & Sussex, R. (2008). The potential of using a mobile phone to access the Internet 
for learning EFL listening skills within a Korean context. ReCALL, 20(2), 331–347. 
National Center for Education Statistics. (2016). English language learners. Retrieved from 
https://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=96 
National Clearinghouse for English Language Acquisition (2015, October). Language spoken by English 
learners (ELs). Retrieved from 
http://www.ncela.us/files/fast_facts/OELA_Fast_Facts_All_Languages_Update_508_11_5_15.pdf 
National Council of Teachers of English (2008). English language learners: A policy research brief 
produced by the National Council of Teachers of English. Retrieved from 
http://www.ncte.org/library/NCTEFiles/Resources/PolicyResearch/ELLResearchBrief.pdf  
Newman, B. M. (2012). Mentor texts and funds of knowledge: Situating writing within our students’ 
worlds. Voice from the Middle, 20(1), 25–30. 
Oberg, A., & Daniels, P. (2013). Analysis of the effect a student-centered mobile learning instructional 
method has on language acquisition. Journal of Computer Assisted Language Learning, 26(2), 177–196. 
Pérez, L. F. (2013). Mobile learning for all: Supporting accessibility with the iPad. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Corwin. 
Petrone, R. (2013). Linking contemporary research on youth, literacy, and popular culture with literacy 
teacher education. Journal of Literacy Research, 45(3), 240–266. 
Plester, B., & Wood, C. (2009). Exploring relationships between traditional and new media literacies: 
British preteen texters at school. Journal of Computer Mediated Communication, 14(4), 1108–1129. 
Samway, K. D. (2006). When English language learners write: Connecting research to practice, K–8. 
Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 
Sandberg, J., Maris, M., & Geus, K. D. (2011). Mobile English learning: An evidence-based study with 
fifth graders. Computers & Education, 57(1), 1334–1347. 
Schwartz, L. H. (2015). A funds of knowledge approach to the appropriation of new media in a high 
school writing classroom. Interactive Learning Environment, 23(5), 595–612. 
Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Stockwell, G. (2010). Using mobile phones for vocabulary activities: Examining the effect of the 
platform. Language Learning & Technology, 14(2), 95–110. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num2/stockwell.pdf 
Street, C. (2005). Funds of knowledge at work in the writing classroom. Multicultural Education, 13(2), 
22–25. 
Sugarman, S. (2010). Seeing past the fences: Finding funds of knowledge for ethical teaching. The New 
Educator, 6, 96–117. 
Yan Chen, Chris Liska Carger, and Thomas J. Smith Mobile-assisted Narrative Writing Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
Sung, Y. T., Chang, K. E., & Huang, J. S. (2008). Improving children’s reading comprehension and use 
of strategies through computer-based strategy training. Computers in Human Behavior, 24(4), 1552–
1571. 
Taylor, L. K., Bernhard, J. K., Garg, S., & Cummins, J. (2008). Affirming plural belonging: Building on 
students’ family-based cultural and linguistic capital through multiliteracies pedagogy. Journal of Early 
Childhood Literacy, 8(3), 269–294. doi: 10.1177/1468798408096481. 
Wei, L. (2014). Negotiating funds of knowledge and symbolic competence in the complementary school 
classrooms. Language and Education, 28(2), 161–180. 
Woo, M., Chu, S., Ho, A., & Li, X. (2011). Using a wiki to scaffold primary-school students’ 
collaborative writing. Educational Technology & Society, 14(1), 43–54. 
