Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/review1.pdf 
February 2017, Volume 21, Number 1 
pp. 46–51 
 
Copyright © 2017, ISSN 1094-3501 46 
REVIEW OF MEZHDU NAMI 
Mezhdu Nami 
Lynne deBenedette, William J. Comer, Alla Smyslova, & 
Jonathan Perkins 
2016 
ISBNs: 9781611950168 US $12.50 
9781611950175 US $15.00 
9781611950182 US $12.50 
9781611950199 US $15.00 
268 pp. 
Jayhawk Ink 
Lawrence, KS 
 
 
Review by Irina Zaykovskaya, Michigan State University 
INTRODUCTION 
Mezhdu Nami (Между Нами), the first fully-online introductory Russian textbook, was released publicly 
in the summer of 2015 and is rapidly gaining popularity. According to the textbook website, it has been 
adopted by sixteen universities and one middle school in the United States and Canada. It is perhaps 
unsurprising, given that this textbook is innovative in at least three ways. 
First, while most of the elementary Russian textbooks currently on the market adhere to the principles of 
communicative language teaching, Mezhdu Nami is the only one claiming to incorporate the ideas of task-
based language teaching as well. A second important characteristic of Mezhdu Nami is that its 
methodological approach is theoretically grounded in the input processing theory (VanPatten, 1993, 1996, 
2000). This theory views the processing of the input (target language) by L2 learners as a crucial step of 
language learning and allows for the mapping of linguistic form (morphology and syntax) onto meaning. 
Third, as the textbook is released under a Creative Commons license, it is free to use. The accompanying 
workbooks (Classroom Activities and Homework Assignments) are also available for free download from 
the website, and users may order printed and bound copies for approximately $15.00 USD. 
WEBSITE LAYOUT AND STORYLINE 
The website’s Cyrillic interface may be intimidating to a true beginner at first, as it contains very little 
English, apart from an introduction section with traditional Russian imagery (see Figure 1). However, 
once a student learns the alphabet and basic vocabulary, it becomes easy to navigate. Even if one does not 
understand the meaning of the words behind the lessons and the content of the top bar, it is fairly easy to 
deduce the meaning behind the numbers. Each unit is marked with the word Уро́к (Lesson) and a 
sequential number; the sub-sections of each lesson’s drop-down menu are also numbered in sequence. 
The reference and supplementary section—located directly below the bar with the lesson contents and 
containing links to the dictionary, multimedia, grammar tables and index—is also labeled in Russian, but 
English translations of each section’s titles are available if one hovers the mouse pointer over the Russian 
labels. Further assisting the user in overcoming the deluge of Russian is the “Getting Started” section at 
the bottom of the main website. It is written in English and links to an overview page, which contains a 
Irina Zaykovskaya Review of Mezhdu Nami 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
description of the textbook’s storyline and characters. Instructions on how to use the website (which 
contains a brief video tutorial) and a section with the workbooks are also located in the same section. It is 
worth noting that, although the video tutorial is eminently useful, navigating to it is a multi-step process, 
which may require initial intervention and guidance on the part of the instructor. First, from the main 
website, users must scroll to the bottom left and click “Read more” under “Getting Started”. The link will 
take them to the Overview page, the left frame of which contains a link called “Using the Website”. 
Clicking that link brings up the video instruction. 
The course content is organized around a story about four American students (three undergraduate and 
one graduate student) on their year-long study abroad program in Russia. The list of main characters also 
includes their Russian friends, teachers, and host families. Importantly, both the American and Russian 
characters are of different ethnic backgrounds which enriches the cultural component of the textbook and 
may add to the characters’ appeal for diverse language learners. 
The characters mainly live or stay in four Russian cities (St. Petersburg, Yaroslavl’, Kazan’, and Irkutsk). 
This approach switches the focus of attention from the capital city of Moscow that is typical for many 
Russian textbooks (e.g., Голоса, Live from Moscow) and allows instructors to naturally weave in some 
valuable information about the diversity of Russian geography, climate, and even everyday life in 
different parts of the country. This is of particular importance, because generally culture does not seem to 
be a key component of the textbook—there is no specific part of the website devoted to it, nor is culture a 
structural part of the units. However, certain tidbits of cultural information may be found within different 
units. For example, in Unit 3.4, under “A Little Bit About Language,” there is a note entitled What You 
May See At A University: 
University buildings in Russia may contain one or more departments. Campus buildings may not 
have any large plot of land containing dorms and academic buildings in an enclosed space—
unlike a US [campus]. Dorms and university buildings may be located at some distance from one 
another. Departments often have their own library, which will usually not have open stacks. 
Pragmatics is also introduced through commentaries, such as the one in Unit 1.4 discussing the 
appropriateness of certain greetings in different situations and for different interlocutors. 
 
Figure 1. Mezhdu Nami: Homepage view. 
Irina Zaykovskaya Review of Mezhdu Nami 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
UNIT STRUCTURE AND CONTENT ORGANIZATION 
The textbook covers a rich list of topics, including, but not limited to, family and academic life, getting 
around in a city, dining out, and shopping and social interactions. The content is organized into nine large 
units (or lessons), and an epilogue which does not introduce any new grammar or vocabulary material or 
exercises, but instead completes the four students’ stories and recaps some of the major themes of the 
course. Each of the lessons is broken down into three parts, each one of which, in turn, contains from one 
to four episodes (see Figure 2). Importantly, there is a special section with learning goals at the beginning 
of each of the lessons. The goals are presented in a user-friendly format that resembles can-do statements, 
such as those offered for self-assessment within ACTFL and the Common European Framework of 
Reference for Languages. They all begin with a statement: “By the end of this unit you will be able to…” 
and contain various goals, such as “ask and tell about items that you and others do have/don't have” 
(Lesson 4) and “give a biographical sketch of yourself or another person” (Lesson 8). In addition to 
stating the goals, the section describes what linguistic features of the target language will be covered in 
order to help learners achieve those goals, such as “conjugating verbs in the present tense (1st and 2nd 
conjugation)” (Lesson 3) and “date-month expressions (како́е число́ and како́го числа́)” (Lesson 6). 
 
Figure 2. Unit content view. 
The standard structure of each episode is as follows (all labeled in Russian): The episode begins with the 
input part, Текст (Text); continues to a set of comprehension check activities, Вы всё по́няли? (Did you 
understand all of that?); and then finishes with a section containing linguistic information and related 
exercises, Немно́го о языке́ (A little bit about the language). In the first unit, there is also a section 
devoted to the Cyrillic alphabet and Russian handwriting. It’s worth noting that because the offline 
workbooks contain the bulk of the exercises, tasks, and other activities, there are not many in the online 
textbook itself. 
The input is provided mostly in both textual and aural forms and is supplemented with situationally 
appropriate pictures of the main characters. The dialogues are scripted, but are clearly intended to mimic 
authentic real-life situations—one of their peculiarities that I particularly appreciated was the fact that the 
native speakers sound as they should, while the students have accents, which further contributes to the 
Irina Zaykovskaya Review of Mezhdu Nami 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
authenticity. At times, however, the speech rates of both native and non-native speakers are unnaturally 
slow even for a beginner-level course. Additionally (and unfortunately), the website does not allow the 
user to hide the captions while playing the audio, which limits the instructor’s opportunities to use 
listening-only activities. The only way to do so would be by forcing students to close their device and not 
share the instructor’s screen. In rare cases, there are mismatches between the recorded text and the 
captions, which may lead to confusion. 
The Did you understand all of that? parts vary substantially in the type of activities included, but there are 
often few comprehension check exercises per episode. The most frequently used types of comprehension 
activities are true/false questions, identifying speakers, matching words or phrases with pictures, multiple 
choice questions, and fill-in-the-gap exercises. These may be used by students independently (e.g., as part 
of homework in a flipped classroom), as the answers are often available by clicking on the answer link or 
hovering the mouse pointer over the answer choices (where such links are provided). There are also 
Quizlet interactive vocabulary learning activities in many episodes, in which learners may select different 
study modes: match, learn, test, flashcards, or spell. Depending on the vocabulary in question, learners 
may be asked to make words disappear, match them with pictures, or other sorts of activities. Did you 
understand all of that? may also contain cultural or pragmatic commentary for the learners. 
Finally, each episode’s A little bit about the language part contains brief information and a few exercises 
on Russian syntax, morphology, and pronunciation. In addition, there is often a box titled “Use good 
learning strategies!” which contains pertinent tips. For example, the authors suggest using association for 
learning irregular plural forms of certain nouns in Lesson 2 and good practice words for the pronunciation 
of certain consonant clusters in Lesson 6. 
ADDITIONAL FEATURES 
The additional features of the website are represented in the reference and supplementary section. The 
dictionary contains not only words and phrases, but also titles of important cultural texts and idioms (e.g., 
Геро́й на́шего вре́мени [Hero of our time], the title of a book by Mikhail Lermontov; вели́кий и могу́чий 
ру́сский язы́к [the great and mighty Russian language]). The sortable and searchable list contains the 
translation, as well as grammar information and a reference to the place in the textbook where the 
grammar forms can be seen in context. For certain words, hypernymic categories to which they belong 
(e.g., places, seasons, etc.) are included. The dictionary only contains words and phrases that appear in the 
textbook, however, so learners will not be able to use it to look up words they may find elsewhere. 
The Audio+ (multimedia) section consists of two parts. The first part consists of audio and various 
materials corresponding to the activities in the Homework Assignments offline workbook; however, 
certain tracks are missing from the audio part. I assume that these will be fixed over time, as the editors 
and authors are still updating the materials, which is evident from the workbooks, since each one has a 
date stamp with the last update. The other materials, although engaging and rich, are not yet equally 
distributed across all of the lessons, and some are missing altogether—of the total of thirteen, four refer to 
Lesson 7 while Lessons 4 and 9 are not represented at all. 
Tables does a particularly admirable job of covering all six grammatical cases with detailed information 
about their functions (including multiple examples). There are also declension tables and, curiously, a 
whole separate section dedicated to the use of two directional/locational prepositions. However, no tables 
for verb conjugation or extra information about the verbal aspect can be found. 
The website also features a For Teachers section in which instructors can find a detailed outline of the 
program components, an overall list of expected student outcomes, and a clearly stated methodological 
and theoretical ground upon which the textbook is based. By contacting the authors, teachers may gain 
access to a shared folder with supplementary materials for the textbook (transcripts, flash cards, warm-up 
activities, PowerPoint presentations, etc.). In addition, I assume the authors will soon have a home for 
Irina Zaykovskaya Review of Mezhdu Nami 
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
these supplementary materials on the textbook website—having these readily available will be a bonus to 
teachers. Some of the materials are developed by the textbook authors, but other instructors using the 
textbook are invited to share their materials as well—and some of them do. 
METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH AND THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
The structure of the episodes, as outlined above, clearly reflects the input processing approach that the 
authors claim to favor. In the Methodological Approach section, the authors state the following: 
We prioritize having learners first show comprehension of the narrative and then map words and 
forms used in the story line to the meanings they convey; the learners’ initial work with the input 
is structured and active, even if they are not creating new grammar forms in output-based practice 
immediately…[because l]earners who do the input-based work first have had a chance to get 
familiar with the new vocabulary and map its forms to the correct meanings before they are asked 
to deploy these in their own speech. 
To further persuade the Russian instructors using the textbook to follow the suggested order, the authors 
provide a link to their own published empirical study. The results show that processing instruction 
worked just as well or better than traditional instruction for the low-level learners of Russian learning 
directional and locational expressions (Comer & deBenedette, 2011). 
The authors’ claim that they utilized principles of task-based teaching when they designed this textbook 
may be an overstatement. Certainly elements of task-based language teaching are incorporated into the 
course, but there are many different ways to define a task and there are many theoretical underpinnings 
behind task-based language teaching design. Unfortunately, the authors do not define how they 
envisioned the tasks they were using when planning. However, in a previously published study, one of the 
authors of Mezhdu Nami (Comer, 2007) used Ellis’ (2003) description of a task and suggested that a clear 
nonlinguistic outcome is a crucial feature. For example, a regular communicative activity may involve a 
role-play imitating the process of renting an apartment, but for a pedagogical task, the most important part 
would be success or failure to rent. Although a vast majority of the activities offered in the Classroom 
Activities workbook are intended to promote learner collaboration (group- or pair-work) and 
communication, many of them fail to lead the learners towards achieving any real-life outcome. For 
example, the final activity in the part of Lesson 2 devoted to family life presents a set of pictures showing 
the characters the learners are already familiar with and gives the following instructions: Work with a 
partner to say as much as you can about each of the pictures below. Be prepared to share your answers 
with the class (Classroom Activities I, p. 69). As this is the final activity, it can be assumed that the 
learners would have enough linguistic skills to engage in an activity with a clearer outcome. For example, 
they could have been tasked with finding a person who could help them with something by searching 
through the available options and remembering their family members, some of whom could possess 
necessary medical or similar kind of knowledge. The learners would need guidance from their classroom 
teachers in using the linguistic forms and information from the textbook lessons in real-life, meaningful 
situations, either in the classroom with their teacher and peers or with others outside of class. 
CONCLUSION 
Despite minor technological problems (which are likely to be resolved by the authors as they continue to 
revise the textbook content) and the fact that the textbook is perhaps less task-based than it could be, it is 
difficult to overestimate the importance of an online textbook like Mezhdu Nami appearing as an open 
educational resource for Russian language education. Mezhdu Nami is innovative methodologically and 
theoretically, bringing the principles of processing instruction and some elements of task-based language 
teaching into the Russian classroom. In addition, its content is highly relevant, especially for 
Irina Zaykovskaya Review of Mezhdu Nami 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
undergraduates who might consider going on a study abroad program in Russia. The characters are 
relatable, the story is engaging, and the design is user-friendly. Instructors benefit greatly from the shared 
folder with supplementary materials (answer keys, image collections, sample lesson plans, PowerPoint 
presentations), while learners do not need to worry about the cost of the textbook when making a decision 
to take a Russian class. I highly recommend that Russian language teachers not only adopt Mezhdu Nami 
for the language classroom, but also contribute by giving feedback to the authors as the authors continue 
to work on the textbook content. Most importantly, teachers should consider uploading any supplemental 
tasks that they design that correspond with the individual chapters or units. The textbook authors should 
be commended for creating a space where textbook users can upload supplemental files, and this feature 
of the textbook should be highlighted and amplified as an important toolbox associated with Mezhdu 
Nami. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Irina Zaykovskaya is a PhD student in Second Language Studies and a teaching assistant at Michigan 
State University. She has taught pedagogical grammar and Elementary Russian. 
E-mail: zaykovsk@msu.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Comer, W. (2007). Implementing task-based teaching from the ground up: Considerations for lesson 
planning and classroom practice. Russian Language Journal/Russkii Yazyk, 57, 181–203. Retrieved from 
http://rlj.americancouncils.org/issues/57/articles/comer-2007 
Comer, W. J., & deBenedette, L. (2011). Processing Instruction and Russian: Further evidence is IN. 
Foreign Language Annals, 44(4), 646–673. doi: 10.1111/j.1944-9720.2011.01155.x 
Ellis, R. (2003). Task-based language learning and teaching. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
VanPatten, B. (1993). Grammar instruction for the acquisition rich classroom. Foreign Language Annals, 
26(4), 433–450. doi: 10.1111/j.1944-9720.1993.tb01179.x 
VanPatten, B. (1996). Input processing and grammar instruction in second language acquisition. 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
VanPatten, B. (2000). Processing instruction as form-meaning connections: Issues in theory and research. 
In J. Lee & A. Valdman (Eds.), Form and meaning: Multiple perspectives (pp. 43–68). Boston, MA: 
Heinle & Heinle. 
