Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/helmdooly.pdf 
February 2017, Volume 21, Number 1 
pp. 166–185 
 
Copyright © 2017, ISSN 1094-3501 166 
CHALLENGES IN TRANSCRIBING MULTIMODAL DATA: 
A CASE STUDY 
Francesca Helm, Università degli Studi di Padova 
Melinda Dooly, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona 
Computer-mediated communication (CMC) once meant principally text-based 
communication mediated by computers, but rapid technological advances in recent years 
have heralded an era of multimodal communication with a growing emphasis on audio and 
video synchronous interaction. As CMC, in all its variants (text chats, video chats, forums, 
blogs, SMS, etc.), has become normalized practice in personal and professional lives, 
educational initiatives, particularly language teaching and learning, are following suit. For 
researchers interested in exploring learner interactions in complex technology-supported 
learning environments, new challenges inevitably emerge. This article looks at the 
challenges of transcribing and representing multimodal data (visual, oral, and textual) 
when engaging in computer-assisted language learning research. When transcribing and 
representing such data, the choices made depend very much on the specific research 
questions addressed, hence in this paper we explore these challenges through discussion of 
a specific case study where the researchers were seeking to explore the emergence of 
identity through interaction in an online, multimodal situated space. Given the limited 
amount of literature addressing the transcription of online multimodal communication, it is 
felt that this article is a timely contribution to researchers interested in exploring 
interaction in CMC language and intercultural learning environments. 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English 
Keywords: Computer-mediated Communication, Research Methods, Virtual 
Environments, Multiliteracies 
APA Citation: Helm, F., & Dooly, M. (2017). Challenges in transcribing multimodal 
data: A case study. Language Learning & Technology, 21(1), 166–185. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/helmdooly.pdf 
Received: November 19, 2015; Accepted: October 4, 2016; Published: February 1, 2017 
Copyright: © Francesca Helm & Melinda Dooly 
INTRODUCTION 
Identity has become an important field of research in applied linguistics and second language acquisition. 
As far back as 1995, Norton Peirce called for the development of a “concept of the language learner as 
having a complex social identity that must be understood with reference to large and frequently 
inequitable social structures which are reproduced in day-to-day social interactions” (p. 579). In 2011, a 
state-of-the-art article in the journal Language Teaching acknowledged the establishment and rapid 
growth of identity as an area of inquiry (Norton & Toohey, 2011), witnessed by the fact that identity had 
also begun to appear in most handbooks and encyclopedias of language learning and teaching (e.g., 
McKinney & Norton, 2008; Norton & Toohey, 2002; Ricento, 2005). At the same time, it has also been 
recognized that most research on identity has been carried out in the field of second (L2) language 
learning and, in particular, immigrant learners (Norton, 2000/2013; Pavlenko & Blackledge, 2004). Much 
less work has been carried out in the foreign language classroom (Block, 2007/2014), or in the field of 
computer-assisted language learning (CALL) although it is recognized that “understanding how learner 
identities…are constructed and enacted in particular contexts can be useful in designing and 
implementing technology-mediated language learning in education” (Gee & Lee, 2016, p. 166). Much of 
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 167 
the work which has been carried out regards language learners’ identity work in social networks (e.g., 
Chen, 2013; Klimanova & Dembovskaya, 2013; Schreiber, 2015). 
The work of identity scholars such as Bucholtz and Hall (2005) and Zimmerman (1998), who adopt a 
social linguistic approach to the study of identity as it emerges through interaction, has been recognized 
as a potentially valid basis for the study of identities in online contexts (Thorne, Sauro, & Smith, 2015). 
However, these frameworks were developed for the analysis of identity in face-to-face contexts, hence the 
methodological challenge for CALL researchers lies in adapting these frameworks to explore interactions 
which take place in online contexts as what we see and do on the phone, tablet, or computer screen is 
highly mediated, filtered, and designed through the technology itself (Kern, 2014). Interaction in online 
environments is quite different from face-to-face communication, for in any online medium, temporal and 
spatial relations are transformed (Malinowski & Kramsch, 2014). Also, the many available online 
environments and tools differ considerably from one another. It is no longer sufficient to distinguish 
computer-mediated communication (CMC) from face-to-face communication for it has been widely 
acknowledged that there is no single form or genre of Netspeak or CMC, just as there is no single form or 
genre of spoken or written communication. Facebook has different affordances and constraints for 
interaction and identity work from, say, Twitter, Tumblr, Whatsapp, Skype, or Snapchat and these will be 
reflected in the interactions and identity work taking place (Chen, 2013). 
Herring (2007), one of the most influential scholars on computer-mediated discourse (CMD) identifies 
two main types of influence on CMD: medium (i.e., the technological aspect which includes aspects such 
as synchronicity, message transmission, size of message) and situation (i.e., the social context, with 
factors such as information about participants, their relationships to one another, their purposes for 
communicating). Kern (2015) also emphasizes the situated, relational, and mediated dimensions of 
meaning making and identity construction in the study of online interactions. 
With these concepts of situatedness and mediation in mind, we discuss some of the challenges faced 
when studying interaction in online multimodal contexts while exploring identity in interaction. 
Following the principles of discourse-centered online ethnography (Androutsopoulos, 2008) we address 
situatedness and mediation by first offering a thick description of the situated context in which the 
interactions took place and of the functionalities of the communication medium—along with the three 
available communication modes: visual, oral and textual. We then briefly describe the methodological 
approach adopted, which, following a social semiotics approach to multimodality (see Jewitt, Bezemer, & 
O’Halloran, 2016), begins with analysis of each mode separately. However, the main focus of the article 
is on the challenges of transcribing and representing the interplay between the three modes in a study that, 
as mentioned above, was concerned with the emergence of identity through interaction in an online, 
multimodal environment. 
CONTEXT OF DATA COMPILATION 
The interaction data is drawn from the Soliya Connect Program, established in 2003 in the aftermath of 
9/11 (see Figure 1). The main aim of the program developers was to bridge the gap between young people 
in Western societies and predominantly Muslim societies and to have them engage constructively with 
difference. The program runs twice a year (Spring and Fall Semester) and involves partner universities 
who integrate the program into their institutional courses in various ways. There are two possible strands, 
one focusing more on academic or political issues and the other on less academic and more intercultural 
issues, with different options for cross-cultural and individual assignments. 
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 168 
 
Figure 1. The Soliya website. 
The Soliya Connect Program was not developed as an English language program, but it has been adopted 
in advanced English language courses in various institutes in Europe and the Middle East. The rationale 
for this is that it is a form of experiential learning, or what could also be considered content and language 
integrated learning, in which learners are required to use English as a vehicular language to learn more 
about international relations and divisive issues that relate to participants’ identities (Helm, 2013, 2014). 
It offers students an opportunity for developing their English language and acquiring knowledge about 
issues which affect the geopolitical and sociocultural relations between Western and predominantly 
Muslim societies. Furthermore, the program allows participants to develop new online literacies (Guth & 
Helm, 2010) empathy and intercultural understanding, as well as critical thinking (Bali, 2014).  
One of the authors of this article completed an 8-week online facilitation training in 2010 and was then 
offered her first co-facilitator assignment with a dialogue group. The weekly, 2-hour audio and video 
dialogue sessions formed a part of a data corpus, some of which is analysed in this study. Written 
permission was obtained for the use of the data. The names of the participants have been changed to 
protect their identities. 
The dialogue group whose interaction is the object of this study met in Soliya’s main meeting room (see 
Figure 2) over a period of seven weeks. Within the situated context of the online meeting room, the 
participants had access to one another and could glimpse into the other participants’ local physical 
surroundings through the small webcam picture. This context (main meeting room) can be described as a 
space in itself with a culture and norms of behavior of its own which are co-constructed by the 
participants and facilitators through their interactions, mediated by the affordances and constraints of the 
technological and pedagogic design. 
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 169 
 
Figure 2. The affordances of the Soliya meeting room. 
As can be seen in Figure 2, the situated context of Soliya is an online environment which allows for 
communication in a range of modes (oral, visual, and textual). This, combined with the fact that there can 
be up to twelve participants and thus twelve webcam images in the dialogue sessions, makes it a highly 
complex context for communication where participants have to negotiate the technology as well as 
language and meaning. As Messina Dahlberg and Bagga-Gupta (2014) observe, these kinds of spaces 
afford several conversational floors at the same time, and these “are neither exclusive nor additive, but 
rather multiplicative since they build upon one another” (p. 6). This additional layer of complexity that 
the mediation of technology adds to the communication inevitably has repercussions for the transcribers 
and researchers, not least of which is deciding where to focus the analysis. 
METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH 
As the researchers come from a Conversation Analysis (CA) background (Dooly, 2009; Dooly & Sadler, 
2016), CA was intended to be the initial approach for analyzing the data. However, it soon emerged that 
there were multimodal features of the interaction—due to the mediating effect of the technologies—that 
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 170 
could not be fully accounted for in a CA approach, for example turn-taking mechanisms and sequentiality 
across modes (Gibson, 2014), not to mention the length and meaning of silence (seconds and even 
minutes as opposed to fractions of seconds). The approach that we subsequently adopted draws from what 
Androutsopoulos (2008) calls discourse-centered online ethnography, which has been adopted for the 
study of how identities are constructed through interaction in CMC (Androutsopoulos, 2007; Georgalou, 
2016), as well as Herring’s (2007) work on CMD and research in the field of multimodality in social 
semiotics. We also bring into play the outline for approaching multimodal data based on social linguistic 
traditions by Bezemer and Jewitt (2010). In a social semiotics approach modes are defined as organized 
sets of semiotic resources used for meaning making. The more a set of resources has been used within a 
community, the more fully and finely articulated it becomes as a commonly recognizable meaning-
making resource (Bezemer & Jewitt, 2010; Guichon & Cohen, 2016). 
We first of all privileged mode as an organizing principle of identity representation in exploring the 
affordances and constraints of the media available in this online context for identity construction. The 
term mode is used to refer to many different aspects of communication, for example language is 
considered a mode—as are speech and writing. There are also visual modes of communication, such as 
gaze and gesture (Bezemer & Jewitt, 2010; Kress, 2009). The key characteristic of mode within a theory 
of multimodality is that it is a culturally recognized communication channel or set of semiotic resources. 
In this case study the modes analyzed are textual (through synchronous, multi-participant, one-way text 
chat), oral (through the audio), and visual (through the webcams). We are aware of the multiple facets 
(Herring, 2007) that characterize these broad communication modes, as highlighted in our definition of 
the platform above. Subsequently, as we explored emerging identities through the interaction itself we 
adopted an approach which remained multimodal, but was more in line with multimodal research that 
follows social linguistic traditions (Bezemer & Jewitt, 2010), as the units of analysis were individual turns 
of spoken interaction and interaction sequences. As will be explained later in the article, we prioritized the 
oral mode as this was where most interaction was taking place (due to the design of both the online space 
and the educational program itself) and turned our attention to the text and visual when these were made 
relevant in the spoken interaction. This is clearly not to say that this approach should be adopted in all 
studies, but that it seemed the most relevant given the research questions and the situated context of the 
study. 
EXPLORING IDENTITY THROUGH DIFFERENT MODES 
Textual Mode 
The written text mode was an initial way in to the data, for a record of the written interactions was 
downloaded at the end of each session. The text chat appeared in the central box of the interface, as seen 
in Figure 2, and was indeed central to the interactions, largely because the facilitators transcribed a 
summary of the interaction as it unfolded. This transcribed summary was indexed by the facilitators 
initially writing the name of the participant followed by a colon, as in Excerpt 1, where Jessica transcribes 
Brendan’s words, and then at the end checks her transcription with Brendan. Indeed, facilitator–
transcriber was one of the key identities that emerged through the text chat and was certainly the most 
dominant with over 80% of the text chat seemingly used for transcription. 
Excerpt 1. Using Text Chat for Transcription 
Jessica: Brendan: I think we all know or feel that 9/11 def changed the relationship 
Jessica: Brendan: wants to ask people in Middle East if there are any events 
Jessica: of the same caliber 
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 171 
Jessica: which affected your view of the US 
Jessica: right? 
Brendan: you got it :) 
As for the other participants, some used the text chat frequently (though nowhere near as much as the 
facilitators), and others barely used it at all. Those who used it more frequently included text chat 
conventions, such as a wide range of emoticons, abbreviated forms, and repetition of letters, which serve 
as identity markers (Kern, 2015) and index social presence and the ability to adapt the medium to their 
communicative needs (Herring 2001, 2015). Excerpt 2 shows how the phatic use of the text chat indexes 
the group identity and cohesion which emerged through the seven weeks of dialogue as they mark their 
emotion at the ending of the program. 
Excerpt 2. Session 7, Phatic Use of Text Chat 
Kate: To everyone!! THANK YOU VERYMUCH! 
Fadela: luv u alllllllllll 
Kate: it was a pleasure to meet you 
Alef: I LOVE U GUYS :) bless u all! 
Mohammed: thanks guys 
Thamena: I want to ask everyone to keep in touch plzzz 
Thamena: and I lovee U alll 
Doja: it was pleasure meeting you 
Jessica: byee Fadela 
Denise: bye Fadela!! 
Jessica: will definitely kep in touch 
Fadela: byeeeeeeee 
Jack: bye Fadela! 
Fadela: :'( 
Alef: bbbye ;) 
The challenges of analyzing the text chat mode alone were that sequentiality, which is disrupted even 
when text chat is the only mode of communication (Anderson, Beard, & Walther, 2010; Gibson, 2014; 
Tudini, 2010), was particularly difficult to establish since there were no timestamps. Furthermore, without 
also accessing the audio data it was not clear whether text chat turns were responses to previous lines of 
text chat or to what was being said through the oral mode. Whilst it was certainly useful as a way into the 
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 172 
data and in defining certain identities of facilitators and participants, analysis of the text chat alone 
highlighted its very partial nature in this context and the need for multimodal analysis. 
Visual Mode: Gaze, Positioning, and Investment 
Scholars have begun to explore the affordances and constraints of webcams and have looked at several 
aspects of the visual mode such as gaze and facial expression (Satar, 2013), framing, positioning, and 
gesture (Guichon & Cohen, 2016; Guichon & Wigham, 2016; Telles, 2009). Studies have shown the 
relevance of participants’ positioning with respect to the webcam which is constrained by technical 
features (e.g., built-in or mobile webcams) but which is also often strategically used by participants in 
projecting a certain image of themselves. Scholars have also analyzed aspects such as proximity to the 
webcam and framing, which have been found to index interactants’ level of trust and confidence with the 
medium and their interlocutors (Kern, 2015). In Figure 3, for example, we see how some participants 
have positioned themselves at the bottom-left corner of the window, away from the direct gaze of other 
participants. In terms of identity work the visual mode also offers access to visual identity markers such 
as gender, clothes, accessories such as caps or headscarves, and background context (public or private 
space, décor). 
 
 
Figure 3. Strategic positioning of participants with respect to the webcam. 
Challenges in researching the visual in this study regarded the size and quality of the image, which was 
small and often of very poor quality due to the inequalities in Internet connections and, above all, the 
number of webcam images to observe (up to 12 at a time). Most studies which have explored aspects of 
the visual such as gesture and gaze in video communication have involved dyadic communication 
(Guichon & Wigham, 2016; Satar, 2013; Telles, 2009), where much more emphasis can be given to the 
visual mode in the communication itself. 
Oral Mode 
The main mode of communication in this context, however, was the oral mode as the program was 
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 173 
designed around spoken interactions which were led and supported by the facilitators. This mode can 
deliver paralinguistic cues such as tone of voice, intonation, speech rate, and identity markers such as 
accent and hesitation. Challenges in transcription—and also in the interaction itself—are linked to the 
quality of the audio which can hinder understanding. Often this depends on the quality of the Internet 
infrastructure which, in turn, can depend on geopolitical as well as technical factors. 
In order to research the interactions, it was necessary to transcribe the oral data and to prepare a transcript 
which included not only the spoken interaction but also relevant information about what was happening 
through the visual and also the textual modes. We discuss how this was dealt with in the next section. 
PREPARING A WORKING TRANSCRIPT OF MULTIPLE MODALITIES FOR THE 
EXPLORATION OF IDENTITY IN ONLINE INTERACTION 
A study of the processes of transcription is key to a greater understanding of the research process. 
Transcription offers a way in to the analysis, and the needs of the researcher can vary during the different 
phases of the research process, hence justifying the need for different transcripts. Baldry and Thibault 
(2006) write the following: 
Transcription is itself a form of analysis: it is a textual record of the attempts we make to 
systematize and unpack the co-deployment of the semiotic resources and their unfolding in time 
as the text develops. Transcription also prepares the way for other forms of analysis. (p. xvi) 
A working transcript of the multimodal data, which brought together the visual, oral, and textual modes, 
was created in order to offer further insights into the interactions taking place and allow for the selection 
of interactions for more in-depth analysis. The process for creating the working transcript involved 
several steps. First, the recordings of the audio and video interaction were viewed several times and were 
subdivided into more manageable sections (categorized by activity or topics that emerged) for 
transcription and analysis. For each section, a rough transcription was made of the oral interaction taking 
place with notes on gestures and other aspects of the video screens which particularly stuck out as aspects 
worthy of further analysis or which were made relevant through the spoken interaction by the participants 
(the emic approach). 
Each video was viewed again to add a timestamp to each line of the text chat transcript so it could be 
aligned with the audio and video transcript. This became the multimodal working transcript. This working 
transcript served for analytic purposes, rather than to be published and shared, and was in constant 
evolution as the research evolved and challenges were addressed. 
Creating working transcripts of the sessions presented several challenges along the way, some of which 
have been addressed by other researchers (above all in the field of CA), although rarely in an online 
environment as described in this study. As ten Have (2002) puts it, the process of transcribing must be 
considered “deeply problematic” (p. 1). Some of the key issues which have been identified by researchers 
are: (a) recording, (b) selection, (c) representations of time and space, and (d) the format of the transcripts 
and legibility. We have added (e) the definition of turns and representation of silence. Each of these issues 
are described separately below along with how they were dealt with in the case study we have described. 
Recording 
One of the problems ten Have (2002) identifies in transcription is that the processes of recording then 
transcribing interaction are necessarily selective; they do not provide a full record of what went on. As 
Ochs (1979, p. 44) points out, “transcription is a selective process reflecting theoretical goals and 
definitions”. The same can be said of the way in which technology is used for capturing the data: it is 
selective by nature. In this particular study, the recordings of the audio and video were made by the Soliya 
organization for internal monitoring, quality control, and research purposes (the participants were fully 
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 174 
informed and gave their consent). The recording captured the screen of the Soliya interface1 as the 
participants experienced it during the dialogue and was a relatively faithful reproduction of all 
participants’ viewpoint of the situated context. 
There were, however, limitations in this recording set-up. The recording used in this study contained only 
interactions on the main Soliya interface. There was no record of the private text chats participants may 
have engaged in with other participants during the sessions or of text chat they may have started writing 
and then abandoned (Smith, 2008). The recordings also did not include the other windows which 
participants may have had open on their computers and could have been accessing whilst they were 
connected to their computers during the session. The researchers also did not have insight into what was 
happening in the spaces surrounding each participant, the hors-champ (Guichon & Wigham, 2016). 
For language teachers interested in knowing more about the different language resources used during the 
interaction, gaining access to the learners’ full engagement with the computer interface can be of interest. 
In such cases, using screen captures of individual computers can provide fuller information of how the 
learners are engaged with different technology resources. For instance, Video Screen Capture has been 
adapted for research on writing processes (see Hamel & Séror, 2016) and some researchers have looked at 
learner strategies such as self-repair in CMC interactions (see Smith, 2008). Depending on the aims of the 
research study, having full screen capture may or may not be important. The purpose of the current 
research study was not to explore what participants were doing at their computers whilst taking part in 
Soliya, but rather to analyze emerging identities in the group interaction, thus recording only the 
interaction in the platform was not seen as a limitation to the analysis. 
Selection 
It was clearly impossible to transcribe everything, particularly when we were dealing with video data and 
when the question of how faithful a reproduction of the interaction a transcript should produce is subject 
of ongoing debate. When transcribers seek to include too much information in their transcript, it becomes 
inaccessible even to fellow researchers, let alone the lay reader. This is particularly true when seeking to 
include non-verbal communication, such as gesture, which is usually represented through symbols in text 
transcription and requires a legend to explain their use. It is important to acknowledge that there are 
inevitable losses when rendering spoken and visual interaction through the written language, and 
inevitably the transcribing process requires selection on behalf of the researcher as to what to include and 
what to leave out. This must be decided according to the particular interests of the researcher (ten Have, 
2002; Ochs, 1979). 
In this case study, the predominant mode of interaction was oral, though text chat and visual modes were 
also used and were integrated into the transcript. The criterion for deciding when to include information 
about the visual mode in the transcript was based on the interactants making it relevant through the 
spoken or text chat modes (the emic approach). For instance, as can be seen in Figure 4, Jack curls the 
index and middle fingers of both hands to indicate air quotes. If we look at the transcript (Figure 5), we 
see that he makes this gesture when he says the words Arab and Muslim world. This gesture echoes the 
use of scare quotes that we can see in the text chat window in the same image—where in the first line of 
text, we can see Jessica had typed a question for the participants (Is there a conflict between the “west” 
and the “Arab and Muslim world”) and also in the last line of text chat (see the right-hand column of 
transcript in Figure 5) where Fadela used scare quotes around the word israel. With this gesture, Jack 
seems to highlight potentially problematic terminology, as Jessica and Fadela had done in the text chat. 
This mutual alignment towards the use of scare quotes (in text) and air quotes (through video) to mark 
possibly contentious terms links to the identity of a group engaging in dialogue about a controversial 
topic and aware of the problematicity of terminology used to frame the debate. 
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 175 
 
Figure 4. Screenshot of air quotes gesture. 
 
Figure 5. Transcript of multimodal data including scare quotes in text chat. 
Representations of Time and Space 
Representation of time is a challenging aspect of multimodal transcription, and is determined in part by 
the affordances both of the technologies used for the interaction and those used in the transcription. In the 
transcript of the text chat, which can be seen in Excerpt 1 and Excerpt 2 above, there were no timestamps. 
Unlike many other platforms offering written as well as audio and video interaction (e.g., Skype, where 
there is a time stamp for each turn of text), the Soliya platform did not have this, rather just the name of 
the person typing and the text. 
As reported above, a timestamp was added to the text transcript in a second phase of the research, and by 
comparing the versions with and without timestamp, it was possible to see how the dimension of time 
contributed significantly to possible interpretations of the unfolding of the text chat. In Version A (see 
Table 1) there was a seeming coherence between the lines of text chat; with the exception of the first line 
in the extract, the subsequent lines make up a coherent conversation. However, Version B (with the 
timestamps) allowed us to detect significant multimodal features that were not visible in Version A of the 
text chat. For instance, there was an approximate 30-second delay after Alef typed tomorrow to Tunisia 
and the next line, and a 1-minute delay after Alef typed to meet Tunisian youth and officials (highlighted 
in Version B). 
  
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 176 
Table 1. Text chat with and without timestamp  
Version A Version B 
Ranà: : to write 7 aspects of their identity  
Alef: we have Hilary Clinton coming7 
Alef: tomorow to Tunisia 
Alef: to meet Tunisian youth and officials 
Alef: I’ll be there in the meeting  
Thamena: Oh really? 
Mohammed: the meeting is about what? 
Fadela: do u think that her visit will help? 
Alef: Muhammed: I heard that no one in Egypt 
*accepted to meet her?  
Ranà: thats right alef  
Ranà: :) 
Mohammed: perhaps because its our problem  
Mohammed: and we want to solve it ourselves  
Mohammed: we need no help 
Alef: JACK: what’s the purpose of Clinton’s 
visit to Tunisia and Egypt, now, in your opinion?  
1:45 Ranà: : to write 7 aspects of their identity 
2:03 Alef: we have Hilary Clinton coming7 
2:09 Alef: tomorow to Tunisia 
2:45 Alef: to meet Tunisian youth and officials 
3:47 Alef: I’ll be there in the meeting 
4:02 Thamena: Oh really? 
4:19 Mohammed: the meeting is about what? 
4:23 Fadela: do u think that her visit will help? 
4:42 Alef: Muhammed: I heard that no one in 
Egypt accepted to meet her? 
5:03 Ranà: thats right alef 
5:10 Ranà: :) 
5:24 Mohammed: perhaps because its our problem 
5:39 Mohammed: and we want to solve it ourselves 
5:56 Mohammed: we need no help 
6:08 Alef: JACK: what’s the purpose of Clinton’s 
visit to Tunisia and Egypt, now, in your opinion? 
Representation concerns various features captured in transcripts as regards time measurements but also 
the spatialization of the flow of interaction. As said before, there are multiple layers of meaning making 
which overlap with one another, and it is important to represent them in the transcription. In the 
transcription of audio data, particularly when analyzed from a CA perspective, overlap of turns is an 
important feature to be captured, and conventions have been developed to represent this (Jefferson, 1984; 
Sacks, Schegloff, & Jefferson, 1974). However, turn-taking in online platforms inevitably has some 
variability when compared to face-to-face conversations, due to the features and constraints of the 
technology (Gibson, 2014). 
For instance, in the computer-mediated interaction data of this study, overlap between speakers was not 
possible, for the software did not allow interruption or overlap (unlike Skype, for instance). In order to 
take the floor a speaker had to click on the talk button (see Figure 2), and they had the floor until they 
released the talk button. Overlap of speaker turns was thus not a concern in this analysis simply because it 
could not take place. However, overlap of other modes was of interest in this research as the interaction 
could take place on multiple floors and as one mode could support the other. It could also be used to carry 
on parallel interactions or subvert the other mode (Sauro, 2009). When working with multimodal online 
data it was thus important to capture the “transmodality,” or the intersections of the different modes as 
they “sequentially perforate and interpenetrate each other” (Messina Dahlberg & Bagga-Gupta, 2014, p. 
6). 
The perforation of different modes was present in our study, thus it was important to capture the way in 
which the different modes were mediated by the participants as potential communication resources. For 
example, in one of the extracts, a facilitator (Ranà) used the camera feature to index her discussant 
orchestrator identity by instructing the others to respond to her question through the visual channel using 
“Thumbs up, thumbs down”. She used one mode of communication, the spoken, but called for a response 
through a different mode. One of the other group members followed her instructions and produced the 
expected response by raising her thumb, thereby acknowledging her discourse identity of addressee of 
Ranà’s instructions. 
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 177 
 
Figure 6. Screenshot of cartoonized “thumbs up”. 
 
Figure 7. Screenshot of pixelated “thumbs up”. 
Of course, the use of screenshot captures to represent spatiality brought forth yet more issues such as how 
to maintain the anonymity of the study participants. In this study two technical options were explored, 
cartoonizing (Figure 6) and pixelating (Figure 7). In both cases, these inevitably resulted in a loss of 
detail of more minute facial gestures, though more so in the case of pixelating. For sake of brevity, these 
are not discussed here. For a discussion of different approaches to the problem see Dooly and Hauck 
(2012, pp. 150–151). 
Format of Transcripts 
The format of the transcript can, to a certain extent, support the spatial representation of transmodal 
communication. Various spatialized formats have been experimented within the literature on multimodal 
data analysis, from the column format (advocated by Ochs, 1979 for particular kinds of data), to the list 
format and the partition format (Mondada, 2007)—each of which offers a materialized conception of “the 
temporal unfolding of talk and conduct and of the sequential organization of their details” (p. 812). In 
more recent research into online multimodal data, some researchers have prioritized modalities used for 
communication (e.g., text, emoticon, audio, video) over temporality of the talk (see Dooly & Hauck, 
2012). 
One of the more predominant formats used by transcribers is the list format whereby time unfolds line by 
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 178 
line representing either successive or simultaneous relations (Mondada, 2007). Gibson (2014) uses the list 
format, prioritizing the audio mode and inserts numbers in brackets for text chat and other action 
sequences, such as appearance of typing icon. These are then listed below the excerpt. Messina Dahlberg 
and Bagga-Gupta also adapted the list format in their 2014 study. Their unit of analysis included the 
interactional turns (common to CA) as well as the synchronous use of a range of language varieties and 
modalities negotiated by the participants. Moreover, their adapted CA transcription conventions took into 
account multimodality with the use of screen captures and figures, with the use of different font styles 
(bold, italics, or quotation marks) to highlight the language varieties in play, and by making available the 
written language-in-use. Nonetheless, it must be noted that these procedures, while capturing important 
details for analysis, can render the transcripts highly complex, and not immediately understandable, 
particularly to the untrained eye.2 
Several analysts have adopted the use of the tabular format (Bezemer & Mavers, 2011; Lamy, 2012; 
Satar, 2013; Sauro, 2004). The tabular format is commonly used with different columns for each of the 
different communication modes. This format “constructs temporality on a vertical axis and modal 
separation horizontally. This provides an impression of how the meanings made unfold synchronously 
and diachronically, and how they map onto each other” (Bezemer & Mavers, 2011, p. 202). However, 
whichever element is presented in the left-most column of the table may inevitably be interpreted as 
intentionally fronting that particular feature (e.g., the gestural mode vs. the speech mode) if we follow the 
reasoning that Western cultures attend first to the left-hand side of the page (see Bezemer & Mavers, 
2011; Dooly & Hauck, 2012; Thibault, 2000). 
Lamy (2012) uses a tabular format with the identity of the speaker in the first column on the left, followed 
by turn number, time, audio-transcript, and text chat. Sequentiality can be vertical and horizontal across 
the columns as a single conversation can occur across modes, parallel conversations can occur in different 
modes, and multiple conversations can cross the different modes. Satar (2013) also uses a similar tabular 
format, interspersed with screenshots of the video screen. 
For the working transcript in this study, a tabular format was selected following Lamy (2012), with 
speakers arranged in rows in a table and modes in columns, as in Figure 8. It is important to acknowledge 
that spatial and temporal representations are not neutral, but heavily influenced by cultural dimensions. In 
European literacy cultures, as transcription theorists such as Ochs (1979) have pointed out, ideas are 
encoded from top to bottom and from left to right (see also Thibault, 2000). Western readers prioritize 
leftness and hence would look to the left for the inception of a statement or entire discourse. We tend to 
forget however, that this representation is not universal, nor is it neutral, and that it can influence our 
interpretations of transcripts. For transparency, decisions on how the transcript is formatted can be made 
explicit. In our study for instance, we made notes for the visual mode in a column and screenshots were 
used when necessary, but outside of the table. 
Definition of Turns and Representation of Silence 
Almost immediately the issue of how to define turn became apparent when looking at the simultaneous 
multimodal data. Would the text chat or the spoken interaction define the turns? Since the main mode of 
communication was the oral mode, it was decided that the oral mode would be represented as the 
dominant mode in the table and that rows would be defined on the basis of speaker turns rather than text 
chat turns (despite the fact that the text chat was defined as the starting point for the analysis). 
Accordingly, the audio column appeared to the left of the text chat column and to the right of the 
speaker’s name. The notes on actions occurring on the video screen were to the right of the text chat, as in 
Figure 8Error! Reference source not found.. A single speaker turn could include several turns of text 
chat or none. 
Related to the issue of turns was the representation of silence, which has not been addressed in recent 
studies on multimodal communication. If we look at CA (Sacks et al., 1974), human turn-taking is viewed 
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 179 
as so precise that speakers tend to avoid gaps, overlaps, and silences. The mediation of technology in 
online interations, however, has a major impact on turn-taking mechanisms (Gibson, 2014). The online 
interactions in the current study included many silences, some of which lasted well over one minute. 
Understanding the meaning of silence in the interactions, as well as the impact of silence on the 
interaction, became an area of interest as the researchers engaged in the process of transcription. As the 
working transcription developed, the way silences were transcribed gradually became more complex as 
we found that that there were different types of silence and that these needed to be taken into account, at 
least in the parts which were subject to close analysis. At times there was a technical silence at the end of 
a speaker turn before the speaker released the floor by clicking on the talk button, in which case the 
silence was included in brackets at the end of the speaker turn (see Turn 209 in Figure 8). At times 
somebody had the floor but was not aware of this and did not speak, in which case their name was 
nonetheless inserted in the speaker column as it meant nobody else could take the floor (see Turn 210). 
Silences between turns were given their own rows, that is the equivalence of turns in the transcription 
table, as a visual representation of their significance and to allow for further analysis (see Turn 211). In 
these cases, silence could be an indication of participants’ reluctance to speak or even resistance to being 
cast into certain identity categories, as we will see in the discussion of the extract. However, silence in the 
audio mode did not necessarily entail silence in the other modes, as text chat could be taking place when 
there was silence in the oral mode, as in Turn 211. 
If we look at Figure 8Error! Reference source not found., which is a screenshot of the working 
multimodal transcript of part of Session 1, we see how this transcript can help us acquire a greater 
understanding of the interaction and the interplay between the various modes as well as the emergence of 
identities through the interaction. Ranà, as part of her situated identity of facilitator, tried to set up a game 
through the oral mode (Turn 209). Her spoken turn is followed by a long technical silence when Jessica 
has the floor but is not talking (Turn 210). Ranà then gives further brief instructions through text chat to 
write seven aspects of their identity, but as in Turn 209, her instructions are incomplete. In the long 
silence which ensues (almost 3 minutes) in Turn 211, Alef tries to initiate interaction on a new topic 
through the text chat, aligning to the situated identity of participant–initiator of interaction, also making 
relevant his own identity as a Tunisian youth with an interest in political affairs as he writes that he is 
going to meet Hillary Clinton. 
The unfolding of the text chat was slow. There were long, silent pauses after Alef’s statements, 
suggesting that he was expecting a response from the co-participants each time he typed a line of text, but 
two minutes passed before there was a reaction from Thamena, who oriented to Alef’s use of the text 
mode, followed by Mohammed and then Fadela. When Alef wrote that he had heard that nobody in Egypt 
wanted to meet Hillary Clinton, Mohammed and Ranà both indexed their Egyptian identities through the 
text chat in their responses to Alef, Ranà stepping out of the institutional facilitator identity and making 
relevant her Egyptian identity. Alef then cast Jack into the category of informed American citizen with an 
understanding of US foreign policy as he emphatically called on Jack (using capital letters) to explain 
Clinton’s motives for going to Tunisia and Egypt. After nearly 20 seconds of silence Jack responded 
through the oral mode. This long silence before taking the floor and the hesitation, false starts, 
disclaimers, and humour that marked Jack’s turn as he made excuses for his lack of knowledge on recent 
events could be seen to index his identity as an uninformed American or his reluctance to express an 
opinion on the issue with a group of people he was not yet familiar with (this was the first of seven online 
meetings). 
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 180 
 
Figure 8. Working multimodal transcript of Session 1 Turns 209–214. 
What was deemed relevant in the extract from the video mode (annotated in the right hand column) were 
the appearance and disappearance of the facilitators and participants and their attempts to take the floor. 
These disappearances suggest that technical difficulties were occurring at this point of the interaction and 
may also account for the silences. Transmodality was indicated in the transcript through the use of arrows 
which indicated how a topic was communicated through different modes by a particular speaker—in the 
case of Figure 8, Ranà. 
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 181 
The transcript of this short extract from the first session illustrates the complex interplay between the 
modes of communication and the importance of representing time and silence. The long silences may 
reflect technical problems, lack of familiarity of the participants with this new online space and the 
multiple modes of communication, or a lack of familiarity with one another and the conventions for 
interaction (i.e., their novice identities). Furthermore, the unclear instructions from Ranà and her crossing 
of modes may have fostered uncertainty as to whether participants needed to orient to her instructions or 
follow Alef’s lead. The silences may also suggest deletions (Smith & Sauro, 2009), with participants 
writing in the text chat but then deleting, though there is no way of knowing—the software did not have 
foreshadowing (Gibson, 2014), or indication that somebody was typing. This online environment was 
quite different from face-to-face settings and indeed many other online environments, and the rules or 
conventions for interaction were being established through their interactions, with the support of the more 
expert facilitators. Arguably, without the adaptation of this new format for transcription the signficance of 
these long silences may not have been revealed. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
By describing the process and discussing the challenges encountered in the transcription of multimodal 
data in a research case study that adopted discourse-centred online ethnography and social linguistic 
mulitmodal analysis as its methodological points of departure, we have sought to raise awareness of the 
complexity of this endeavour. We have highlighted the need to recognise the subjectivity of the 
transcription process which can indeed build on the work of other researchers, but which should also 
acknowledge the partiality of transcription in terms of what is focused on in the different research studies; 
the affordances that the communication modes offer; and the sociocultural preferences in how we prepare, 
read, and interpret transcripts. We have taken examples from a wider study that looks at identity as 
constituted in the multimodal interaction in the described platform. It is clear that the methodological 
issues discussed concerning the transcription of online data must be carefully considered because the 
mediation through technology does have an impact on the way in which these identities are constructed 
(e.g., affordances and constraints). We argue that the relationship between technology and 
communication, the medium and the message, should be a key issue in the discussion and research of 
online interactions with respect to language and intercultural learning. In order to carry out a 
comprehensive analytical approach, some of the challenges described here should first be acknowledged. 
The aim of this study was not to offer an attempt at prescribing solutions or frameworks for the 
transcription of complex, multimodal data. In seeking to explain and justify the decisions made in the 
process of transcribing multimodal data for this case study which focused on one construct in language 
learning (identity), we hope to highlight how we can try to be reflexive and critical in our research 
practices, increasing the transparency and accountability of our work and opening it up for discussion 
with others. 
NOTES 
1. To watch sample sessions in progress click on the different files available. 
2. In a more recent study, Messina Dahlberg and Bagga-Gupta (2016) have adopted the tabular format. 
 
  
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 182 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This study was partially funded by the KONECT (Knowledge for Network-based Education, Cognition & 
Teaching) project and financed by the Ministerio de Economia y Competitividad: Proyectos I+D del 
Programa Estatal de Fomento de la Investigación Científica y Técnica de Excelencia (EDU2013-43932-
P); 2014–2018. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Dr. Melinda Dooly holds a Serra Húnter fellowship as teacher and researcher at the Education Faculty of 
the Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona where she teaches English as a Foreign Language Methodology 
and research methods courses. Her principal research addresses technology-enhanced project-based 
language learning in teacher preparation. Her current research interest is project-based telecollaborative 
language learning and very young learners. 
E-mail: melindaann.dooly@uab.cat 
Francesca Helm is an English language teacher and researcher at the University of Padova in Italy and 
recently completed a PhD at the Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona under the supervision of Melinda 
Dooly. Her research interests are computer-mediated collaboration, telecollaboration, intercultural 
dialogue, critical approaches to technology and learning, internationalization in higher education and 
English medium instruction. 
E-mail: francesca.helm@unipd.it 
 
REFERENCES 
Anderson, J. F., Beard, F. K., & Walther, J. B. (2010). Turn-taking and the local management of 
conversation in a highly simultaneous computer-mediated communication system. Language@Internet, 7, 
Article 7. Retrieved from http://www.languageatinternet.org/articles/2010/2804 
Androutsopoulos, J. (2007). Style online: Doing hip-hop on the German-speaking web. In P. Auer (Ed.), 
Style and social identities: Alternative approaches to linguistic heterogeneity (pp. 279–317). Berlin, 
Germany: de Gruyter. 
Androutsopoulos, J. (2008). Potentials and limitations of discourse-centred online ethnography. 
Language@Internet, 5, Article 8. Retrieved from http://www.languageatinternet.org/articles/2008/1610 
Baldry, A., & Thibault, P. J. (2006/2010). Multimodal transcription and text analysis. London, UK: 
Equinox Publishing. 
Bali, M. (2014). Why doesn’t this feel empowering? The challenges of web-based intercultural dialogue. 
Teaching in Higher Education, 19(2), 208–215. 
Bezemer, J., & Jewitt, C. (2010). Multimodal analysis. In L. Litosseliti (Ed.), Research methods in 
linguistics (pp. 180–197). London, UK: Continuum. 
Bezemer, J., & Mavers, B. (2011). Multimodal transcription as academic practice: A social semiotic 
perspective. International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 14(3), 191–206. 
Block, D. (2007/2014). Second language identities. London, UK: Continuum. 
Bucholtz, M., & Hall, K. (2005). Identity and interaction: A socio-cultural linguistic approach. Discourse 
Studies, 7(4–5), 585–614. 
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 183 
Chen, H. I. (2013). Identity practices of multilingual writers in social networking spaces. Language 
Learning & Technology, 17(2), 143–170. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/chen.pdf 
Dooly, M. (2009). Doing diversity: Teachers’ construction of classroom reality. Bern, Switzerland: Peter 
Lang. 
Dooly, M., & Hauck, M. (2012). Researching multimodal communicative competence in video and audio 
telecollaborative encounters. In M. Dooly & R. O’Dowd (Eds.), Researching online foreign language 
interaction and exchange: Theories, methods, and challenges (pp. 135–161). Bern, Switzerland: Peter 
Lang. 
Dooly, M., & Sadler, R. (2016). Becoming little scientists: Technology-enhanced project-based language 
learning. Language Learning & Technology, 20(1), 54–78. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/doolysadler.pdf 
Gee, E. H., & Lee, Y. N. (2016). From age and gender to identity in technology-mediated language 
learning. In F. Farr & L. Murray (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of language learning and technology 
(pp. 160–172). Abingdon, UK: Routledge. 
Georgalou, M. (2016). ‘I make the rules on my wall’: Privacy and identity management practices on 
Facebook. Discourse & Communication, 10(1), 40–64. 
Gibson, W. J. (2014). Sequential order in multimodal discourse: Talk and text in online educational 
interaction. Discourse & Communication, 8(1), 63–83. 
Guichon, N., & Cohen, C. (2016). Multimodality and CALL. In F. Farr & L. Murray (Eds.), The Routledge 
handbook of language learning and technology (pp. 509–521). Abingdon, UK: Routledge. 
Guichon, N., & Wigham, C. R. (2016). A semiotic perspective on webconferencing supported language 
teaching. ReCALL, 28(1), 62–82. 
Guth, S., & Helm, F. (Eds.). (2010). Telecollaboration 2.0. Language, literacies, and intercultural 
learning in the 21st century. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Hamel, M.-J., & Séror, J. (2016). Video screen capture to document and scaffold the L2 writing process. 
In C. Caws & M.-J. Hamel (Eds.), Language-learner computer interactions: Theory, methodology, and 
applications (pp. 137–162). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Helm, F. (2013). A dialogic model for telecollaboration. Bellaterra Journal of Teaching & Learning 
Language & Literature, 6(2), 28–48. Retrieved from http://revistes.uab.cat/jtl3/article/view/522/571 
Helm, F. (2014). Developing digital literacies through virtual exchange. eLearning Papers, 38, 1–10. 
Retrieved from http://www.openeducationeuropa.eu/en/article/Developing-digital-literacies-through-
virtual-exchange 
Herring, S. (2001). Computer-mediated discourse. In D. Tannen, D. Schiffrin, & H. Hamilton (Eds.), 
Handbook of discourse analysis (pp. 612–634). Oxford, UK: Blackwell. 
Herring, S. (2007). A faceted classification scheme for computer-mediated discourse. 
Language@Internet, 4, Article 1. Retrieved from http://www.languageatinternet.org/articles/2007/761 
Herring, S. (2015). New frontiers in interactive multimodal communication. In A. Georgapoulou & T. 
Spilloti (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of language and digital communication (pp. 398–402). London, 
UK: Routledge. 
Jefferson, G. (1984). Transcription notation. In J. Atkinson & J. Heritage (Eds.), Structures of social 
interaction (pp. 191–222). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Jewitt, C., Bezemer, J., & O’Halloran, K. (2016). Introducing multimodality. Abingdon, UK: Routledge. 
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 184 
Kern, R. (2014). Technology as pharmakon: The promise and perils of the internet for foreign language 
education. Modern Language Journal, 98(1), 340–357. 
Kern, R. (2015). Language, Literacy, and Technology. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Klimanova, L., & Dembovskaya, S. (2013). L2 identity, discourse, and social networking in Russian. 
Language Learning & Technology, 17(1), 69–88. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2013/klimanovadembovskaya.pdf 
Kress, G. (2009). Multimodality: A social semiotic approach to communication. London, UK: Routledge. 
Lamy, M.-N. (2012). Personal learning environments: Concept or technology? Click if you want to speak: 
Reframing CA for research into multimodal conversations in online learning. International Journal of 
Virtual and Personal Learning Environments, 3(1), 1–18. 
Malinowski, D., & Kramsch, C. (2014). The ambiguous world of heteroglossic computer-mediated 
language learning. In A. Blackledge & A. Creese (Eds.), Heteroglossia as practice and pedagogy (pp. 
155–178). Berlin, Germany: Springer. 
McKinney, C., & Norton, B. (2008). Identity in language and literacy education. In B. Spolsky & F. Hult 
(Eds.), The handbook of educational linguistics (pp. 192–205). Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
Messina Dahlberg, G., & Bagga-Gupta, S. (2014). Understanding glocal learning spaces: An empirical 
study of languaging and transmigrant positions in the virtual classroom. Learning, Media, and 
Technology, 39(4), 468–487. 
Messina Dahlberg, G., & Bagga-Gupta, S. (2016). Mapping languaging in digital spaces: Literacy 
practices at borderlands. Language Learning & Technology, 20(3), 80–106. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/messinadahlbergbagga-gupta.pdf 
Mondada, L. (2007). Commentary: Transcript variations and the indexicality of transcribing practices. 
Discourse Studies, 9(6), 801–821. 
Norton, B. (2000/2013). Identity and language learning: Gender, ethnicity and educational change. 
Harlow, UK: Longman. 
Norton, B., & Toohey, K. (2002). Identity and language learning. In R. B. Kaplan (Ed.), The Oxford 
handbook of applied linguistics (pp. 115–123). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
Norton, B., & Toohey, K. (2011). Identity, language learning, and social change. Language Teaching, 
44(4), 412–446. 
Norton Peirce, B. (1995). Social identity, investment, and language learning. TESOL Quarterly, 29(1), 
9–31. 
Ochs, E. (1979). Transcription as theory. In E. Ochs & B. B. Schiefelin (Eds.), Developmental pragmatics 
(pp. 43–72). New York, NY: Academic Press. 
Pavlenko, A., & Blackledge, A. (Eds.) (2004). Negotiation of identities in multilingual contexts. 
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Ricento, T. (2005). Considerations of identity in L2 learning. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Handbook of research 
on second language teaching and learning (pp. 895–911). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-
taking for conversation. Language, 50(4), 696–735. 
Satar, H. M. (2013). Multimodal language learner interactions via desktop videoconferencing within a 
framework of social presence: Gaze. ReCALL, 25(1), 122–142. 
Francesca Helm and Melinda Dooly Challenges in Transcribing Multimodal Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 185 
Sauro, S. (2004). Cyberdiscursive tug-of-war: Learner repositioning in a multimodal CMC environment. 
Working Papers in Educational Linguistics, 19(2), 55–72. 
Sauro, S. (2009). Strategic use of modality during synchronous CMC. CALICO Journal, 27(1), 101–117. 
Schreiber, B. R. (2015). “I am what I am”: Multilingual identity and digital translanguaging. Language 
Learning & Technology, 19(3), 69–87. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2015/schreiber.pdf 
Smith, B. (2008). Methodological hurdles in capturing SCMC data: The case of missing self-repair. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(1), 85–103. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/smith/default.html 
Smith, B., & Sauro, S. (2009). Interruptions in chat. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 22(3), 229–
247. 
Telles, J. (2009). Do we really need a webcam? The uses that foreign language students make out of 
webcam images during Teletandem sessions. Letras & Letras, Uberlàndia, 25(2), 65–79. 
ten Have, P. (2002). Reflections on transcription. Cahiers de Praxématique, 39, 21–43. Retrieved from 
http://praxematique.revues.org/pdf/1833 
Thibault, P. (2000). The multimodal transcription of a television advertisement: Theory and practice. In 
A. Baldry (Ed.), Multimodality and multimediality in the distance learning age (pp. 311–385). 
Campobasso, Italy: Palladino Editore. 
Thorne, S. L., Sauro, S., & Smith, B. (2015). Technologies, identities, and expressive activity. Annual 
Review of Applied Linguistics, 35, 215–233. 
Tudini, V. (2010). Online second language acquisition: A conversation analysis of online chat. London, 
UK: Continuum. 
Zimmerman, D. H. (1998). Discoursal identities and social identities. In C. Antaki & S. Widdicombe 
(Eds.), Identities in talk (pp. 87–106). London, UK: Sage. 
