Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
June 2017, Volume 21, Issue 2 
pp. 73–95 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2017 Richmond Dzekoe 
 
 
Computer-based multimodal composing activities, 
self-revision, and L2 acquisition through writing 
Richmond Dzekoe, Miami University, Oxford Ohio 
Abstract 
This study investigated how 22 advanced-low proficiency ESL students used computer-based multimodal 
composing activities (CBMCAs) to facilitate self-revision and learn English through academic writing in 
the USA. The CBMCAs involved a combination of writing, listening, visual analysis, and speaking activities. 
The research was framed within an integrated theoretical framework of multimodality, the noticing 
hypothesis, and the multi-dimensional model of revision. Data include surveys, students’ revision history, 
online multimodal posters, reflections, screen recordings of listening activities, stimulated recall 
interviews, final written drafts, and scores on those drafts. Data collection and analysis followed a 
descriptive case study design with embedded quantitative data. Findings indicate that CBMCAs helped 
students discover specific rhetorical and linguistic elements that they used to revise their written drafts. In 
addition, students reported that the activities helped them develop language and voice to convey ideas that 
they were struggling to express using the written mode alone. Contrary to findings in most previous 
research, the students did more content-level than surface-level revisions. Also, there was a significant 
correlation between total frequency of revision and text quality. The practical and theoretical implications 
of these findings for L2 writing pedagogy and research are discussed. 
Keywords: Revision, L2 Writing, Multimodality, Online, L2 Acquisition, L2 Composition 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English 
APA Citation: Dzekoe, R. (2017). Computer-based multimodal composing activities, self-revision, and L2 
acquisition through writing. Language Learning & Technology, 21(2), 73–95. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2017/dzekoe.pdf 
Introduction 
Research in second language acquisition (SLA) and computer assisted language learning (CALL) shows 
that successful language learning requires a co-constructed process of communication skills (Hafner, Chik, 
& Jones, 2015; Jeon-Ellis, Debski, & Wigglesworth, 2005) and that “languages are best learned by a 
combination of talking, hearing, reading, and writing” (Magnan, 2007, p. 153). Even though some studies 
have shed light on the role of individual skills in L2 development, not much research exists on how the 
combination of these skills in language learning activities facilitates L2 acquisition (Barkaoui, 2007; 
Nishino & Atkinson, 2015). Some L2 writing studies have called for more research on how integration of 
other skills might facilitate language learning through writing (Leki, Cumming, & Silva, 2008; Warschauer, 
2000, Wijaya, 2006). 
Most previous research on multimodal composition in L2 has turned to focus on how to integrate different 
modes in projects, such as digital storytelling and infographics. No study known to the author at the time 
of writing this paper focuses on how transfer among different modes aids L2 acquisition through writing. 
This study complements existing research because of its special focus on how transfer among oral, written, 
and visual modes might help L2 students notice linguistic and rhetorical features that need revision in their 
compositions. The study sought to answer one question: To what extent do revisions prompted by 
computer-based multimodal composing activities (CBMCAs) facilitate advanced-low ESL writer’s ability 
to notice gaps in their written drafts and improve the quality of their writings? Findings from the study 
74 Language Learning & Technology 
 
contribute to L2 research and pedagogy by providing empirical evidence on the potential of and the 
challenges associated with using CBMCAs as procedural support to help ESL writers learn language 
through writing. An integrated theoretical framework, combining perspectives from multimodality (Kress 
& van Leeuwen, 2001), the noticing hypothesis (Schmidt, 1990), and the multi-dimensional model of 
revision (Stevenson, Schoonen, & Glopper, 2006), informed the design of the study. 
Literature Review 
Multimodality: Language as a Semiotic Mode 
As a theory, multimodality emphasizes the interconnection among representation, meaning making, and 
communication as distinct but interrelated processes (Kress, 2010). In second language education, 
multimodality was adopted by the New London Group (1995) to describe the process of integrating 
different semiotic resources such as written or verbal text, images, and sounds to make and represent 
meaning. In this study, multimodality refers to the “use of several semiotic modes in the design of a semiotic 
product or event,” and modes are defined as “ways of representing information or the semiotic channels we 
use to compose a text” (Kress & van Leeuwen, 2001, pp. 20–22). 
Language is one of several modes that people bring together in a multimodal ensemble (Finnegan, 2002). 
Advocates of multimodal approaches to teaching and learning argue that in meaning making, 
representation, and communication, language and other non-linguistic modes are equally important. This 
view of equating non-linguistic modes to language is perhaps the most strongly contested assumption of 
multimodality. Some have interpreted the place of language in multimodality “as an attempt to side-line 
language” (Jewitt, 2009, p. 2). However, far from sidelining language, multimodality seeks to highlight 
how language and other modes interact and sustain each other in communication (Shipka, 2005). Each 
semiotic mode has a distinct affordance, and the integration of different modes provides an orchestration 
of meaning in a given context of communication (Jewitt, 2009). 
Multimodal Composing as Procedural Support 
This study adopts two perspectives from multimodality: writing as design (Hyland, 2009; Kern, 2000), and 
intersemiotic complementarity, which is the collaboration between different semiotic modes “to produce a 
coherent multimodal text” (Royce, 2002, p. 193). In multimodal composing, a writer is a designer (Kern, 
2000). Writing goes beyond the written text. It is an art in which “writers design and redesign all the modes 
of representation they draw upon in the production of multimodal texts in order to convey their intended 
meanings” (Shin & Cimasko, 2008, p. 377). It is “assembling text and images in new visual designs, and 
writers often need to understand the specific ways of configuring the world which different modes offer” 
(Hyland, 2009, p. 59). 
A number of studies have reported that integrating non-linguistic modes may help reinforce, clarify, 
compensate for, or reveal contradictions in students’ writing (Hafner, 2013; McKee, 2006; Nelson, 2006; 
Salbego, Heberle, & Soares da Silva Balen, 2015; Yang, 2012). Shin and Cimasko (2008) observe that 
“multimodal approaches to composition provide writers who are having difficulty in using language, 
including those writers for whom English is a second language (ESL), with powerful tools for sharing 
knowledge and for self-expression” (p. 377). Lee (1994) found that the use of pictures helped students to 
recall past experiences, reduce anxiety, activate vocabulary they had learned, generate more ideas for their 
papers, and revise written drafts in ways that led to an overall improvement in writing proficiency. The 
current study sheds some light on the potential of multimodal activities to help students notice linguistic 
and rhetorical issues in their writing and improve their written communication. 
Noticing in L2 Writing 
In addition to multimodality, the study used perspectives from the noticing hypothesis that learners’ 
awareness of a mismatch between their input and output is necessary for acquisition of a second language 
(Schmidt, 1990). The use of noticing hypothesis in this study rests on the assumption that taking steps to 
Richmond Dzekoe 75 
 
revise one’s output to make it more intelligible can occur not only in speaking but also in writing (Cresswell, 
2000; Hanaoka, 2007; Leow, 2000; Swain & Lapkin, 1995; Williams, 2012). Previous studies mostly used 
this theory to investigate how learners notice problems with lexical and grammatical forms in their drafts 
(Cumming, 1990; Cumming & So 1996; Izumi, 2002). However, the application of the noticing hypothesis 
in this study is novel. It goes beyond focusing on lexical and grammatical forms to include how students 
notice metalinguistic and rhetorical features at the macro level of their writing. Specifically, this theory 
helped to understand how CBMCAs triggered internal revision and enabled students to notice issues with 
language, content, and organization of their academic papers. 
Multi-Dimensional Model of Revision 
Another theoretical perspective adopted in this study is the multi-dimensional model of revision (Stevenson 
et al., 2006), which focuses on revision in a computer-based composition and combines ideas from the 
traditional, recursive, and cognitive models of revision. Unlike the linear model which sees revision as “a 
separate stage at the end of the process—a stage that comes after the completion of a first or second draft 
and one that is temporally distinct from the prewriting and writing stages of the process” (Sommers, 1980, 
p. 378), the multi-dimensional model explains revision in terms of location and orientation. Regarding 
location, revision is seen as a recursive activity that could be embedded at any stage of the composing 
process: before, during, and after transcription. In orientation, revision involves internal and external 
changes that a writer makes. Internal revision might include all the mental changes that take place before a 
writer begins a draft (pre-textual revision). For instance, a writer might think about four different topics 
before deciding on one that gets transcribed into a written text. External revision is the observable changes 
at the point of inscription. In this model, revision is both a mental and physically observable activity. Based 
on this understanding, revision is defined in this study as the ongoing mental and physical changes to a text, 
changes that may be error-triggered or non-error-triggered. This way of understanding revision allows for 
collecting data on both the mental processes (noticing) and the textual changes that occur as students 
compose their essays. 
Methodology 
Descriptive Case Study 
This descriptive case study with embedded quantitative data was conducted in an undergraduate ESL 
writing (16 -week, 3-credit) classroom at a North-American university. There were 22 students in the class. 
This class was different from the regular English classes at the university because of its special focus on 
multimodal composition. All assignments in the class required integration of written and visual modes (still 
images), as well as oral presentations and listening activities meant to facilitate students’ revision. The class 
met for 1 hr 30 min, twice per week. In addition to the regular class meeting times and 2-hour office hours, 
there were four individual student–teacher conferences spread over the 16 weeks. 
Data Collection 
Data came from surveys and students’ revision history (content-level revisions, which involved revisions 
that were meaning-changing, e.g., She has two cats became She has three cats; and surface-level revisions, 
which involved revisions that were meaning-preserving, e.g., The man in a red shirt is my father became 
My father is the man who is wearing a red shirt). Other data came from online posters, reflections, listening 
activities, stimulated recall interviews, final written drafts, and scores on those drafts. Although both sets 
of data (qualitative and quantitative) from all participants were used to determine frequency and type of 
revision (surface or content level), only the data from six focal students were used for in-depth qualitative 
analysis. Three main types of software were used for the CBMCA: Google Docs, Glogster, and 
NaturalReader. As seen in Figure 1, Glogster is an online multi-media site for educators that allows users 
to create and share interactive posters by integrating different modes—such as written text, images, audio, 
video, and graphics. 
76 Language Learning & Technology 
 
NaturalReader is a text-to-speech (TTS) program that allows “playback of printed text as spoken words” 
(Atkinson & Greches, 2003, p. 178). As the text is being spoken, users may control the speed of the voice, 
pause the playback, or stop the speech and correct any errors they detect in the written text. Google Docs 
is an online word processor that allows users to create, store, and share documents. Google Docs can be 
used for online collaboration in real time or asynchronously. It also records a revision history of each 
document. These revision histories provided useful data for understanding how students’ drafts developed 
throughout the process of composition. 
Participants 
22 ESL learners took part in the study. They included 14 Chinese, 3 Malaysian, 1 Sri Lankan, 2 South 
Korean, and 1 Nepalese students. 16 of the participants had taken the TOEFL iBT (Test of English as a 
Foreign Language), and their scores ranged between 72 and 95. Six had taken the IELTS (International 
English Language Testing System) exam and reported scoring within a range of 6.0–6.5. Based on the 
interpretation of their TOEFL, IELTS, and EPT (the university’s English placement test) scores, the 
university considered these students advanced-low writers. 
Participants were divided into three groups based on how they used the poster activity in the composing 
process during the semester. Group A used it for both pre-writing and point-of-writing revisions. Group B 
used it mainly for point-of-writing revision, and Group C used it mainly as a pre-writing activity. The 
division of the class into groups is in line with the embedded case study approach, which “occurs when, 
within a single case, attention is also given to a subunit or subunits” (Yin, 2009, p. 50). Six main focal 
students were selected for in-depth analysis—two from each group. They were given the following 
pseudonyms: Shirley and Lenard represented Group A; Felicity and Tonia, Group B; and Ryan and 
Anderson, Group C. These students were selected because their use of the poster activity was representative 
of other participants in their respective group. 
Procedure 
The study lasted for 16 weeks. After signing the consent form, students completed the pre-survey. This was 
analyzed to make decisions about learner training—a crucial step for the success of any CALL activity 
(Hubbard, 2004). Three 50-minute learner trainings were provided in the computer lab. The first session 
focused on introducing students to Google Docs. The second session focused on helping students create 
online posters using Glogster; and the third session trained students on how to use NaturalReader. There 
was also explicit training on integration of written and visual texts in acdemic writing. Students used 
Microsoft Word to practice how to provide captions for visuals. They also learned the principle of ensuring 
that visuals are appropriate for their target audience, placed where readers can easily locate them, and are 
referenced in the written text. 
 
Figure 1. Glogster 
Richmond Dzekoe 77 
 
Data Collection 
Data collection began in the second week as students started the first expository essay, Assignment 1, which 
required students to write about their role models and the impact that the role models had on their lives. 
This was considered baseline data and students used only the written mode to complete this assignment in 
Google Docs. They used CBMCAs for Assignments 2, 3, and 4. In Assignemnt 2, students explored an 
issue of their choice and wrote a 650-word essay. In Assignment 3, they chose an artwork or a place on 
campus, analyzed it, and wrote a 700-word essay focusing on the meaning their particular artwork has for 
people on campus. Assignment 4 asked students to choose one controversial issue that affected the 
university community or the larger society and compose a 700-word argumentative essay on the issue. 
Students were asked to follow six steps in completing CBMCAs. First, they composed a written draft using 
Google Docs. Second, they created an online digital poster using Glogster and integrated as many modes 
as they wanted. Third, they wrote a reflection on how composing the poster helped them notice gaps in their 
written drafts and generate ideas to fill those gaps. Fourth, students continued the revision of their written 
texts in Google Docs. Fifth, they performed a listening activity in which they used NaturalReader to revise 
for style and grammar. They copied and pasted their written text into the software and listened to their texts 
read aloud by the program. As they noticed an error, they either paused and corrected it or made notes about 
the need for revision. Sixth, they integrated visuals (still images) into their written texts in class and wrote 
responses to the following questions: Why did I choose this visual? What is the main message in this visual? 
What information does the visual give that is not already in the written draft? How does the message in the 
visual help me build on the ideas in the written draft? Table 1 explains the steps involved in CBMCA. 
As part of the multimodal composing activity, students were guided to reflect on how CBMCAs helped 
them notice gaps in their work and make content- and surface-level revisions. The reflection focused on 
helping students identify linguistic and rhetorical choices they made in creating the online posters and how 
those choices helped them notice features that needed attention in their written texts. As shown in Appendix 
A, the guide contained 16 questions that were divided into substance, language and style, or organization. 
The questions in the substance section were meant to help participants think about their theses, details, 
audiences, purposes, and messages contained in the other semiotic modes (visual, recorded voice, and 
video) that were not already expressed in the written text. Students also reflected on how the message and 
ideas in their posters helped improve their written draft. The last five questions focused on organization of 
ideas and materials in the poster, as well as how the arrangement helped organize ideas in the essay. 
Providing this kind of guidance for students during their reflection was necessary, because, left unguided, 
students who lack effective metacognitive skills could focus on too many issues in their reflection, which 
could make data analysis very difficult (Gass & Mackey, 2007). 
In addition to guiding students to reflect on the poster activity, the researcher met with each participant on 
four occasions for stimulated recall. Each meeting lasted for approximately 40 mins. In all, there were 3,520 
mins (59 hours) of interviews with the participants. During the stimulated recall, students were shown their 
posters as well as the drafts they wrote immediately after making the poster. They were then asked to 
comment on how they developed or even changed their ideas on the topic as they composed the poster. 
Students were also shown their final multimodal text and were asked to comment on decisions they made 
while integrating the visuals as well as how that facilitated their revision. 
Since the researcher was also the instructor of the class, some measures were taken to ensure credibility 
and reliability of the findings. These included making students aware that participation in the research was 
optional and had no impact on their grades, asking other trained raters to grade students’ papers based on a 
rubric, calculating inter-rater reliability, coding data with a second coder, and calculating inter-coder 
reliability.  
78 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Table 1. Matrix for CBMCA 
Steps or Activities Rationale Semiotic Modes Technology 
Step 1: Compose alphabetic 
text 
Develop a draft Written/alphabetic  Google drive 
Step 2: Create interactive 
poster 
Focus on content-level 
revision 
Written, oral, and visual 
(still and moving images) 
Glogster 
Step 3: Write reflection Focus on noticing gaps and 
generating ideas 
Written /alphabetic Google drive  
Step 4: Continue revision of 
existing draft 
Improve ideas in existing 
draft 
Written/alphabetic Google drive 
Step 5: Listen to essay using 
TTS 
Focus on noticing grammar 
errors and improving 
organization 
Oral and written NaturalReader 
Step 6: Integrate visuals into 
final draft 
Produce a multimodal text Written and visual (still 
images) 
Google drive and 
Microsoft Word.  
Data Analysis 
Data collection and analysis occurred simultaneously. This allowed for member checking and gave 
participants the “opportunity to discuss and clarify the interpretation and contribute new or additional 
perspectives” (Baxter & Jack, 2008, p. 556) on how they used CBMCAs to facilitate revision. Data from 
students’ surveys, written drafts, online posters, screen recordings of listening activities, reflections, and 
stimulated recall interviews were downloaded and transcribed. Five codes were adapted from the multi-
dimensional model of revision (Stevenson et al., 2006). Textual changes in Google Docs were considered 
the observable behavior of noticing (Hegelheimer & Chapelle, 2000) and were coded either as surface- or 
content-level revisions, additions, deletions, substitutions, error-triggered revisions, and non-error-
triggered revisions. Inferences about noticing in the listening activity were based on observable changes 
and the notes students made to themselves that were captured in screen recordings. 
In addition to the multi-dimensional model, an open coding system (Miles & Huberman, 1994) was used. 
Tags were used to assign units of meaning to inferences made during the study. After initial parsing of the 
data, 35 codes were developed based on the open-coding system. The research design, theoretical 
framework, research questions, and codes were explained to a second coder, who held a master’s degree in 
Teaching English as a Second Language and taught ESL writing. The researcher and the second coder used 
data from two (of the six) focal students to practice the codes. After the two coders agreed on the total 
number of codes and their definitions, the codes from the open coding system were reduced to 21 and were 
added to five codes adopted from the multi-dimensional model of revision. In all, 26 codes were developed 
(see Appendix B). The second coder and the researchers coded 25% of the data from all students. The inter-
coder agreement calculated using simple percentages, was 90%. 
Inferences about the impact of CBMCAs on the revision process were made based on a comparison of the 
means (t-test) of students’ total revisions in each assignment, as well as the means of particular types of 
revision students made. Three ESL teachers graded the students’ final papers, which were multimodal texts 
that combined written texts and still images, using a rubric based on intersemiotic complementarity (Royce, 
2007). This approach to assessing multimodal texts focuses on how the integration of different modes 
presents new meanings. It uses the concept of sense relations (Halliday, 1985) to assess multimodal texts 
at two levels proposed by The New London Group and other researchers: analyzing each mode separately 
and then analyzing how they are synthesized to produce a unified multimodal text (Kress & van Leeuwen, 
2006). The rubrics also assessed the substance, organization, style, and delivery of students’ final texts (see 
Appendix C). To collect validity evidence for the rubric, an inter-rater reliability was calculated among the 
Richmond Dzekoe 79 
 
three raters. They graded 12 essays from the focal students (Assignment 2, 3, and 4) using the revised rubric. 
The inter-rater reliability (Kendall’s tau-c) among the three raters was 0.972. Finally, the correlation 
(Pearson’s) between the final text scores and the frequency of revision was calculated in order to determine 
the extent to which student’s revisions related to text quality. 
Results and Discussion 
The research sought to understand the extent to which revisions prompted by CBMCAs might facilitate 
advanced-low ESL writer’s ability to notice gaps in their written drafts and improve the quality of their 
writings. In general, the findings indicate that CBMCAs facilitated internal revision and helped students 
discover specific information, linguistic elements, and organizational structure that they used to revise their 
drafts. In addition, the activities helped students notice problems with rhetorical and linguistic features of 
their drafts, revise content and organization of ideas, and develop language and voice to convey ideas that 
they were struggling to express using the written mode alone. Further, there was a significant correlation 
between total frequency of revision and text quality. 
Participants reported that integrating multiple modes gave them the opportunity to practice their English 
and produce language in a way that they found easier than just expressing themselves through writing. 
Anderson noted the following during the stimulated recall: “I liked the thing of saying what I want to write 
as part of the poster because writing it down makes me slow because when I write I check grammar and 
think which is hard.”1 The idea that recording their thoughts in the poster helped them express themselves 
more fluently and generate ideas for their papers was mentioned by 60% of the students. In general, 
responses from the exit survey showed 91% of students agreed that making the poster was helpful for their 
writing, with 9% indicating disagreement. 82% said the poster activity helped them notice things that 
needed revision in their writing while 18% indicated that it did not facilitate their noticing. In addition, 90% 
of students said they would continue to explore the poster activity on their own to revise the content and 
organization of their papers, while 10% said they would not explore the poster activity on their own. Table 
2 presents students’ perception of the poster activity. 
Table 2. Students' Perception of the Poster Activity 
Statement Responses (N = 22) 
 1 
Strongly Agree 
2 
Agree 
3 
Disagree 
4 
Strongly Disagree 
Q5. Making a poster as part of the writing 
process was helpful to me. 
7 (32%) 13 (59%) 2 (9%) 0 (0%) 
Q6. The poster activity helped me to notice 
some things in my paper that needed to be 
done differently. 
5 (23%) 13 (59%) 4 (18%) 0 (0%) 
Q7. Depending on what type of paper I am 
writing, I may continue to explore how 
making a poster might help me develop the 
content and organization of my papers. 
9 (41%) 11 (50%) 1 (5%) 1 (5%) 
Developing Language and Organizational Structure 
Intersemiotic analysis of the poster and the written drafts of students in groups A and B shows that the same 
ideas were repeated verbatim or expressed in similar ways in the two documents. For instance, Shirley 
followed the organizational structure of the poster in developing the ideas in the written draft. As seen in 
Table 3, she discussed the failing economy, factors that caused the problem, impact of the crisis on people, 
and called for immediate action to be taken to address the issues. Some of the causes for the failing economy 
80 Language Learning & Technology 
 
that she discussed as well as the solutions she proposed in her final draft were borrowed from the video in 
her poster. 
Table 3. Intersemiotic Analysis of Shirley’s Poster and Written Draft 
Visual Elements in Poster Description Linguistic Representation 
of Ideational Meaning in 
Written Draft 
Intersemiotic 
Complementarity 
 
The US economy is 
failing 
The U.S. economic issue has 
been existed for many years 
but get more ailing (Excerpt 
from Shirley’s introduction). 
Synonymy: 
• Fail 
• No more 
ignoring or 
biggest concern 
 
The problem has 
caused unemployment, 
which is destroying the 
lives of the citizens 
and people around the 
world. 
After that, high 
unemployment rate becomes 
the biggest concern of 
American citizens. (Excerpt 
from her third paragraph). 
Linguistic 
Repetition:  
• Unemployment 
• The US 
economy 
• Ignoring 
 
This alarming situation 
can no longer be 
ignored. 
The economic issue of 
United States has become an 
economic concern in 
worldwide because the 
important role that dollar 
plays in the world economy. 
We have to do something 
about it instead of ignoring it 
like we did before (Excerpt 
from her conclusion). 
Repetition of Ideas: 
• The economy is 
failing and needs 
attention 
• Everybody is 
affected 
• We have to do 
something about 
it 
Reflections from the six focal students (see Table 4) indicate that the poster activity helped them discover 
specific information, words, phrases, and organizational structure that they used to revise their written text. 
Students in groups A and B, who used the poster for point-of-writing revisions, reported that the activity 
helped them notice and revise. However, those in group C, who used it solely as a pre-writing activity, 
found the poster activity less helpful.
Richmond Dzekoe 81 
 
Table 4. Students Guided Reflections for the First CBMCA 
Questions Participant Responses 
 Group A  Group B  Group C 
 Shirley Lenard  Tonia Felicity  Anderson Ryan 
Q7. What information 
do the images/videos 
give that is not already 
in your written draft? 
The details about 
how to fix the 
ailing economy 
The table shows the 
number of students 
who come to 
America 
 I haven't written any 
examples about the 
medicine 
advertisement. 
Serial killers' 
background 
 The audience can 
see the “real” 
problems that exist 
in today world when 
education is not 
equally distributed 
The different 
way of living 
between poor 
and rich 
Q8. Comparing your 
written draft with your 
poster, what new 
information do you 
think your poster brings 
to your audience? 
A clear and straight 
sense that the 
economy is falling 
and sick.  
The reason why 
more and more 
Chinese students 
come to America 
 It points out food, 
beauty product and 
medicine 
advertisement are 
sometimes 
untrustworthy 
More details story 
about some of the 
serial killers. 
 Audience will start 
to realize what is 
actually means by 
civilization  
I think all 
things in my 
poster is 
contain in my 
draft 
Q9. How will the ideas 
in the poster help you 
build on the ideas in 
your written draft? 
It helps me build a 
well-organized 
paper with my four 
sub-topics 
It makes the main 
idea of my passage 
more clear 
 I can write 
advertisement for 
food for one 
paragraph 
The organization of 
the ideas as well as 
the additional points 
on the video. 
 It serve as a 
brainstorm for me to 
come up with more 
ideas  
Actually, I 
don’t think the 
poster can help 
me to build the 
ideas 
Q10. What words on 
the poster convey the 
main message of the 
poster? 
How to fix the 
economy; No 
ignoring; 
unemployment; Tax 
rate 
Better, English 
Education, Less 
Expense, 
Convenience 
Transportation 
 Advertisements 
make products seem 
better than they 
really are 
Serial killers on the 
loose. Why? 
 Education for better 
civilization 
The top 
sentence 
Q16. How might the 
organization of ideas in 
your poster help you 
organize your ideas in 
the written draft? 
It will help my 
written draft with a 
better structure. 
My written draft 
followed the 
bulleted point in the 
poster 
 First, write the thesis. 
Then, explain it. And 
divide the 
advertisement into 
three aspects 
It helps me arrange 
my points better and 
it's easier for me to 
get ideas with the help 
of the images, videos 
 It gives me better 
guideline on how to 
arrange the ideas 
Helpless 
 
82 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Furthermore, Shirley’s comment from the interview shows that making the poster gave her an opportunity 
to do a two-way revision: 
Umm, for me the poster and the paper itself um they are like revising each other. Sometimes I come 
up with some good ideas for the poster and I add them to the paper and sometimes I think of 
something I can write in the paper to make the statement better and after I wrote something I will 
add some picture to the poster too. So it’s a two-way revision. 
Lenard’s perception about the poster activity was similar to that of Shirley and other students in Group A 
and Group B. He reported that the poster activity helped him organize his essays more effectively: “My 
written draft followed the bullet point in the poster….I will write each aspect in each paragraph. And the 
main message of the poster will be the thesis of my essay.” Felicity also stated: “It helps me arrange my 
points better and it’s easier for me to get ideas with the help of the images, videos and points that are broken 
down.” Intersemiotic analysis of her final draft and the poster (see Table 5) showed that the two documents 
had the same ideational meaning. 
Table 5. Intersemiotic Analysis of Felicity’s Poster and Written Draft 
Visual Elements in 
Poster 
Description Linguistic Representation of 
Ideational Meaning in Written 
Draft 
Intersemiotic 
Complementarity 
 
Images of 
serial killers 
People should be aware of the 
surrounding wherever they are.  
Linguistic 
Repetition: 
• Victim 
• Serial killers 
• Tragedy 
 
Symbol of 
death 
This is a serious matter. Synonymy: 
• Victims can be 
anyone/anybody 
can be victim 
• Serious/dangerous 
 
People of all 
ages shown 
possible 
victims 
No one should take this lightly. 
Anybody can be victim of serial 
killers.  
Repetition of Ideas: 
• Everybody can be 
a victim so we all 
need to be alert 
and help fight this 
social evil. 
 
A tragic 
murder video 
One mistake can cost them their life. 
(Excerpt from Felicity’s conclusion; 
paper 2) 
Serial killing has 
become a serious 
problem for the 
society. 
During the interviews, Felicity also indicated that the poster helped her overcome writer’s block when she 
used it as a pre-inscription activity: 
Researcher: Um, one reason for making you do the poster, listen, and add visuals to your essay is 
to help you see some things in your paper that need improvement. Do you think that is happening? 
Felicity: Um sometimes I don’t have any ideas to write and when I design the poster and I find the 
pictures and visuals and everything then I started getting the ideas of what I am going to write and 
Richmond Dzekoe 83 
 
I yeah, I think um visual is one element that helps a lot with my writing. 
Contrary to the experience of students in Group A and Group B, those in Group C—like Ryan and 
Anderson—did not see the poster activity helping them to make revisions. In his reflection, Ryan wrote the 
following: “Actually, I don’t think the poster can help me to build the ideas”. He also attributed his lack of 
interest in the poster activity to the fact that he is not a visual learner and that his challenges are with 
grammar and not rhetorical features: 
Researcher: Hello Ryan, tell me something about the poster 
Ryan: It’s fine, it’s just wastes my time…because I prefer to write a draft by words, not by a poster, 
poster, so I think it’s a waste of my time. Yeah, I don’t think it’s very helpful. Maybe I’m not a 
good visual person. I have a lot of problems about the grammar and so I focus just that. 
In general, students seemed to have benefited from the poster activity in revising their papers. However, 
other contextual factors including students’ learning styles seemed to impact their perception and use of 
this activity for revision. 
Listening Activity, Noticing, and Revision 
As in the poster activity, findings from this study show that the listening activity helped students notice 
problems with rhetorical and linguistic features of their academic texts. Students also reported that it helped 
them look at their essays from the readers’ perspective and to “see,” “hear,” and “feel” what needed 
revision. The exit-survey asked all 22 students to state their level of agreement or disagreement with the 
statement Listening to my paper being read aloud helped me to notice some things in my paper that needed 
revision. 86% of students agreed that the listening activity facilitated their noticing while 14% said the 
activity was not helpful for noticing. 
Further analysis of the screen recordings and interviews with the six focal students indicated that all of 
them, except Ryan, found the listening activity useful for noticing. Shirley indicated, during the interview 
that the activity helped her identify what “sounded weird” in her writing: “I like it very much, using it at 
times I can feel the essay, the ideas, the structure and grammar and I think it’s useful because it can tell you 
the essay is weird or does not sound correct”. Tonia also indicated that listening to her essay helped her see 
things that needed improvement: “I used NaturalReader to listen to my essay. And I can see it is abrupt in 
some places or there is no main point in the passage. Then I know how to revise it”. The picture narrative 
of Tonia’s listening activity, as seen in Table 6, affirms her comments. 
Anderson also indicated that unlike the poster activity, he found the listening activity helpful for revision 
and learning English. Specifically, he identified the organization, expression, and sentence structure of his 
paper as elements that needed improvement. The way he wrote the note, as seen in the picture story in Table 
7, also indicates that listening to his essay helped him put himself in place of his audience and perceive 
their needs more effectively: “readers cannot get what I am trying to express.” 
The following comment sums up Anderson’s general perception of the activity by the end of the semester:  
In my personal opinion, one of the problems for the international students to write the essay is to 
make sure the essay is suitable as how the native speaker writes so I think the NaturalReader, it 
gives the solution to the problem because we can listen how the native speaker speaks our paragraph 
it sounds like the native speaker is writing it. 
  
84 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Table 6. Tonia's Listening Activity and Noticing 
Tonia’s Listening Activity Description Inferences 
 
Tonia uploads her 
essay and listens to it 
using NaturalReader 
She performed the listening 
activity 
 
She makes a note on 
the need to add more 
details about the 
effects of 
advertisements 
Listening facilitated her 
noticing 
 
Tonia copies and 
pastes her note in her 
draft in Google Docs. 
Tonia used what she 
noticed to revise her paper 
Table 7. Anderson’s Listening Activity and Noticing 
Anderson’s Listening Activity Description Inferences 
 
Anderson uploads his 
draft and listens using 
NaturalReader 
He actually used 
listening as a 
revisionary activity 
 
Anderson makes a note 
to himself about the 
need to improve the 
organization, the 
expression, and the 
sentence structure.  
The activity facilitated 
his Noticing 
In general, the activity provided an opportunity for students to notice some grammar errors and other 
linguistic and rhetorical problems. However, the free version of NaturalReader was less helpful for noticing 
grammar errors, especially in the case of students with low proficiency levels in grammar. There were many 
grammar errors in students’ papers that they could not notice. 
This finding resonates with Garrison’ (2009) observation that training students to listen to their writing 
might have positive impact on revision. Not only did most students find the listening activity useful for 
noticing issues, but they also considered it one of the most effective ways of knowing how an essay might 
“sound” from a reader’s perspective. Furthermore, students reported finding this activity less stressful and 
more fun than reading the essays by themselves. Students noted that they performed the listening activity 
when they got tired or bored with writing. In all, the findings confirmed those of previous research that 
integrating listening activity into the writing process has the potential to increase students’ motivation to 
write (DiEdwardo, 2005; Garrison, 2009; Wijaya, 2006). The findings also underline the need to introduce 
Richmond Dzekoe 85 
 
learners to tools that might facilitate noticing of rhetorical and linguistic problems, such as automated 
writing assessment software that draws students’ attention to grammar problems (Li & Hegelheimer, 2013). 
Integration of Visuals in Written Text and Noticing 
Analysis of the exit-survey and interviews provided insights for making inferences about students’ views 
on integrating written and visual texts as well as how that facilitated their noticing and revision. All 22 
students stated that adding visuals to their written text made them revise their content and organization. 
Also, 95 % said they would continue to explore how the integration of visuals and written texts might help 
them communicate with their readers. Even though Ryan had indicated that he was not a visual learner, he 
commented during the final interview that integrating the visuals into his written draft was his favorite 
activity. He also stated that the visuals helped him discover language and voice that he did not have as he 
composed his drafts using only the alphabetic text: 
I think if the reader cannot get something that I want to say from my essay, I find some picture for 
the reader. Some point is difficult to just write down things and there is more to put a picture there 
into the essay, so I choose that picture. I read it and think if I maybe I can’t understand what I mean, 
so I use the picture. 
Ryan’s experience affirms the observation that integrating visuals can help students’ access meaning at 
different levels (Salbego et al., 2015). 
One possible reason for the apparent contradiction in Ryan’s attitude towards the visual activities could be 
the amount of work that the two visual activities required. Creating the poster demanded more work and 
creativity than finding images to insert into the already composed texts. 
In general, students’ interviews affirm findings in previous research that L2 writers find it difficult to 
express emotions effectively in the target language because “different languages have distinct emotion 
vocabularies and ways of expressing emotions” (Pavlenko & Driagina, 2007, p. 91). Students’ comments 
that CBMCAs help them hear, feel, and see their essays from a readers’ perspectives points to the potential 
of the integration of modes to help students develop not only rhetorical and linguistic competence, but also 
strategic competence in the target language. This affirms what has been observed in previous studies that 
using different modes might enhance the development of L2 learner’s competence (Leki et al., 2008; 
Lemke, 2009). 
Students’ interviews and survey responses further point to the strength in approaching L2 writing as a 
design process (Hyland, 2009; Kern, 2000). Some students revealed that, in certain assignments, they did 
their posters before they began a written draft. They developed some understanding of L2 composition as 
an “ensemble” in which an author does not always have to start with a written text. Rather, they can begin 
their composition in any mode and integrate other modes in the process to develop a piece of writing as a 
communicative event. Such an approach for L2 composition challenges our traditional view on what 
students’ first drafts should look like. It suggests a rethinking of what instructors require as a first draft. For 
instance, students can record their thoughts and present an audio file as their first draft instead of producing 
a written draft. 
CBMCA, Revision, and Text Quality 
Assignment 1 was used as baseline data so students did not use any CBMCAs. They did use CBMCAs in 
Assignments 2, 3, and 4. However, Assignment 2 was not used for data analysis because it was learner 
training for students to get familiar with CBMCAs. In general, the findings show that students did more 
revisions when they used CBMCAs. The means and standard deviations for students’ total revisions were 
as follows: Assignment 1 (M = 82.4, SD = 48.3), Assignment 3 (M = 157.3, SD = 41. 8), and Assignment 
4 (M = 185.9, SD = 36.5). The results of a paired sample t-test analysis shows that there was a significant 
difference in the total number of revisions that students made between Assignment 1 and Assignment 3 (t 
= -4.265, p < .001) as well as between Assignment 1 and Assignment 4 (t = -6.207, p < .000). In order to 
estimate the magnitude of the differences in the various revision histories, the effect size was calculated 
86 Language Learning & Technology 
 
using correlation coefficient (r). The correlation between Assignments 1 and 3 was -0.64 and that between 
Assignment 1 and 4 was -0.77. The descriptive statistics of the revision history (see Table 8) shows that, 
contrary to what has been reported in previous studies (Silva, 1993; Suzuki, 2008), students in this study 
made more content-level revisions than surface-level revisions. 
Table 8. Descriptive Statistics of Students’ Revision History 
 Type of Revision 
 Surface-level  Content-level  Error-triggered  Non-error-triggered 
 M SD  M SD  M SD  M SD N 
Assignment 1 29.5 31.6  61.6 37.1  13.2 15.4  78.1 43.4 13 
Assignment 2 33.7 19.6  131 46.2  11.4 14.9  151 44.3 13 
Assignment 3 41.5 16.9  153 31.2  8.4 8.3  192 41.3 13 
The disparity between the current findings and those of previous studies could be attributed to differences 
in the way revision was captured in this study and how previous studies analyzed revision. Unlike most 
previous studies (Garrison, 2009; Gaskill, 1987; Raimes, 2001), this research saw revision not as the growth 
from one draft to another, but as the record of every change that the essay went through—a developmental 
history from the beginning of the first draft to the point of submission for grading. In addition, few studies 
that have analyzed the history of students’ revision, such as Chambers (2011) and Hall (1990), have focused 
on timed essays (usually 90 mins). Unlike such timed essays, papers in this research were take-home 
assignments. Students had four weeks to complete one essay; and that might have helped them pay more 
attention to content-level revisions. 
In addition to students making more content-level revisions, the findings show two different results 
regarding total frequency of revision and text quality. The Pearson correlation coefficient for students’ 
revision and scores in Assignment 3 (r = 0.122) showed no significant correlation between total frequency 
of revision and text quality. However, there was a significant correlation (r = 0.012) in Assignment 4. The 
interviews after Assignment 3 shows that most students used the poster activity for pre-writing activities in 
order to generate ideas for the artwork they were writing about. Most of them noted that they revised their 
ideas as they were putting the poster together so they did not have to change much of the content when they 
began writing. This could have influenced the amount of revisions they did at the point-of-writing. This 
coincides with previous contradictory findings on the relationship between frequency of revision and 
overall text quality in L2 revision (Reynolds & Bonk, 1996; Stevenson et al., 2006; Yagelski; 1995) and 
confirms Sengupta’s (2000) observation that the relation between revision and text quality is problematic. 
Conclusion 
This research was designed to investigate how CBMCAs might facilitate L2 writers’ noticing and self-
revision as they composed academic papers and learned language through writing. The findings provide 
empirical evidence on how CBMCAs might help L2 writers notice linguistic and rhetorical elements in 
their writing and revise for effective communication. Integration of different modes helped students make 
more content-level related revisions and focus on personal language development as they wrote academic 
papers. The use of CBMCAs also had a positive impact on the overall quality of text that students produced. 
In addition, the use of an integrated framework, which combines multimodality, noticing, and the multi-
dimensional model of revision, provides precedence for the field of L2 research regarding how these three 
theories might work together in helping resolve the challenges L2 writers have with self-revision. This 
study also contributes to these theories by showing how the noticing hypothesis can be applied not only to 
spoken language and syntactic aspects of language, but also to the meta-linguistic and macro-level elements 
of writing such as organization of ideas. Other pedagogical and theoretical implications of the findings are 
Richmond Dzekoe 87 
 
discussed below. 
Pedagogical Implications 
Findings in this study highlight the potential of non-linguistic modes to enhance students’ ability to express 
intended meanings beyond word-based materials (Nelson, 2006) and to provide access to information that 
may not be easily available through the written mode (MacKee, 2006). Embracing multimodal composition 
in L2 classroom may help students learn the target language as they compose academic papers. However, 
using other modes to complement the written mode in meaning making requires careful and strategic 
integration. CBMCAs are effective when activities are integrated into a syllabus that is based on a 
multimodal approach to composition rather than when they are added on to a traditional writing syllabus. 
Such a syllabus calls students’ attention to writing as a communicative event and the writer as a designer, 
contains objectives for the different modes, requires students to produce multimodal texts, and emphasizes 
linguistic and rhetorical features of academic writing. Developing a multimodal syllabus for L2 writing 
requires a pedagogical shift from a predominant focus on learning-to-write (an approach that sees the 
writing classroom as a place to help students express already-acquired language through writing) to writing-
to-learn (Hanaoka & Izumi, 2012; Harklau, 2002; Manchón, 2011). 
Theoretical Implications 
Theoretically, research on revision has been greatly influenced by the process approach to writing and its 
emphasis on multiple drafts. Most previous studies saw multiple drafts as the marker of revision and focused 
on comparing multiple drafts. Conclusions about students’ revision practices were, therefore, based on 
between-draft revisions (Dave & Russell, 2010). However, evidence from students’ revision in Google 
Docs in the current study shows that they did not compose multiple drafts, but rather single drafts with 
developmental histories of revision. This has implications for L2 writing research on self-revision. It 
indicates the need to expand the meaning of a draft. It raises two important questions: (a) What is a draft? 
(b) What should be the unit of analysis for research that focuses on self-revision when students compose 
using a word processor? A clear conceptualization of what constitutes a draft is important for any research 
that seeks to analyze students’ revisions. Findings from this study affirm the observation that the “on-going 
revision of a ‘single’ draft allowed by word processing provides no demarcation between drafts” (Dave & 
Russell, 2010, p. 410) and suggest that research on self-revision needs to focus on in-process rather than 
between-drafts revisions in order to unravel the mystery that continues to surround L2 writers’ self-revision. 
Limitations 
Despite these informative findings, the study has some limitations. First, it did not capture textual 
changes—except the addition of visuals—that students made at the final stage when they used Microsoft 
Word to format their papers. Students used Microsoft Word for the final revision because it was difficult 
for them to use Google Docs to format visuals for effective integration. Second, the researcher could not 
control for all possible factors that might influence noticing. For example, instructor’s responses to 
students’ questions about their papers during in-class activities could have facilitated their noticing of 
problems in their writing. Third, students’ comments suggest that pre-writing revisions might have 
impacted point-of-writing revisions and text quality; however, the study did not analyze the impact of pre-
writing revisions on the rest of the writing process. In addition, the software that was used to integrate the 
listing activity into the writing process did not have spellcheck or grammar-check options. This made 
grammar correction challenging for the students in this research. Using software that allows for grammar 
check might be more helpful for low-level students to notice grammar errors unless there is need to control 
for factors that might influence students’ noticing (as was the case in the current study). 
Directions for Future Studies 
A future study could investigate how pre-writing revisions might influence point-of-writing revisions and 
text quality. Furthermore, a study that focuses on the challenges the instructor faces in integrating CBMCAs 
as procedural support might add valuable information to the pedagogical implications of using CBMCAs 
88 Language Learning & Technology 
 
in L2 writing classroom. Also, the current study focused on how advanced-low ESL writers used the 
CBMCAs; further research on how the activities might facilitate noticing and revision for low- and 
intermediate-level L2 writers might yield findings that will complement those reported here. This will help 
L2 writing researchers deepen our understanding of how learners with different proficiency levels might 
benefit from CBMCAs as procedural support for revision as they write to learn a new language. Finally, 
although one semester (16 weeks) is sufficient time to develop some understanding of how CBMCAs 
facilitate students’ noticing, self-revision, and communication through writing, researching the potential of 
CBMCAs for a longer duration might yield more findings that will add to what is documented in this study. 
Notes 
1. All quotations from students are reported verbatim to preserve their voice. 
References 
Atkinson, T. N. J., & Greches, M. (2003). What works for me: Microsoft Windows XP accessibility 
features. Intervention in School and Clinic, 38(3), 177–180. 
Barkaoui, K. (2007). Revision in second language writing: What teachers need to know. TESL Canada 
Journal, 25(1), 81–92. 
Baxter, P., & Jack, S. (2008). Qualitative case study methodology: Study design and implementation for 
novice researchers. The Qualitative Report, 13(4), 544–559. 
Chambers, L. (2011). Composition and revision in computer-based written assessment. Research Notes, 
43, 25–32. 
Cresswell, A. (2000). Self-monitoring in student writing. ELT Journal, 54, 235–244. 
Cumming, A. (1990). Metalinguistic and ideational thinking in second language composing. Written 
Communication, 7, 482–511. 
Cumming, A., & So, S. (1996). Tutoring second language text revision: Does the approach to instruction 
or the language of communication make a difference? Journal of Second Language Writing, 5(30), 
197–226. 
Dave, A. M., & Russell, D. R. (2010). Drafting and revision using word processing by undergraduate 
student writers: Changing conceptions and practices. Research in the Teaching of English, 44(4), 
403–434. 
DiEdwardo, M. A. P. (2005). Pairing linguistic and music intelligences. Kappa Delta Pi, 41(3), 128–130. 
Garrison, K. (2009). An empirical analysis of using text-to-speech software to revise first-year college 
students’ essays. Computers and Composition, 26, 288–301. 
Gaskill, W. (1987). Revising in Spanish and English as a second language: A process-oriented study of 
composition. (Doctoral dissertation). University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA. 
Retrieved from Dissertation Abstracts International. 47(10A), 3747. 
Gass, S. M., & Mackey, A. (2007). Data elicitation for second and foreign language research. Mahwah, 
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Hafner, C. A., Chik, A., & Jones, R. H. (2015). Digital literacies and language learning. Language 
Learning & Technology, 19(3), 1–7. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2015/commentary.pdf 
Hanaoka, O. (2007). Output, noticing, and learning: An investigation into the role of spontaneous 
attention to form in a four-stage writing task. Language Teaching Research, 11, 459–479. 
Richmond Dzekoe 89 
 
Hanaoka, O., & Izumi, S. (2012). Noticing and uptake: Addressing pre-articulated covert problems in L2 
writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 21, 332–347. 
Harklau, L. (2002). The role of writing in classroom second language acquisition. Journal of Second 
Language Writing, 11, 329–350. 
Hegelheimer, V., & Chapelle, C. A. (2000). Methodological issues in research on learner-computer 
interactions in CALL. Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 41–59. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/hegchap/default.html 
Hubbard, P. (2004). Learner training for effective use of CALL. In S. Fotos & C. Browne (Eds.), New 
perspectives on CALL for second language classrooms (pp. 45–68). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum. 
Hyland, K. (2009). Teaching and researching writing (2nd ed). London, UK: Pearson. 
Izumi, S. (2002). Output, input enhancement, and the noticing hypothesis: An experimental study on ESL 
relativization. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 24, 541–577. 
Jeon-Ellis, G., Debski, R., & Wigglesworth, G. (2005). Oral interaction around computers in the project-
oriented CALL classroom. Language Learning & Technology, 9(3), 121–145. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/pdf/jeon.pdf 
Jewitt, C. (Ed.). (2009). The handbook of multimodal analysis. London, UK: Routledge. 
Kern, R. (2000). Literacy and language teaching. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Kress, G. (2010). Multimodality: A social semiotic approach to contemporary communication. London, 
UK: Routledge. 
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (2001). Multimodal discourse. The modes and media of contemporary 
communication. London, UK: Edward Arnold. 
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen. T. (2006). Reading images: The grammar of visual design (2nd ed.). New 
York, NY: Routledge. 
Lee, L. (1994). L2 writing: Using pictures as a guided writing environment. Paper presented at the Rocky 
Mountain Modern Language Association Conference, San Diego, CA. Retrieved from 
http://www.eric.ed.gov/contentdelivery/servlet/ERICServlet?accno=ED386951 
Leki, I., Cumming, A., & Silva, T. (2008). A synthesis of research on second language writing in English. 
New York, NY: Routledge. 
Lemke, J. (2009). Multimodality, identity, and time. In C. Jewitt (Ed.), The handbook of multimodal 
analysis (pp. 140–150). London, UK: Routledge. 
Leow, R. P. (2000). A study of the role of awareness in foreign language behavior: Aware versus unaware 
learners. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 22, 557–584. 
Li, Z., & Hegelheimer, V. (2013). Moblie-assisted grammar exercises: Effects on self-editing in L2 
writing. Language Learning & Technology, 17(3), 135–156. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2013/lihegelheimer.pdf 
Magnan, S. S. (2007). Commentary: The promise of digital scholarship in SLA research and language 
pedagogy. Language Learning & Technology, 11(3), 152–155. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num3/pdf/magnan.pdf 
Manchón, R. M. (2011). Writing to learn the language: Issues in theory and research. In R. M. Manchón 
(Ed.), Learning-to-write and writing-to-learn in an additional language (pp. 61–82). Amsterdam, 
Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
90 Language Learning & Technology 
 
McKee, H. (2006). Sound matters: Notes toward the analysis and design of sound in multimodal 
webtexts. Computers and Composition, 23(3), 335–354. 
Miles, M., & Huberman, M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage. 
Nelson, M. E. (2006). Mode, meaning, and synaesthesia in multimedia L2 writing. Language Learning & 
Technology, 10(2), 56–76. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num2/pdf/nelson.pdf 
New London Group. (1995). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures. Harvard 
Educational Review, 66, 60–92. 
Nishino, T., & Atkinson, D. (2015). Second language writing as sociocognitive alignment. Journal of 
Second Language Writing, 27, 37–54. 
Pavlenko, A., & Driagina, V. (2007). Russian emotion vocabulary in American learners’ narratives. 
Modern Language Journal, 91(2), 213–234. 
Raimes, A. (2001). What unskilled ESL students do as they write: A classroom study of composing. In P. 
K. Matsuda & T. Silva (Eds.), Landmark essays on ESL writing (pp. 37–61). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum. 
Reynolds, T., & Bonk, C. J. (1996). Facilitating college writers’ revisions within a generative-evaluative 
computerized prompting framework. Computers and Composition, 13, 93–108. 
Royce, T. D. (2002). Multimodality in the TESOL classroom: Exploring visual-verbal synergy. TESOL 
Quarterly, 36(2), 191–206. 
Royce, T. D. (2007). Intersemiotic complementarity: A framework for multimodal discourse analysis. In 
T. D. Royce & W. L. Bowcher (Eds.), New directions in the analysis of multimodal discourse (pp. 
63–110). London, UK: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Salbego, N., Heberle, V. M., & Soares da Silva Balen, M. G. (2015). A visual analysis of English 
textbooks: Multimodal scaffolding learning. Calidoscopio, 13(1), 5–13. 
Schmidt, R. W. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 11, 
129–158. 
Sengupta, S. (2000). An investigation into the effects of revision strategy instruction on L2 secondary 
school learners. System, 28, 97–113. 
Shin, D., & Cimasko, T. (2008). Multimodal composition in a college ESL class: New tools, traditional 
norms. Computers and Composition, 25, 376–395. 
Shipka, J. (2005). A multimodal task-based framework for composing. College Composition and 
Communication, 57(2), 277–306. 
Silva, T. (1993). Toward an understanding of the distinct nature of L2 writing: The ESL research and its 
implications. TESOL Quarterly, 27(4), 657–677. 
Sommers, N. (1980). Revision strategies of student writers and experienced adult writers. College 
Composition and Communication, 31, 378–388. 
Stevenson, M., Schoonen, R., & Glopper, K. (2006). Revising in two languages: A multi-dimensional 
comparison of online writing revisions in L1 and FL. Journal of Second Language Writing, 15, 201–
233. 
Suzuki, M. (2008). Japanese learners’ self-revisions and peer revisions of their written compositions in 
English. TESOL Quarterly, 42(2), 209–233. 
Richmond Dzekoe 91 
 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1995). Problems in output and the cognitive processes they generate: A step 
towards second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 16(3), 371–391. 
Wijaya, H. P. S. (2006). The use of music to stimulate L2 learners in writing: A study of Writing 2 classes 
in the English department of Petra Christian University, Indonesia. (Unpublished master’s thesis). 
Assumption University, Bangkok, Thailand. 
Williams, J. (2012). The potential role(s) of writing in second language development. Journal of Second 
Language Writing, 21, 321–331. 
Yagelski, R. (1995). The role of classroom context in the revision strategies of student writers. Research 
in the Teaching of English, 29, 216–238. 
Yang, Y.-F. (2012). Multimodal composing in digital storytelling. Computers and Communication, 29, 
221–238. 
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods (4th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Appendix A. Guided Reflection on Poster Activity 
The following questions are meant to help you reflect on your poster so that you can discover new ideas 
and strategies that you have expressed in the poster that might help you revise your written draft in Google 
Docs. In other words, the questions will help you analyze your poster critically and rhetorically, and develop 
the SUBSTANCE, ORGANIZATION, LANGUAGE and STYLE, of your written draft. 
Substance 
1. What is the main message (thesis) of this poster? Can you state that in one sentence? 
2. What other minor ideas are captured in the poster? Please list them. 
3. Who is/are the intended audience? 
4. What is the main purpose of the poster? 
5. Why did you choose the background color that you did? 
6. Why did you use those images and/or videos in the poster? 
7. What information do the images/videos give that is not already in your written draft? 
8. Comparing your written draft with your poster, what new information do you think your poster 
brings to your audience? 
9. How will the ideas in the poster help you build on the ideas in your written draft? 
Language and Style 
10. What words on the poster convey the main message of the poster? 
11. Have you included some credible sources about your topic in your poster? 
Organization 
12. Is the main idea in the poster divided into clear and simple sub-ideas? How? 
13. Why did you arrange the materials (words, images, sounds, videos) on your poster the way you 
did? 
14. Is there any idea that contradicts your main message? 
15. What questions might your readers raise about your poster? And how would you respond to these 
questions? 
16. How might the organization of ideas in your poster help you organize your ideas in the written 
draft? 
92 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Appendix B. Codes 
Code Related to Research 
Question and Theoretical 
Framework 
Code Code definition 
Poster, Multimodality, and 
Noticing 
PNA Poster activity and noticing of issues related to ideas 
PNO Poster activity and noticing of issues related to organization 
PNLS Poster activity and noticing of issues related to language 
and style 
COMIP Comments on how the integration of modes helped noticing 
and revision (Positive) 
COMIN Comments on how the integration of modes helped noticing 
and revision (Negative) 
Listening, Multimodality, 
and Noticing 
LNA Listening activity and noticing of issues related to ideas 
LNO Listening activity and noticing of issues related to 
organization 
LNLS Listening activity and noticing of issues related to language 
and style 
Integration of visual, 
Multimodality, and 
Noticing 
IVNA Integration of visuals and noticing of issues related to ideas 
IVNO Integration of visuals and noticing of issues related to 
organization 
IVLS Integration of visuals and noticing of issues related to 
language and style 
Additional Emerging Sub-
codes 
Tech Diff The use of technology was difficult 
Tech Easy The use of technology was not difficult 
CWA Challenges that students faced while performing the 
CBMCAs 
IPR Students initial perception of revisions 
NP of revision New perceptions that students developed about revision 
FDR What students reported they focused on during revision 
PR Skills 
(surface) 
Students’ description of their previous revision skills as 
focusing on surface-level revision 
PR Skills 
(content) 
Students’ description of their previous revision skills as 
focusing on content-level revision 
PR Skills 
(C & A) 
Students’ description of their previous revision skills as 
focusing on both content- and surface-level revisions 
FUP Students mention that they will use the poster activity in 
their future classes 
FUL Students mention that they will use the listening activity in 
their future classes 
FUI Students mention that they will use will explore integration 
of visuals in their future classes 
Richmond Dzekoe 93 
 
Code Name Definition Example 
IP Intersemiotic 
repetition 
The repetition of the same 
experiential meaning as encoded in 
the written and visual texts. 
Both a visual and the written text focus on 
football and same words and phrases are 
repeated in the visual and the written draft. 
IS Intersemiotic 
synonymy 
The expression of similar 
experiential meanings as encoded 
in the written and visual texts. 
A visual is about people at a beach and the 
essay is talks about of summer vacations. 
Similar words are used to describe a holiday 
experience in the visual and the written text. 
IA Intersemiotic 
antonymy 
The presentation of opposing or 
conflicting experiential meanings 
as encoded in the verbal and visual 
texts. 
A visual shows people in poverty and is 
meant to contrast a discussion of a luxurious 
lifestyle in the written draft. 
 
94 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Appendix C. Rubrics for Students’ Assessing Multimodal Academic Texts 
 Exemplary Mature Competent Developing Beginning 
Context  (10) The treatment of topic is 
original and very thoughtful. 
It engages reader early and is 
mindful of audience 
(8) The treatment of topic is 
original and somewhat 
thoughtful. It engages reader, but 
not early enough; shows signs of 
being mindful of audience but 
can be improved. 
(6) Treatment of topic is 
original but lacks 
thoughtfulness. Audience is 
implicit and difficult to find. 
Engages reader only late in 
the paper. 
(4) Treatment of topic is 
NOT original and lacks 
thoughtfulness. Fails to 
engage audience. In 
general, the context is 
insufficient. 
(2) Treatment of topic too 
broad and intro lacks 
originality. The context seems 
unrelated to the topic and 
needs major revision. 
Substance  (15) The content is relevant, 
supporting details are very 
carefully chosen, appropriate 
for the topic, and substantial. 
(12) The content is relevant, and 
supporting details are 
appropriate for the topic, but 
need to be more specific. 
(10) The content is somewhat 
relevant, supporting details 
seem too general and needs 
to be made more appropriate 
for the topic. 
(6) The content seems 
irrelevant, to the main 
topic; supporting details 
seem too general, content 
not substantial for the topic. 
(4) The content seems 
irrelevant to the main topic; 
details do not relate to the 
central idea and seem to be 
chosen haphazardly. 
Organization  (15) Intro provides a very 
explicit, specific, and clear 
thesis; and provides overview 
of organization. Conclusion 
recasts the thesis -Smooth 
flow of ideas in the paper; 
ordered in a logical sequence 
that effectively guides the 
reader; each paragraph has a 
well-supported and clearly-
stated main point; There is 
effective use of transitions 
(12) Intro provides thesis that is 
somewhat clear but not explicit 
and specific enough. Conclusion 
recasts thesis but could be 
improved. -Flow of ideas in the 
paper could be more effectively 
sequenced. 
(10) Intro provides thesis but 
lacks clarity, is too general. 
Conclusion only recasts 
thesis weakly. -Ideas flow in 
a logical, cohesive manner 
but development of ideas 
needs work  
(6) Intro provides thesis 
which is only implicit and 
hard to find; and conclusion 
fails to recast the thesis. 
Both intro and conclusion 
need major revision. -
Sequence of ideas and 
paragraphs need major 
revisions. Topic sentences 
are NOT well written and 
fail to focus on the thesis.  
(4) Intro is very weak; thesis is 
undetectable; conclusion 
seems unrelated to the thesis. -
There is no clear sequence of 
ideas and paragraphs seem 
aimless and haphazard. 
Style: Language 
and use 
(25) Correct, appropriate, and 
varied integration of textual 
examples, including in-text 
citations; limited errors in 
spelling, grammar, word 
order, word usage, sentence 
structure, and punctuation; 
good use of academic English 
(23) Correct, appropriate, and 
some integration of textual 
examples, including in-text 
citations; However, there are 
some FEW errors  
(20) Correct and appropriate 
integration of textual 
examples, including in-text 
citations; However, MANY 
errors per page Major 
problems with using 
academic English 
(15) MOSTLY incorrect 
sentences structures 
integrating textual 
examples, including in-text 
citations; several errors per 
paragraph informal 
language used in multiple 
instances 
(10) Pervasive incorrect 
sentence structures integrating 
textual examples; no in-text 
citations; many errors that 
IMPEDE comprehension 
throughout the paper; informal 
or inappropriate language use. 
Richmond Dzekoe 95 
 
Intersemiotic 
Complementarity 
(25) The integration of verbal 
and visual texts shows 
effective encoding of same 
experiential meaning 
(Repetition); or similar 
experiential meaning 
(Synonymy); or 
opposing/Conflicting 
meanings. Or, all three 
meanings are effectively 
encoded. 
(23) The integration of verbal 
and visual texts shows a good 
encoding of same experiential 
meaning (Repetition); or similar 
experiential meaning 
(Synonymy); or 
opposing/Conflicting meanings. 
Or, all three meanings are 
encoded but need some revision 
to be effective. 
(20) The integration of verbal 
and visual texts shows some 
somewhat a fair encoding of 
same experiential meaning 
(Repetition); or similar 
experiential meaning 
(Synonymy); or 
opposing/Conflicting 
meanings. Or, all three 
meanings are fairly encoded. 
(15) The integration of 
verbal and visual texts 
shows a weak encoding of 
same experiential meaning 
(Repetition); or similar 
experiential meaning 
(Synonymy); or 
opposing/Conflicting 
meanings. Or, the encoding 
of meanings needs major 
revision. 
(10) There is no clear 
integration of verbal and visual 
texts. Or an attempt at 
encoding of same experiential 
meaning (Repetition); or 
similar experiential meaning 
(Synonymy); or 
opposing/Conflicting 
meanings is confusing. 
Delivery (10) Consistency in 
typography and headings, 
page layout makes the paper 
easy to read. Cites sources 
using APA or MLA style. 
Visuals are well integrated 
text. 
(8) Consistency in typography 
and headings, but displays minor 
problems with page layout and 
citing of sources using APA o 
MLA style. Displays minor 
problems with visual integration. 
(6) There is some 
consistency in typography 
and headings, but displays 
some problems with page 
APA or MLA style, and 
integration of visuals. 
(4) Major problems with 
typography and headings. 
Display major problems 
with APA and MLA style. 
Displays problems with the 
integration of visuals. 
(2) There is no consistency in 
typography and headings; it 
displays major problems with 
page layout. There is no 
integration of visuals. Overall 
layout severely impedes 
comprehension. 
About the Author 
Richmond Dzekoe is a Visiting Assistant Professor of English at Miami University, Oxford, OH. He holds a PhD in TESL/Applied Linguistics and 
Technology from Iowa State University. His research interests include English for academic purposes, CALL, multimodal communication, and 
second language writing. 
E-mail: rdzekoe@gmail.com 
