Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
June 2017, Volume 21, Issue 2 
pp. 121–138 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2017 Chantelle Warner & Hsin-I Chen 
 
 
Designing talk in social networks: What Facebook 
teaches about conversation 
Chantelle Warner, University of Arizona 
Hsin-I Chen, National Kaohsiung University of Applied Sciences 
Abstract 
The easy accessibility, ubiquity, and plurilingualism of popular SNSs such as Facebook have inspired many 
scholars and practitioners of second language teaching and learning to integrate networked forms of 
communication into educational contexts such as language classrooms and study abroad programs (e.g., 
Blattner & Fiori, 2011; Lamy & Zourou, 2013; Mills, 2011; Reinhardt & Ryu, 2013; Reinhardt & Zander, 
2011). At the same time, the complex and dynamic patterns of interaction that emerge in these spaces 
quickly push back upon standard ways of describing conversational genres and communicative competence 
(Kern, 2014; Lotherington & Ronda, 2014). Drawing from an ecological interactional analysis (Goffman, 
1964, 1981a, 1981b, 1986; Kramsch & Whiteside, 2008) of the Facebook communications of three 
German-speaking academics whose social and professional lives are largely led in English, the authors 
consider the kinds of symbolic maneuvers required to participate in the translingual conversational flows 
of SNS-mediated communication. Based on this analysis, this article argues that texts generated through 
SNS-mediated communication can provide classroom opportunities for critical, stylistically sensitive 
reflection on the nature of talk in line with multiliteracies approaches. 
Keywords: Discourse Analysis, Social Networking, Technology-Mediated Communication, Literacy 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: German, English 
APA Citation: Warner, C., & Chen, H. (2017). Designing talk in social networks: What Facebook teaches 
about conversation. Language Learning & Technology, 21(2), 121–138. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2017/warnerchen.pdf 
Introduction 
Over the last two decades, social network sites (SNSs) have attracted millions of users worldwide and have 
contributed to the emergence of linguistic practices that are now woven tightly into the social fabric of 
many people’s lives. The easy accessibility, ubiquity, and de facto multilingualism of these spaces have 
inspired many scholars and practitioners in second language (L2) teaching and learning and related fields 
to integrate networked forms of communication into educational contexts, such as classrooms and study 
abroad programs (e.g., Blattner & Fiori, 2011; Lamy & Zourou, 2013; Mills, 2011; Mitchell, 2012; 
Reinhardt & Ryu, 2013; Reinhardt & Zander, 2011). Yet, the conversational landscapes of SNSs diverge 
in many important ways from the characteristic shapes and patterns of face-to-face interaction (see Kern, 
2014; Knobel & Lankshear, 2008; Lotherington & Ronda, 2014). SNS-mediated interactions may also pose 
methodological and conceptual problems for language educators, who are often motivated to incorporate 
digital media by the promise of greater and more meaningful communication. 
The notions of design and genre have been central features in literacy-oriented and multiliteracies 
approaches to collegiate foreign language (FL) teaching in recent years. A primary pedagogical goal of FL 
teaching in these discussions is the development of “textual thinking,” which is characterized as language 
use that moves beyond the “immediate physical environment” of learners and emphasizes the “verbally 
created and imagined world of texts that inherently contains a level of abstraction and ambiguity” (Maxim, 
2006, p. 21). Because multiliteracies approaches first entered into FL and L2 teaching via education 
122 Language Learning & Technology 
 
research as a means of developing advanced language abilities, there has been very little focus on what we 
might call everyday literacies, such as conversational genres (Knobel & Lankshear, 1999). Increasingly, 
these vernacular literacies are digital and networked, which means that even the most basic and familiar 
genres are situated beyond the immediate physical environment of learners. A goal of this article is thus to 
carefully consider the potential of networked communication in SNSs for supporting richer conceptual 
thinking about conversation genres among teachers and learners. 
Three case studies of researchers whose professional and personal lives are led largely in English and 
German provide the basis for our discussion. Based on an interactional analysis of key examples from the 
Facebook interactions of the three users, the authors consider how the study of SNS-mediated 
communication might enable opportunities for critical, stylistically sensitive reflection in instructed, FL 
contexts within a pedagogy of multiliteracies. In particular, we demonstrate how multilingual design 
choices and power dynamics often play a role in communicative maneuvers within SNSs (see also 
Androutsopoulos, 2013) and propose that SNS talk might be used to defamiliarize conversational genres 
and promote ecological thinking by making these elements more salient for learners (Kramsch & Whiteside, 
2008). 
The Conversational Landscape of Social Network Spaces 
Recently evolved neologisms such as Twitterverse and Blogosphere portray an expansion in how people 
conceptualize communication technologies. The internet has increasingly become a site where significant 
portions of our daily interactions and transactions play out. Facebook boasted over 1.2 billion daily active 
users on average for December 2016—a significant portion of the estimated mobile daily user population 
of more than 1.1 billion (Facebook, 2016). Around 80% of these daily active users live outside of the U.S. 
and Canada, and although it is not easy to track language use on personal Facebook pages, it is noteworthy 
that the site is available in over 70 languages. 
In SNSs like Facebook, one has to “type oneself into being” (Sunden, 2003, p. 3). One’s presence in the 
space is through the existence of a profile (a unique page including an image and brief biographical 
information) and a timeline (a space consisting of posts put there by the page owner or by friends in their 
network). In this space, one’s affiliations with various social networks are created and maintained by 
posting on each other’s timelines, liking, commenting on friends’ posts, sharing friends’ posts, and tagging 
friends in posts and photos (see also boyd & Ellison, 2007, p. 211; Ellison, Steinfeld, & Lampe, 2007). As 
SNSs have evolved over the last several years, the profile (in the sense of a relatively static, self-descriptive 
section) has diminished in importance and the timeline (with its dynamic activity stream) has emerged as 
the central locus of self (see Ellison & boyd, 2013). Thus, in order to be present in the flow of interaction, 
one must not only type oneself into being, but must keep typing oneself into being. 
Facebook spaces such as timelines and newsfeeds are semi-public, in that they are typically only accessible 
to those individuals who are in the user’s social network—their friends and possibly friends of friends, 
depending on individual privacy settings. Individual posts can be restricted to a particular subset of friends. 
However, in many instances, users must negotiate the multiple levels of audience within widely broadcast 
posts and related threads.1 Although there is evidence that some users, specifically L2 English speakers, 
perceive the default language of Facebook to be English (Chen, 2012; Honeycutt & Cunliffe, 2010), the 
Facebook encounters analyzed in this study seemed to be characterized by what Androutsopoulos (2013) 
has dubbed networked multilingualism, or multilingual practices that are shaped by two interrelated 
processes: being networked (i.e., digitally connected to other individuals and groups) and being in the 
network (i.e., embedded in the global mediascape of the web). Of particular interest to this present article 
are the ways in which users draw from multilingual repertoires in order to design multiple layers of 
interaction and meaning in Facebook conversations and potential implications for the educational needs of 
L2 and FL learners. 
Chantelle Warner and Hsin-I Chen 123 
 
Complex Encounters 
The prototypical communicative scenario featuring a small and clearly defined set of interlocutors 
conversing in a single standard language has been increasingly problematized within applied linguistics and 
related fields. The increased movement of people across spaces, both the physical spaces traversed by 
migrational and diasporic communities and the virtual spaces created through networked technologies, has 
fundamentally reshaped communicative practices (e.g., Honeycutt & Herring, 2009; Kramsch & Whiteside, 
2008; Lam, 2009; Lotherington & Ronda, 2014). In these dynamic spaces, individuals must, “mediate 
complex encounters among interlocutors [who have] different language capacities and cultural 
imaginations, who have different social and political memories, and who don’t necessarily share a common 
understanding of the social reality they are living in” (Kramsch & Whiteside, 2008, p. 646). 
The ecological approach espoused by Kramsch and Whiteside (2008) can be viewed as part of a broader 
critique within contemporary L2 education of notions of communication and communicative competence 
that focus primarily on monolingual, “transactional, oral language use” (Byrnes, 2006, p. 244; see also 
Allen & Paesani, 2010; Kern, 2000; Maxim, 2006). This ecological framework shares much in common 
with more recent discussions in literacy studies and, in particular, new literacy approaches, which 
emphasize the inherent multiplicity—of languages, of modes, of genres, and of sociocultural scales—
implicated in the design of meaning (e.g. New London Group, 1996). 
Scholars working within conversation analysis (CA) and new literacy studies have often emphasized that 
new media afford new ways of speaking (Gee, 2011; Street, 1995; see also Beisswenger, 2008, Golato & 
Taleghani-Nikazm, 2006, Herring, 1999; Rintel, Mulholland, & Pittam, 2001; Schönfeldt & Golato, 2003). 
From within the field of computer-assisted language teaching and learning, González-Lloret (2011) has 
shown how CA can be used productively to analyze L2 computer-mediated communication as a means of 
demonstrating learning that is participation based—in other words grounded in social interaction rather 
than limited to linguistic features and forms. However, while CA as a model addresses the ways in which 
participants orient themselves in an in situ, physically proximal context, networked communications 
connect a dispersed body of participants in both online and physical worlds (see Androutsopoulos, 2014). 
The multidimensionality of these technologies thus affords users with not only different ways of structuring 
discourse, but also different ways of being in a conversation (see Knobel & Lankshear, 2008). 
In this article, we use the word conversationality to indicate an analytical cautiousness and to delineate the 
particular ways of being in SNS-mediated interaction. If conversations are understood as local interactional 
episodes (as they have tended to be theorized within conversational analysis and interactional linguistics), 
then the very concept of a Facebook conversation (outside of the site’s instant messaging function, which 
was not considered in our study) is somewhat problematic. There are moments when two or more users are 
online and posting at the same time and their posts and responses occur semi-synchronously, but for the 
most part, Facebook posts feature asynchronous communication. Additionally, participants are often 
engaged in a multiplicity of online and offline conversational contexts at any given moment (see boyd, 
Golder, & Lotan, 2010; Leppänen, Pitkänen-Huhta, Piirainen-Marsh, Nikula, & Peuronen, 2009). In a 
typical Facebook interaction, one user posts a short comment or multimedia content on either their or 
someone else’s timeline, and another individual (typically a member of their immediate social network, i.e., 
a friend) posts a response at some point later.2 This response can then be viewed by and commented on by 
other friends, who have access to the user’s specific post. While these encounters may not neatly fit 
restrictive definitions of conversation, they do exhibit certain features of other conversational genres, which 
serve as interactional affordances for locally managing and designing talk. 
A study by boyd et al. (2010) points to another dimension of SNS-mediated conversationality. In their 
examination of the microblogging site Twitter, boyd et al. describe how the practice of retweeting (the 
copying and rebroadcasting of other people’s posts) contributes to the conversational ecology of the SNS. 
By rebroadcasting online content, participants are able to create a sense of coherence across extended and 
somewhat diffuse stretches of talk, while the bounded space of the site also maintains a more local context 
124 Language Learning & Technology 
 
than many comparable forms of offline written communication (see also Leppänen et al., 2009). The very 
status of a series of utterances in a conversation in an SNS like Facebook is co-constructed and emergent, 
rather than an a priori aspect of the talk at hand. For this reason, both the aforementioned use of 
linguistically realized conversational affordances and practices of content sharing are important means of 
co-constructing a shared sense that participants are engaged in conversational interaction rather than, for 
example, information distribution or personal publishing (as found in many forms of blogging). 
Moments of human interaction always involve multiple levels of interaction and multiple scales of time and 
symbolic meaning—even while networked communication increases and amplifies these multiplicities. 
Based on their exemplary ecological analysis of encounters between translinguals in San Francisco, 
Kramsch and Whiteside (2008) suggest that “symbolic competence,” an “acute ability to play with various 
linguistic codes and with the various spatial and temporal resonances of these codes” (p. 664), is central to 
language use and learning today. A central concern in this article similarly involves the kinds of linguistic, 
interactional, and symbolic resources that L2 learners potentially need in order to be agentive conversational 
participants in the noisy, translocal, and translingual environments of the internet. 
Examples and Analysis 
The examples cited in this paper were taken from case studies of three Facebook users. All three individuals 
were academic researchers and their work lives were primarily led both in English and in German. Two 
(Udo and Mika) were native speakers of German, and the third (Paul) was a native speaker of Dutch.3 Both 
Udo and Mika held research positions in the US. Udo was a postdoctoral fellow in Florida for two years in 
2009 and 2010, before returning to Germany. Mika was a professor at an R1 university in the North East 
since 2007. Paul spent his career in Germany. However, because German research in the natural sciences 
is published almost exclusively in English and because German research institutes tend to draw from an 
international pool of scholars for whom English has become the lingua franca, the professional lives of all 
three of these scholars was dominated by English. These three individuals thus served as models of 
multilingual Facebook users. Udo, Mika, and Paul worked together for a few years at a scientific research 
institute in Germany and then continued to stay in touch through Facebook. These users were chosen based 
on their proclivity for posting and practical reasons of access. Because all three participants were part of 
the first author’s social network, she was able to readily view discussions between them. 
Between November 2012 and 2013, the lead author was engaged as a participant user (i.e., a friend) on the 
Facebook pages of the three participants on an almost daily basis. In order to develop a sense of how 
conversations are structured emergently in Facebook, the lead author collected all visible posts from the 
three users’ timelines that elicited at least three comments exhibiting minimal features of conversation, such 
as adjacency pairs or direct addresses. It was felt that posts shorter than this would not provide enough for 
an analysis of conversationality—although an analysis of less successful posts that do not elicit more 
extended talk might have been revealing in its own right. Based on the interpretive analysis of these 
Facebook conversations, as well as on the experience of being a participant observer in these Facebook 
sites, we were able to gain a sense of some tendencies. However, this article does not claim to present an 
exhaustive or even broadly generalizable picture of SNS-mediated communication.4 We have chosen 
particular examples because they demonstrate elements of SNS conversationality that we perceive as 
particularly relevant for L2 teaching and learning. 
Designing Conversations in Facebook 
In this section, we consider how users co-construct conversationality in the shifting and emergent spaces 
of Facebook timelines and newsfeeds using the technological, linguistic, and discursive affordances 
available to them. What resources do users invoke to bound off unfinalizable stretches or interlinked sets 
of utterances as conversations? In what ways and in which moments are they breached and what do those 
moments reveal about how language, technologies, and genres mediate communication? Consider the 
Chantelle Warner and Hsin-I Chen 125 
 
following post (Figure 1) from Paul (the native Dutch speaker), in which he shares an internet meme from 
the page of another Facebook user. 
 
Figure 1. Paul shared this internet meme, which indexes a moment of U.S. corporate transnationalism in 
Germany. 
When users post or re-post material on Facebook, they have the option of providing a brief introductory 
text. For instance, here Paul includes the brief—and in this case, likely ironic—comment “have a nice day” 
accompanied by a frowning face emoticon. The quotation marks around the phrase might reference the 
(in)famous Walmart greeters, as well as the cliché quality of this chunk of English, which makes salient the 
globalizing presence of a company like Walmart. The frowny face, which mirrors the emoticon featured 
prominently in the image, immediately calls into question how “nice” anything about the meme’s message 
actually is. It is important to note that Walmart closed down in Germany in 2006. By most reports, the 
failure of the company’s almost 10-year-long attempt to win over German customers was due in large part 
to corporate practices that did not translate well—including, interestingly enough, the requirement that sales 
clerks smile. In this respect, the smiley face in the image, which is echoed in the frowning face in Paul’s 
comment, could also be seen as a fractal in Kramsch and Whiteside’s sense of “patterns of activities and 
events which are self-similar at different levels of scales” (2008, p. 660), in that it indexes this particular 
moment of failed American corporate international ambitions. 
Two of Paul’s friends respond to this post: first E, a Dutch speaker that appears to be online at the same 
time as Paul for at least part of the exchange, and then T, an American (see Excerpt 1). The effect is two 
independent conversations initiated by the same prompt that overlap with one another sequentially, 
although each is marked fairly unambiguously by the choice of language. 
Excerpt 1. The Overlapping of Two Emergent Conversations, Separated by Code-Switching 
E: Dan zullen ze het wel verdienen ;) 
Then they better earn it! ;) 
Paul: “heirs” – alleen al door erfgenaam te zijn! 
just by being heirs! 
E: dat begrijp ik. Wat zou jij je nageslacht nalaten als oprichter van zo”en successvolle firma. 
I get that. What should you leave behind to your progeny as founder of such a successful company. 
Paul: ambitie  
126 Language Learning & Technology 
 
ambition 
E: En wat doe je met je geld? 
And what should you do with the money? 
T: Not sure, if this really means so much because if you have a positive net worth of any value you 
are probably above 30% of Americans. Seriously. 
“One in Four Households has no net worth. Economy in crisis” 
Paul: Hmmm, dat geld zou ik als venture capital gebruiken om kansrijke innovatieve ideen snel te 
stimuleren en een blijvende invloed op de bestaande en komende drijfveren van de economie te 
houden. 
Hmmm I would use that money as venture capital to quickly stimulate favorable innovative ideas 
and the remaining influx to maintain the existing and future stimulants. 
Paul: Of dat geinvesteerde kapital dan wel of niet wordt meegeteld in het net worth van mijn 
nageslacht hangt er waarschijnlijk af hoe je telt!  
Whether or not the invested capital is counted in the net worth of my offspring then probably 
depends on how you count! 
Paul: Interesting points about walmart that fit in eerily to other statistics: in the United States today, 
one of every four grocery dollars is spent at Wal-Mart. - Amanzingly, 100 million customers shop 
at Wal-Mart every single week… 
T: On one hand, Walmart is scary huge. On the other hand, the position of Walmart in America is 
not so different from the position of Aldi in Germany. To quote wikipedia: 
T: According to a 2002 survey conducted the German market research institute Forsa, 95% of blue-
collar workers, 88% of white-collar workers, 84% of public servants, and 80% of self-employed 
Germans shop at Aldi. 
In face-to-face interactions, turn-taking is often organized by routinized couplings of utterances and 
provoked responses, such as a question and an answer or a request and the acceptance or rejection of that 
request, that appear in immediate subsequence. In digitally-mediated communication, these pairs are often 
interrupted, resulting in a phenomenon dubbed as virtual adjacency, in which a speaker orients towards 
previous utterances even in the absence of tightly interrelated sequence (see González-Lloret, 2007; 
Schönfeldt & Golato, 2003). Adjacency pairs thus become conversational affordances (Forrester, 1999). 
By completing adjacency pairs in talk, even when they are disrupted, speakers are able to design a sense of 
focused, shared interaction (i.e., of conversationality) in communication that is otherwise temporally and 
sequentially disjointed. 
In the Excerpt 1, the conversation between Paul and E includes two questions posed by E, which are 
answered without sequential disruption by Paul—although the turns are divided in time by minutes and 
even hours. Although Paul does not provide simultaneous feedback, the stretch of talk resulting from their 
contributions has the texture of a conversation. Through the completion of adjacency pairs and non-verbal 
backchanneling in the form of likes, Paul and E signal clearly that they are orienting towards one another’s 
utterances, signaling that they are central participants in this interaction. T’s participation, however disrupts 
the illusion of the dyadic conversation and makes salient the complexity of participation structures in 
Facebook. At the same time, the multilingual context affords Paul a resource (i.e., code-switching) that 
makes the two conversations identifiably distinct. 
In the interactional model of Goffman (1981a), the concept of participation structures describes the relation 
of interactants to a speaker’s utterance in a given moment of talk. Goffman makes a distinction between 
ratified participants, those who are officially recognized as participants in the interaction (whether they are 
Chantelle Warner and Hsin-I Chen 127 
 
directly addressed or not), and unratified participants, which include a range of peripheral roles. Goffman’s 
terms are intended to complicate the traditional descriptive dyad comprised of speaker and listener, and he 
emphasizes that there is no direct correspondence between participant roles and what they hear or read. In 
fact, “a ratified participant may not be listening, and someone listening may not be a ratified participant” 
(1981a, p. 132). 
One of the assumptions in Goffman’s model is that there is some central act of communication, which other 
talk subordinates to. In this regard, Facebook differs significantly from many other forms of talk. In face-
to-face communication and even in the kinds of broadcast communication Goffman analyzes in other essays 
(e.g., 1981b), the statuses of participants are defined by an event frame. For example, in a talk at a 
professional conference the ratified participants would be the members of the audience and potential 
unratified participants might include members of the staff at the convention center moving quietly at the 
back of the room as they refill the refreshments table. While various kinds of peripheral interactions 
between both ratified and non-ratified participants may occur, the genre of professional talk makes clear 
what the central interaction is. 
Facebook communication, especially when it occurs in the wild (i.e., outside of classroom Facebook 
groups), poses new questions for Goffman’s conceptualization of participation structures because it is 
unclear what the central communication is in any given moment. At the same time, technological 
affordances of Facebook, such as tagging; conversational affordances, like adjacency pairs; and even 
plurilingual affordances enable participants to mark a portion of talk byplay within an extended 
conversation. In Excerpt 1, for example, Paul and E use Dutch to bound off a stretch of talk as a dialogic 
conversation. At the same time, the communication remains public, which is what makes it possible for T 
to first make himself visible after five turns, inserting himself through the shared link and related comment. 
Although he does not truly interrupt the flow of the conversation that Paul and E have co-constructed—
especially given the delineation indexed through the codeswitch—the intrusion into a sequence of 
interactions between the two Dutch speakers reveals the precarity of the conversational feel that is 
naturalized through the conversational affordances these speakers use. At the same time, it reveals the 
multidimensionality and de-situatedness of communication in digitally networked spaces. 
The decentering of communication has further implications for conceptualizing ratified and unratified 
participants. Marcoccia (2004) describes how certain participants in online newsgroups become “favored 
recipients,” because of their frequent and visible presence in the groups (p. 142). These users are assumed 
to be among the recipients of any contribution. The three users we studied displayed expansive social 
networks of more than 300 friends. By their own accounts, they rarely used additional privacy settings, 
which made it impossible to know exactly who belonged to a conversational group at any moment. However, 
a much smaller number of fellow users regularly responded to their posts, and when conversational 
structures did emerge, it was often these individuals who were central participants. We can speculate that 
these individuals became ratified, favored recipients for many posts (see also Androupoloutos, 2014). 
Marcoccia (2004) also argues that the eavesdropper role is necessarily different from how Goffman 
conceived it in newsgroup interactions. While the eavesdropper in Goffman’s model holds an unratified 
status, the lack of a clear-cut distinction between ratified and not casts these bystanders in a contradictory 
role. “Indeed, when a participant sends a message, he/she knows that there are eavesdroppers, but he/she is 
forced to include them as recipients” (Marcoccia, 2004, p. 140). When used outside of a locally managed 
interaction, the like button might serve a secondary communicative function, by enabling some participants 
to be recognizable as eavesdroppers and thus to become more salient to the conversation.5 
The ways in which SNS-mediated communication is decentered and co-constructively re-centered has 
implications for what it means to teach communicative competence. In pedagogical contexts, such as 
classroom discussion groups, learners may be immediately ratified as central participants. But in 
Facebook—as well as in many other spaces both online and offline—this status is not taken for granted. 
This might lead language educators and learners alike to examine what is meant by participation as a desired 
learning outcome of language learning and what kinds of learning different forms of participation might or 
128 Language Learning & Technology 
 
might not afford. Taking an example like this as a pedagogical object, learners can be guided to think about 
how we know when we are in a conversation online and offline: When does it stop and start? What kinds 
of participant roles do we take on in particular moments and why? What does it mean to lurk in the language 
classroom versus lurking in an online discussion forum? Learners can also reflect on the role of language 
choice in establishing these roles. 
The practice of sharing content across Facebook also creates new possibilities for the production format of 
utterances. Take Figure 3, a post from Mika’s timeline: 
 
Figure 3. Mika shares a photo from Süddeutsche Zeitung Magazin. Posts such as this one enable users to 
negotiate production roles as they position themselves in the multilingual ecology of Facebook. 
Excerpt 2. 
For my German speaking FB friends. This is simply *too* comical… 
Tragic 
Drawing by Dietrich Brüggeman (http://d-trick.de/). Vielen Dank! 
Problems of intellectual couples 
Bubble 1: Let’s go out again. 
Bubble 2: From where. 
The comic entitled “Problems of Intellectual Pairs” was first posted through the Facebook page of the 
Süddeutsche Zeitung Magazin, one of the larger print news outlets in Germany that, like many others, now 
maintains an active online presence including a Facebook page. At the same time as multiplying the 
audience by effectively merging the readers of the Süddeutsche Zeitung Magazin (whose comments are 
seen in the light blue square to the right) with his own friends list (a subset of which is directly addressed 
at the start of his comment), Mika negotiated production roles in a striking way. In addition to recipient 
roles, Goffman theorized three production roles taken up by speakers in interaction: the animator, the 
physical source of the message; the author, who formulates the message; and the principal, the party to 
whose position the message attests. The technological structure of Facebook affords Mika the possibility 
of being both animator (sharing) and author (commenting) simultaneously, as he expresses the tragicomic 
feelings elicited by the joke. The irony of this double-voicing is emphasized by Mika through the address 
Chantelle Warner and Hsin-I Chen 129 
 
to his “German-speaking friends,” an utterance made redundant by its formulation in German (see Excerpt 
2), which in turn indexes the multilingual production context of Facebook and at the same time, potentially 
points to the relative statuses of English and German on the internet and beyond. The status of English as a 
global lingua franca means that German speaker becomes a sort of marked principal role in a way that 
English speaker does not. 
An example such as this can be used in the language classroom to initiate a discussion about the roles 
learners take up in various conversations both online and offline and the potential effects of these positions. 
Goffman provides a relatively accessible metalanguage that learners can be introduced to in order to analyze 
the practices of sharing and commenting. Whereas the first example from Paul’s page demonstrated the use 
of codeswitching to construct two distinguishable conversations, Mika’s example is also a reminder that 
not all languages traffic equally. When asked to participate in online communities of languages other than 
English, learners may at first be confronted with the fact that purely monolingual spaces of, for example, 
German speakers, are hard to find. Engaging with an example such as this can provide an opportunity to 
consider how languages only exist in the context of other languages (see Pennycook, 2007)—a reality that 
is often more salient online, but is equally true offline—and the implications for structuring participation 
frameworks in digitally-networked spaces. 
The focus of this section has been on the design resources which multilingual speakers engage in order to 
create more manageable local stretches of communication, an activity we have characterized as 
conversationality. As we have already indicated, the multiscalar format of Facebook talk often makes it 
difficult to determine what is central and what is subordinate. If no act of communication is taken for 
granted as central, then the right to take up the floor is held by everyone and no one at the same time. 
Getting heard (or rather, getting read) then calls upon something more than the communicative competence 
needed to negotiate turn taking and create conversational coherence. It requires a symbolic awareness that 
enables speakers to focus the attention of others. 
Social Networks and Conversational Power 
The discussion of participant structures points to another factor in the relative successes and failures of 
Facebook conversations: speakers must not only negotiate more local interactional contexts in order to 
create a shared sense of focused interaction and shape on-going conversations, but also find ways to get 
heard lest they get swept away in the flood of communication appearing in their newsfeeds.6 In their 
research on the conversational ecology of Twitter, boyd et al. (2010) describe the ways in which diffuse 
conversations emerge in SNSs across longer spans and larger time scales. These conversations are, they 
argue, “composed of a public interplay of voices that give rise to an emotional sense of shared 
conversational context” (p. 1). Consider, for example, the following post (Excerpt 3) from Udo’s timeline: 
Excerpt 3. 
Udo: “I always cheer up immensely if an attack is particularly wounding because I think, well, if 
they attack one personally, it means they have not a single political argument left.” - Margaret 
Thatcher 
R: pure shock doctrine 
S: Is that you comment on Obama {indirectly} calling Romney a bullshitter? 
Udo: On the meta-level maybe. 
Udo: Any connection to living persons is left to the discretion of the reader… 
Paul: Did you actually watch Romney? 
Udo: TV-Wahlkamp in den USA: Jetzt wird es richtig schmutzig 
TV-Election Campaign in the USA: Now it’s getting really dirty. 
130 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Paul: Am aktivsten sind Mitt Romney und die hiesigen Republikaner. 13 Spots gehen auf ihr Konto 
- vier direkte Attacken aus Präsident Barack Obama, acht auf andere Demokraten und einyiger 
positiver Spot im Namen eines Senatskandidaten. Dagagen kommen Obama und die Demokraten 
kaum an, nur je drei Attacken auf Romnez und diverse andere Republikaner. Plus zwei positive 
Spots. 
The most active are Mitt Romney and the hiesigen Republicans: 13 TV ads registered on their 
account - four direct attacks on President Barack Obama, eight on other Democrats and one single 
positive ad in the name of a candidate for Senate. Obama and the Democrats hardly even compare, 
with three attacks on Romney diverse other Republicans. Plus two positive ads… 
Paul: My opponent believes in global warming and has been to other countries, he is basically a 
monster 
Udo: By comparison with the reality, my story [is] as tame as a holiday postcard. 
Udo: Gestern im Auto gehört <Link to a radio show on the U.S. election> (gibt irgendwo nen 
Podcast) 
Heard yesterday in the car <Link to a radio show on the U.S. election> (somewhere there’s a 
podcast) 
Paul: hmmm wer hat letztens das artikel gepostet über was für themen für amerika wirklich wichtig 
wären, nur kein Präsidentskandidat das eh ansprechen würde. 
hmmm who posted that article recently about the topics that were really important in America, but 
no presidential candidate would ever bring them up. 
Paul: hmmm ich kann es nicht finden, aber ich habe das hier gefunden! interessante discussion in 
den kommentaren auch 
hmmm I can’t find it, but I found this here!! interesting discussion in the comments too 
Udo: Hansen seems to think paradoxically like me. ;) 
Mika: Nice article, Paul. 
The status update contains a single quote attributed to Margaret Thatcher. The quote is initially posted 
without commentary or explanation, and thus functions as an example of a common communicative strategy 
in Facebook, which—drawing from publishing jargon—we might describe as a teaser. Like its namesake, 
the function of a teaser in SNS-mediated communication is to capture the attention of readers. But whereas 
an article teaser attempts to compel readers to direct their focused attention to a longer article, the Facebook 
teaser draws fellow users into a potential conversation. In order to be felicitous, teasers must be compelling 
at the same time as cryptic. They invite further questions, which can only be answered through further 
interactions—as a reader or as an interlocutor. A typical variant of the teaser is personally directed, such as 
when a poster references some aspect of their own mental or emotional state, thereby calling upon their 
sympathetic friends to check in on the poster. In Udo’s case, the teaser is oriented towards current events, 
namely the 2012 U.S. presidential election. The success of this is evidenced in the first two responses from 
Udo’s network: R’s comment “pure shock doctrine” locates the post within the field of political discourse, 
while S’s question tries to ascertain to what extent the quote can be read as a comment on particular 
individuals and their actions. Udo’s two rejoinders do not explicitly clarify his stance, but instead invite 
further talking. In particular, Udo’s playful allusion to the distancing language used in fictional works 
functions as a sort of second teaser. Paul continues with a directed question asking whether Udo actually 
watched Romney’s recent speech. Udo then replies with a link to an article from the German language news 
site Spiegel, which discusses negative campaigning during the election, thereby evading Paul’s specific 
question, while also demonstrating a clear familiarity with current U.S. politics and offering more material 
to prompt activity on his timeline. 
Chantelle Warner and Hsin-I Chen 131 
 
The emerging conversation exhibits many of the features already discussed including virtual adjacency and 
focused address, but two other features emerge when this post is analyzed as a manifestation of the more 
diffuse, affective conversationality described by boyd et al. (2010). The first pertains to conversationality’s 
situatedness in the flow of talk. If we move beyond the local context of this conversation and expand the 
scope, we can see this conversation as a particular shift in footing within the context of the Facebook wall, 
which includes other posts evidencing a diverse array of position-takings in English and German. However, 
it is also important to note that many users would actually have viewed this post in their newsfeed. This is 
an example of what Kramsch and Whiteside (2008) describe as the unfinalizablity, the unboundedness of 
discourse and discourse communities. The post is recontextualizable in variety of different ways based on 
the users’ access at any given moment. The Thatcher quote also indexes a phenomenon that Kramsch and 
Whiteside describe as “layered simultaneity” (2008, p. 659), a layering of historicity in discourse that 
creates the potential for “multiple and contradictory temporalities” (Blommaert, 2005, p. 128) leading to 
intertextual references and communicative tensions across the two languages at play. 
The shifting production format makes the uptake of the post all the more noteworthy. With a total of 
fourteen responses over the course of a single day, Udo’s post successfully fulfills its function as a teaser 
by initiating focused and sustained interaction. Udo thus exhibits what Kramsch (2008) has described 
“conversational power,” which, she writes, “comes less from knowing which communication strategy to 
pull off and at which point in the interaction than it does from choosing which language to speak with whom, 
about what, and for what effect” (p. 390). Androutsopoulos (2014) demonstrates how the collapse of diverse 
social contexts in Facebook into one digital network heightens the linguistic and stylistic choices through 
which language users construct their audiences. In both Udo’s original post and the extended discourse that 
ensues, conversational power is manifest as citationality. Less than two weeks before Udo’s post, then 
presidential hopeful Mitt Romney made online headlines after posting a tribute to Margaret Thatcher on 
her 87th birthday bringing the former Prime Minister into the fore of political discourse. But even before 
that moment, the same famous quote posted by Udo had circulated widely among bloggers self-identifying 
as conservative as a standard recourse to political attacks from opposing parties. Udo’s teaser was 
presumably most compelling to the friends who recognized the reference. In turn, the act of recognizing the 
connection to Romney’s presidential campaign created the opportunity for Udo’s friends to self-identify as 
in-the-know—as German-speakers and Europeans who are able to move deftly between American and 
German discussions of the U.S. elections. 
Beginning with the sixth turn, the conversation consists almost exclusively of citations. Although 
unattributed, Paul’s next contribution is a direct quote from the article on the U.S. election posted by Udo. 
Paul follows his own post with a new link to a parody article titled “My opponent believes in global 
warming and has been to other countries, he is basically a monster.” Udo’s joking response (“By 
comparison with the reality, my story [is] as tame as a holiday postcard”) is yet another quote, taken from 
the 2001 John le Carré novel of political conspiracy and corrupt government, The Constant Gardener. In 
the subsequent turns, Udo and Paul each contribute further links to online news coverage of the U.S. election 
in the German press. Each of them connects the link in some way to previous stories they have encountered: 
Udo tags his link as something that he heard in the car the day before, for which he has tried to find the 
corresponding podcast. Paul searches first for an article that someone—presumably someone in their shared 
circle of favored recipients—posted recently and eventually settles for a similar piece. The conversation 
ends when Udo and Mika, who has been silent up until that point, express approval of Paul’s final post. 
In contrast to other posting practices in SNSs, such as those common to Twitter, the visual boundedness of 
this interaction ties all of the shared links back to Udo’s original Thatcher quote. The presence of 
backchanneling in the form of relevant citations and the supportive comments at the end indicate that both 
Paul and Udo recognized and acted upon each other’s rejoinders as part of an ongoing conversation. At the 
same time, the conversational power of each interlocutor arose from their ability to continually supply and 
acknowledge new material (in at least two languages). This allowed them to assert themselves and to 
validate their interlocutors as politically informed, while also only minimally offering their own thoughts 
or commentary.7 On another level, the practice of reposting also lends power to the news stories themselves. 
132 Language Learning & Technology 
 
With approximately 30% of Americans accessing news through Facebook (Holcomb, Gottfried, & Mitchell, 
2013), media outlets rely upon users to push their stories in their personal newsfeeds. In this sense, Udo 
and Paul’s citational exchange becomes a fractal of the broader traffic of news as a larger public 
conversation (Kramsch & Whiteside, 2008, p. 660). 
The conversation from Udo’s page, which we analyze here, reveals that situatedness, fixedness in space, 
time, and monolingual context, applies to only one moment in the story of an utterance or literacy practice. 
Digital literacy practices such as SNS-mediated conversations are exemplary of what Kell (2015) has 
theorized as the meaning making trajectories of literacy practices, which thread together words and 
meanings that are only situated in fleeting moments. SNS conversations that occur outside of the safe spaces 
of classroom pages and groups make these threads of meaning making visible and shift the comfortable 
ground of context as they do so. As a cultural artifact for the classroom, an example such as this can be 
used in order to reflect on conversational power and citationality as part of a larger conversation about what 
gets reposted or linked and why. 
Bringing Facebook Conversations into the Classroom 
This small study of three multilingual users of Facebook brings to the fore some of the ways in which SNS-
mediated conversations call for continued re-theorizations of communicative competence and of literacy 
practices, both of which rely heavily on notions of contextually-situated meanings and identifiable, ratified 
participants (e.g., audiences, readers). This has implications for scholars and practitioners within L2 
teaching and learning, who are interested in the role that these technologies might play in L2 development. 
Classroom Facebook use has been demonstrated to enable sociopragmatic awareness (see Blattner & Fiori, 
2011; Reinhardt & Ryu, 2013) and encourage participatory learning (Mills, 2011), but the analysis of these 
three examples shows that outside of orchestrated pedagogical spaces, the possibilities for participation and 
access are often shifting and unequally distributed in SNS communicative landscapes. Staying afloat in the 
stream of online feed requires symbolic resources, awareness, and agility in order to navigate the obscured 
and, at times, even invisible audiences of networked publics. The semipublic format of Facebook and its 
combination of synchronous and asynchronous communication tools makes salient participation and 
production roles beyond the conversational speaker–listener dyads. The preference for citationality and 
other forms of remixing in SNS-talk makes tangible the layered scales of discourse that converge in a 
relatively short moment of interaction. 
Side-by-side with other genres often privileged in multiliteracies and communicative curricula (including 
spontaneous conversations and literary dialogue), learners can be asked to take on the role of literacy 
ethnographers as they read and analyze SNS-mediated communication representative of the multilingual 
communities in which they might participate. Because of the ways in which conversational affordances 
such as adjacency pairs and even code-choice are made visible and entextualized in the digital medium, 
examples of Facebook talk such as Excerpt 1 and Excerpt 2 might provide opportunities for what can be 
described as a kind of reverse bridging activity (Thorne & Reinhardt, 2008). Thorne and Reinhardt focus 
on the development of academic literacies in advanced language learners, but digital vernacular genres such 
as Facebook conversations can also be used to defamiliarize speech genres that dominate the basic and 
early-intermediate levels of language instruction. In addition to interrogating these texts in terms of the 
differences between internet-mediated and more traditional texts—as suggested by Thorne and Reinhardt 
(p. 563)—a guided in-class analysis of SNS interactions can also help learners to recognize comparable 
complexities of other forms of communication. This might include interactions in which the learners 
participate or key examples, such as those analyzed in this study. Such a comparative analysis of Facebook 
and other conversations might include the following kinds of questions inspired by the examples above: 
• Who are the most central participants in this conversation? Are there any additional participants? 
• What examples of crossplay, byplay, and sideplay occur? Who are the participants in each of these 
levels? How do these levels interact with one another? 
Chantelle Warner and Hsin-I Chen 133 
 
• Who is speaking in various moments of communication (including non-verbal communication acts 
and citation acts such as quoting, sharing, and reposting)? When citation occurs, is it direct, indirect, 
or implied (i.e., allusion)? 
Students can also be asked to transform SNS-mediated conversations to spontaneous face-to-face 
conversation or to a scripted theatrical, film, or literary dialogue to raise awareness of the affordances and 
constraints of the different modes and genres, as they consider how the participant roles shift and which 
forms of communication become difficult, awkward, or even impossible. 
The notion of conversational power reminds us that affordances, as opportunities for social action, are by 
no means neutral. As Rambe (2011) concludes in his study of academic uses of Facebook, “power circulates 
through technology’s…affordances and constraints and manifests through the actions and reactions 
of…agents in communicative events and interactions” (p. 275). Discussions of digital literacy and education 
sometimes overstate the creative potential and democratic participation of new media, while disassociating 
the ways in which meaning and social action are designed from questions of power even as current events 
repeatedly present us with examples of the power that emanates through and within online spaces.8 
In his article on integrating textual thinking in a beginning-level language classroom, Maxim (2006) 
concludes by describing some of behaviors that his learners exhibited at the end of a one-semester pilot 
study working with a fictional novel: “By starting to recognize the utterances, characters, and behaviors 
that exercised symbolic power, students began to gain access to the underlying system of thought within 
the novel” (p. 28). Comparably, our claim is that Facebook texts provide opportunities to (a) teach the many 
important ways in which utterances, characters, and behaviors exercise symbolic power, even in vernacular 
literacy practices such as social media; and (b) lay bare the underlying, sometimes layered, sometimes 
contradictory systems of thought that undergird the flow of symbolic power. This may be of particular 
importance for native English speakers learning other languages, because English is a source of symbolic 
and conversational power on the internet in ways that become most apparent through the analysis of 
translingual talk. While getting one’s meaning across on the internet may require only English, being an 
effective, critical, and symbolically sensitive communicator does not. 
As texts in practice, the conversational microcosms of Facebook offer striking examples of how 
conversational power flows through everyday interactions. Integrating key examples of SNS-mediated 
communication (among other literacy practices) can enable learners to consider not only how to get their 
own meanings across, but also which meanings get across to whom and through what channels, in what 
ways these meanings evolve as they are trafficked from conversation to conversation, and to what extent 
they are fractal figures for larger cultural relations. For example, learners may be given conversations from 
Facebook, such as Excerpt 2 and Excerpt 3, and asked to compare them with interactions in other media. 
They can be guided to inquire the following: 
• When individuals take on a role as principal, what societal or cultural authority do they invoke? 
• Whose utterances get cited or shared? In what ways are they shared and to what effect? 
• How do citational practices differ in Facebook, spontaneous face-to-face communication, academic 
genres, and represented face-to-face communication found in theatrical, film, and literary works? 
A guided contrastive analysis of these features can raise learners’ awareness of the various ways in which 
language users recycle and remix the speech of others to different purposes and effects as well as of the 
precarity and vulnerability of conversation and the ways in which language users maneuver in order to be 
heard, gain favor, and demonstrate their symbolic capital. 
Conclusion 
The intent of this article is to draw attention to some of the particular elements of translingual SNS-mediated 
conversations in order to emphasize the complex design choices at hand in the construction of 
conversationality and the negotiation of conversational power. These online conversations are not 
134 Language Learning & Technology 
 
necessarily more complex than the kinds of face-to-face interactions described by Kramsch and Whiteside 
(2008). However, their textualized nature as literacy practices makes them convenient as classroom 
materials. We have argued that the realities of contemporary communication push us to reframe language 
learning not as apprenticeship into a new linguistic community, but as increasing agility in a complex, 
multilingual ecology. Framed within multiliteracies pedagogies, the great potential for SNS-mediated 
communication in contexts of language teaching and learning is perhaps not as a means of accessing 
speakers of a given language as if they were a clearly definable speech community whose ranks can be 
entered through technology nor as an alternative classroom management site, but rather as a means of 
exploring the complexities of speech communities and speech itself. 
Acknowledgements 
We are grateful to the three individuals who agreed to allow us to use their Facebook conversations for this 
study. We also wish to thank the anonymous reviewers, whose thorough and insightful feedback has helped 
to shape this article. 
Notes 
1. Restricted interactions would not have been detected in our data, although all three subjects reported 
using these features only occasionally. 
2. Up until 2011, the messaging board feature of Facebook was a user’s Wall. Facebook phased in a new 
format (the Timeline) in 2011, first allowing users to opt in and then transitioning completely at the end 
of that year. 
3. All names were changed to protect the identities of the participants. 
4. For a broader picture of SNS interaction, see work by Baym and boyd (2012) and Androutsopoulos 
(2013, 2014). 
5. A face-to-face comparison can be made with the audience members in a large lecture hall who nod 
emphatically and make eye contact while the professor speaks, thus signaling nonverbally that they are 
more central or more favored recipients. 
6. Facebook algorithms also determine which posts will show up in an individual’s feed. Although it is 
difficult to determine exactly how these algorithms work and Facebook changes them often, they tend 
to operate according to what the Facebook data science page describes as strong and weak ties. In short, 
this means that the posts and updates of friends with whom one interacts more by mutually sharing, 
commenting on, or liking their content will appear more in one’s feed. 
7. Knobel and Lankshear (2008) have described this aspect of Facebook interactions (by which users 
attend to particular texts on someone’s page) as insiderliness (p. 272). 
8. A relatively recent and poignant example of this was Facebook’s creation of French flag overlays for 
profile photos as a show of solidarity following the attacks in Paris on November 13, 2015. The overlays 
were widely used, but also received backlash from those who criticized their valorization of certain 
tragedies over others. 
References 
Allen, H., & Paesani, K. (2010). Exploring the feasibility of a pedagogy of multiliteracies in introductory 
foreign language courses. L2 Journal, 2(1), 119–142. 
Androutsopoulos, J. (2013). Networked multilingualism: Some language practices on Facebook and their 
implications. International Journal of Bilingualism, 19(2), 185–205. 
Chantelle Warner and Hsin-I Chen 135 
 
Androutsopoulos, J. (2014). Languaging when contexts collapse: Audience design in social networking. 
Discourse, Context, and Media, 4–5, 62–73. 
Baym, N., & boyd, d. (2012). Socially mediated publicness: an introduction. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 56(3), 320–329. 
Beisswenger, M. (2008). Situated chat analysis as a window to the user’s perspective: Aspects of 
temporal and sequential organization. Language@Internet, 5, n.p. Retrieved from 
http://www.languageatinternet.org/articles/2008/1532 
Blattner, G., & Fiori, M. (2011). Virtual social network communities: An investigation of language 
learners’ development of sociopragmatic awareness and multiliteracy skills. CALICO Journal, 29(1), 
24–43. 
Blommaert, J. (2005). Discourse. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
boyd, d., & Ellison, N. (2007). Social network sites: Definition, history, and scholarship. Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1), 210–230. 
boyd, d., Golder, S., & Lotan, G. (2010). Tweet, tweet, retweet: Conversational aspects of retweeting on 
Twitter. In Proceedings of the 43rd Hawai‘i International Conference on System Sciences. New 
York, NY: IEEE Press. Retrieved from http://www.danah.org/papers/TweetTweetRetweet.pdf 
Byrnes, H. (2006). Perspectives: Interrogating communicative competence as a framework for collegiate 
foreign language study. Modern Language Journal, 90, 244–266. 
Chen, H. (2012). Social networking, socialization, and second language writers: The development of new 
identities and literacies. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ. 
Ellison, N., & boyd, d. (2013). Sociality through social network sites. In W. H. Dutton (Ed.), The Oxford 
Handbook of Internet Studies (pp. 151–172). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Ellison, N., Steinfield, C., & Lampe, C. (2007). The benefits of Facebook “friends”: Exploring the 
relationship between college students’ use of online social networks and social capital. Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication, 12(4), 1143–1168. 
Facebook. (2016). Newsroom. Statistics: Facebook. Retrieved from http://newsroom.fb.com/company-
info/ 
Forrester, M. (1999). Conversation and instruction within apprenticeship: Affordances for learning. In P. 
Ainley & H. Rainbird, (Eds.), Apprenticeship: Towards a new paradigm of learning. London, UK: 
Kogan Page. 
Gee, J. (2011). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses. New York, NY: Taylor and 
Francis. 
Goffman, E. (1964). Stigma. London, UK: Penguin 
Goffman, E. (1981a). Forms of talk. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Goffman, E. (1981b). Radio talk in forms of talk. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Goffman, E. (1986). Frame analysis: An essay on the organization of experience. Boston, MA: 
Northeastern University Press. 
Golato, A., & Taleghani-Nikazm, C. (2006). Negotiation of face in chats. Multilingua, 25, 293–322. 
González-Lloret, M. (2007). What do language learners attend to when their environment changes? In C. 
Periñan (Ed.), Revisiting language learning resources. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Scholars 
Publishing. 
136 Language Learning & Technology 
 
González-Lloret, M. (2011). Conversation analysis of computer-mediated communication. CALICO 
Journal, 28(2), 308–325. 
Herring, S. (1999). Interactional coherence in CMC. Journal of Computer-Mediated-Communication, 
4(4), n.p. 
Holcomb, J., Gottfried, J., & Mitchell, A. (2013). News use across social media platforms. Pew research 
journalism project. Retrieved from http://www.journalism.org/2013/11/14/news-use-across-social-
media-platforms/ 
Honeycutt, C., & Cunliffe, D. (2010). The use of the Welsh language on Facebook. Information, 
Communication and Society, 13(2), 226–248. 
Honeycutt, C., & Herring, S. C. (2009). Beyond Microblogging: Conversation and Collaboration via 
Twitter. In Proceedings of the 42nd Hawai‘i International Conference on System Sciences. New 
York, NY: IEEE Press. 
Kell, C. (2015). Ariadne’s thread: Literacy, scale, and meaning making across space and time. In C. 
Stroud & M. Prinsloo (Eds.), Language, literacy, and diversity: Moving words. London, UK: 
Routledge. 
Kern, R. (2000). Literacy and language teaching. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Kern, R. (2014). Technology as pharmakon: The promise and perils of the Internet for foreign language 
education. Modern Language Journal, 98(1), 340–357. 
Knobel, M., & Lankshear, C. (1999). Everyday literacies: Students, discourse, and social practice. New 
York: Peter Lang. 
Knobel, M., & Lankshear, C. (2008). Digital literacy and participation in online social networking spaces. 
In C. Lankshear & M. Knobel (Eds.), Digital literacies: Concepts, policies, and practices (pp. 249–
278). New York, NY: Peter Lang. 
Kramsch, C. (2008). Ecological perspectives on foreign language education. Language Teaching, 41(3), 
389–408. 
Kramsch, C., & Whiteside, A. (2008). Language ecology in multilingual settings: Towards a theory of 
symbolic competence. Applied Linguistics, 29(4), 645–671. 
Lam, W. S. E. (2009). Multiliteracies on instant messaging in negotiating local, translocal, and 
transnational affiliations: A case of an adolescent immigrant. Reading Research Quarterly, 44(4), 
377–397. 
Lamy, M., & Zourou, K. (2013). Social networking for language education. London, UK: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
le Carré, J. (2001). The constant gardener. London, UK: Coronet Books. 
Leppänen, S., Pitkänen-Huhta, A., Piirainen-Marsh, A., Nikula, T., & Peuronen, S. (2009). Young 
people’s translocal new media uses: A multiperspective analysis of language choice and 
heteroglossia. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 14(4), 1080–1107. 
Lotherington, H., & Ronda, N. S. (2014). 2B or not 2B: From pencil to multimodal programming: New 
frontiers in communicative competencies. In J. Pettes Guikema & L. Williams (Eds.), Digital 
literacies in foreign and second language education (pp. 9–28). San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Marcoccia, M. (2004). On-line polylogues: Conversation structure and participation framework in internet 
newsgroups. Journal of Pragmatics, 36, 115–145. 
Maxim, H. H. (2006). Integrating textual thinking into the introductory college-level foreign language 
classroom. Modern Language Journal, 90(1), 19–32. 
Chantelle Warner and Hsin-I Chen 137 
 
Mills, N. (2011). Situated learning through social networking communities: The development of joint 
enterprise, mutual engagement, and a shared repertoire. CALICO Journal, 28(2), 345–368. 
Mitchell, K. (2012). A social tool: Why and how ESOL students use Facebook. CALICO Journal, 29(3), 
471–493. 
New London Group. (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures. Harvard 
Educational Review, 66(1), 60–92. 
Pennycook, A. (2007). Global Englishes and transcultural flows. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Rambe, P. (2011). Exploring the impacts of social networking sites on. Journal of Information 
Technology Education, 10, 272–293. Retrieved from www.jite.org/documents/Vol10/JITEv10p271-
293Rambe981.pdf 
Reinhardt, J., & Ryu, J. (2013). Using social network-mediated bridging activities to develop socio-
pragmatic awareness in elementary Korean. International Journal of Computer Assisted Language 
Learning and Teaching, 3(3), 18–33. 
Reinhardt, J., & Zander, V. (2011). Social networking in an intensive English program classroom: A 
language socialization perspective. CALICO Journal, 28(2), 345–368. 
Rintel, E. S., Mulholland, J., & Pittam, J. (2001). First things first: Internet relay chat openings. Journal 
of Computer Mediated Communication, 6(3), n.p. 
Schönfeldt, J., & Golato, A. (2003). Repair in chats: A conversation analytic approach. Research on 
Language and Social Interaction, 36, 241–284. 
Street, B. (1995). Social literacies: Critical approaches to literacy in development, ethnography, and 
education. London, UK: Longman. 
Sunden, J. (2003). Material virtualities: Approaching online textual embodiment. New York, NY: Peter 
Lang. 
Thorne, S., & Reinhardt, J. (2008). “Bridging activities,” new media literacies, and advanced foreign 
language proficiency. CALICO Journal, 25(3), 558–572. 
About the Authors 
Chantelle Warner is an Associate Professor of German Studies and Second Language Acquisition and 
Teaching at the University of Arizona. She is co-director of the Center for Educational Resources of 
Language, Literacy, and Culture—a National Language Resource. Her research is in second language 
learning and teaching, literacy studies, and discourse stylistics. 
E-mail: warnerc@email.arizona.edu 
Hsin-I Chen is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Applied Foreign Languages at National 
Kaohsiung University of Applied Sciences in Taiwan. Her research interests include technology-mediated 
communication, multiliteracies, intercultural communication, and learner identity. 
E-mail: hsinichen20@gmail.com 
