Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
June 2017, Volume 21, Issue 2 
pp. 27–31 
BOOK REVIEW  
 
 
Copyright © 2017 Tzu-Hua Chen & Luke Plonsky 
 
 
Review of A psycholinguistic approach to technology 
and language learning 
Tzu-Hua Chen, National Taiwan Normal University 
Luke Plonsky, Georgetown University 
 
A psycholinguistic approach to technology and language 
learning 
Leow, R P., Cerezo, L., Baralt, M. (Eds.) 
2015 
ISBN: 978-1-61451-367-4 
US $ 140.00 
267 pp. 
Mouton De Gruyter 
Berlin, Germany 
 
Review 
The realm of second language acquisition (SLA) has experienced a social turn that started in the mid-1990s 
(Block, 2003). Following this shift, SLA brought the field to “fruitful epistemological diversity that affords 
unique opportunities to enrich our multilayered understanding of additional language learning” (Ortega, 
2011, p. 178). One such opportunity is presented in A psycholinguistic approach to technology and 
language learning, which is an ambitious, seminal, book-length work edited by Leow, Cerezo, and Baralt. 
It considers the mediation of SLA by digital technology from a psycholinguistic perspective. As stated by 
the editors in the preface, the major aim of this volume is to establish a dialogue between 
psycholinguistically-motivated theories and applications (i.e., research and pedagogy alike) to fully explore 
the potential of technology that mediates SLA. Thus, this book adopts a unique four-pronged approach 
(theoretical, methodological, empirical, and pedagogical) to technology used for SLA. In doing so, the 
editors hope to encourage their socially-oriented colleagues to do the same and to promote eclectic 
integration of the two theoretical camps into future research and practice. In addition to the major aim, the 
editors are especially interested in drawing attention to the potential benefit of technology to enhance 
second language (L2) learners’ attention and cognitive processes as well as to the role that such processes 
play in technology-mediated SLA. 
Following a brief editorial introduction, the 13 chapters of the volume are divided into four sections. Section 
1, entitled Introduction to technology and SLA theory, consists of two thought-provoking chapters that lay 
the groundwork for this edited collection. In the introductory Chapter 1, Petersen and Sachs provide an 
informative overview of the opportunities and challenges of a number of popular technologies, including 
multimedia, synchronous computer-mediated communication (SCMC), intelligent computer-assisted 
language learning (ICALL), and mobile technology in networked language instruction and learning. 
Petersen and Sachs then advocate for active contributions by various stakeholders (i.e., through open-source 
sharing of teaching and research materials and technology training for practitioners) in conjunction with 
the advance of technology to foster communities of practice. Chapter 2 moves on to an insightful—and 
28 Language Learning & Technology 
 
detailed—theoretical synthesis of existing CALL studies. Examining 115 empirical studies from three 
major CALL journals, Cerezo reports that about half of the studies (42%) did not interpret the findings 
based on any existing theories, that diverse socially oriented approaches are preferred to cognitive 
approaches, and that 63% of CALL research draws from mainstream theories in SLA. Cerezo concludes by 
emphasizing the theoretical and practical contributions of a psycholinguistic perspective for CALL research, 
but also argues for a synergy between cognitive and socially oriented approaches. 
Chapter 3 by Sanz, Morales-Front, Zalbidea, and Zárate-Sández begins the second section, Technology and 
SLA research: Methodological issues. This chapter reports on a survey examining how doctoral students of 
applied linguistics utilize computer software and equipment as well as their perceptions on the advantages 
and challenges of using technology for SLA research. Based on the findings, the authors provide 
constructive suggestions to graduate programs that include providing training on how to operate advanced 
equipment, promoting the use of freeware, encouraging collaboration among novice researchers from 
different disciplines, and organizing workshops targeting specific technologies and techniques. In Chapter 
4, Leow and Suh apply Leow’s (1999) internal and external validity criteria to a methodological synthesis 
of 17 journal studies on the comparative efficacy of CALL versus traditional offline learning in promoting 
vocabulary learning, reading comprehension, and listening comprehension. Focusing on violations of the 
validity criteria in the studies, the chapter offers some empirically-supported recommendations on 
overcoming limitations. Throughout the chapter, the authors highlight the importance of considering 
research designs and reporting practices before arriving at any conclusion on the superiority of one medium 
over the other (see parallel comments in Plonsky & Ziegler, 2016). Readers who wish to improve 
methodological rigor in their research may find this chapter particularly helpful. 
Suh’s meta-analysis and research synthesis (Chapter 5) set the stage for the subsequent six empirical studies, 
which comprise the book’s third section, Technology and SLA research: Empirical studies. Suh gives a 
systematic review of 11 quantitative studies published in 11 refereed journals that touch upon the 
comparative effectiveness of the acquisition of different types of linguistic forms (i.e., grammatical vs. 
lexical forms) in CALL versus in traditional offline learning environments and under different CALL 
treatments (i.e., SCMC vs. e-tutor vs. computerized glosses). Additionally, Suh investigates the link 
between study validity and L2 linguistic form learning outcomes in these chosen studies. The key finding 
is that CALL was better than traditional learning in promoting grammar learning. In addition to showing 
readers the areas which still need further research (e.g., the comparative efficacy of different types of task 
features and target linguistic features in CALL vs. in a traditional learning environment), the author cautions 
against interpretation of existing published meta-analyses in CALL while underscoring a need for robust 
research designs and advanced reporting practices in future empirical studies. The meta-analysis contributes 
to the growing body of primary and meta-analytic CALL research by continuing to address the relationship 
between study validity and L2 learning outcomes in CALL research (see also Plonsky, 2015; Plonsky & 
Ziegler, 2016; Ziegler, 2016). This chapter flows logically from the preceding one since the importance of 
study validity is reinforced and further explored in relation to acquisition of L2 linguistic forms in CALL 
versus in traditional learning environments. 
Following Suh’s work, four of the six empirical studies that make up the rest of the section (Chapters 6–9) 
employ think-aloud protocols to examine the role of attention and cognitive processes in SLA. In Chapter 
6, Medina describes a study that explores the role of both presentation mode (computer vs. paper-based) 
and awareness level (noticing vs. understanding) of glosses in L2 Spanish morphosyntactic development 
and reading comprehension. Pedagogical implications of this study are that glosses are not necessary in 
instructional design, as they are detrimental to text comprehension, and that morphological recognition and 
production can be achieved through rule discovery by learners. In Chapter 7, Hsieh revisits a previous 
article (Hsieh, 2008) by comparing L2 Spanish learners’ level of awareness in morphosyntactic 
development in two types of instructional mediums: C-FTF (video-taped computerized version of face-to-
face instruction) and CAI (computer-assisted instruction via a virtual e-tutor in the form of a game). The 
unique implications of the study are that depth of processing, compared with level of awareness, is a better 
determinant of L2 development, and that a learner-centered instructional medium (i.e., CAI) is more 
Tzu-Hua Chen and Luke Plonsky 29 
 
effective than a teacher-centered instructional medium (i.e., C-FTF) for L2 morphosyntactic development. 
In Chapter 8, Gurzynski-Weiss, Al Khalil, Baralt, and Leow extend a study by Sachs and Suh (2007), 
examining the relationship between level of awareness (high vs. low), type of implicit feedback (enhanced 
vs. unenhanced recasts), and type of linguistic items (lexis vs. morphology vs. syntax) in a text-based 
SCMC environment. In Chapter 9, de la Fuente focuses on the relative efficacy of L1 and L2 explicit 
metalinguistic feedback on awareness and learning of L2 Spanish forms. The study finds that L1 feedback 
offers L2 learners additional cognitive benefits, suggesting that CALL materials and activities should take 
into account the bilingual nature of L2 learners’ minds. Also situating L2 development in a text-based 
SCMC environment, Baralt and Leow devote Chapter 10 to research the link between learner uptake, 
cognitive task complexity (simple vs. complex), and L2 learning of Spanish past subjunctive. Unlike 
findings with FTF environments, the study found that learners’ uptake during both cognitively simple and 
complex tasks in an online environment was not related to learning. In Chapter 11, Serafini and Pennestri 
address the pedagogical value of learner response systems, namely clickers, as a novel way of providing 
feedback to L2 Spanish grammatical forms (preterit and imperfect aspectual distinction) in a classroom 
setting. Two variables, type of feedback (implicit vs. explicit) and timing (immediate vs. delayed), were 
investigated. The study demonstrated that immediate explicit feedback resulted in the best performance in 
grammatical forms production and that clickers are both a welcome psycholinguistic research tool and a 
pedagogical tool. Taken together, these studies offer invaluable insights into the connections between 
awareness level and SLA and generally substantiate that a high level of awareness is related to L2 
development. 
The last section of the volume is entitled Technology and practice. This section shifts from a focus on 
psycholinguistically-motivated empirical studies to a discussion of psycholinguistically-motivated CALL 
activities and directions for future research and practice. Chapter 12 is particularly useful for readers 
interested in pedagogical applications and software or game development for L2 learning. Cerezo, Moreno, 
and Leow start by introducing a clear-cut classification of CALL technologies in which tasks might be 
implemented. The authors then illustrate examples according to the 10 psycholinguistically-motivated 
methodological principles (MPs) of task-based language teaching (TBLT) defined by Doughty and Long 
(2003). The chapter concludes with some bona fide exemplars and examples of less-controlled (e.g., 
simulations and augmented reality games) and more-controlled CALL activities (e.g., e-tutors, new form 
of simulations) in detail. The final chapter, Chapter 13, pulls the volume together as the editors succinctly 
summarize the contents of every chapter and conclude with calls for future research and practice based on 
contributor insights. Specifically, the editors call for employing divergent cognitive and socially oriented 
approaches, particularly the former. They also advocate for the use of advanced technologies (i.e., brain-
based methods and psycholinguistic tools) to understand how the L2 is attended to and for technology-
mediated task design as a future research program. Along with each of these calls to action, the editors 
reiterate the crucial role of L2 learners’ attentional resources and cognitive processes in CALL. 
Well written and accessible, this excellent volume accomplishes the goal that it sets out to achieve: to 
initiate a conversation between psycholinguistic theories and applications. The volume is well-organized, 
moving from more theoretical chapters to more practical ones. Perhaps one of the greatest strengths of this 
volume is that an array of psycholinguistically-motivated theories and concepts is introduced and applied 
to empirical studies as the volume unfolds, which is particularly useful for researchers new to the field. 
Some of the major theories, concepts, and research methods readers are exposed to in this book include the 
noticing hypothesis, interaction approach, TBLT, textual enhancement, form-focused instruction, cognition 
hypothesis, and think-aloud protocols, among others. 
One potential shortcoming is the lack of research using eye-tracking methodology to study the link between 
L2 learners’ attention and cognitive processes and SLA in CALL environments (e.g., Smith, 2012). Another 
methodological shortcoming relates to the research syntheses and meta-analysis in Chapters 2, 4, and 5. 
Specifically, if the contributors had included both published and unpublished studies, the meta-analysis and 
methodological and theoretical syntheses might have limited the potential for publication bias (e.g., Lin, 
30 Language Learning & Technology 
 
2015; Ziegler, 2016). In addition, there might have been chapters that deal with learners’ attention and its 
impact on SLA when using other technological innovations, such as mobile technology, ICALL (e.g., 
automatic speech recognition), and tools like concordancers, which were mentioned in Chapters 1 and 12. 
In doing so, the volume might have more comprehensively attained the goal of a better understanding of 
how L2 learners’ attentional resources and cognitive processes are deployed when using digital 
technologies for L2 learning. However, we are aware that studies addressing the empirical link between 
attention and cognitive processes and SLA have just begun to bloom in the realm of CALL–SLA research, 
and are still scant vis-à-vis technological applications (for a parallel comment, see Chen, 2016). 
Overall, A psycholinguistic approach to technology and language learning represents a much-needed 
contribution to the field by bringing together current and prospective theories, research methods, empirical 
findings, and pedagogical practice. As such, this compelling, versatile volume has great potential to drive 
the area forward by opening up promising avenues for further research and making pedagogical 
recommendations firmly grounded in research findings. Ultimately, this book is a valuable resource for 
experienced and novice researchers and L2 teaching practitioners, as well as for curriculum, software, and 
materials developers. 
References 
Block, D. (2003). The social turn in second language acquisition. Washington, DC: Georgetown 
University Press. 
Chen, T.-H. (2016). Task-based L2 interaction via synchronous computer-mediated communication: A 
research synthesis. Poster presented at the 35th Second Language Research Forum (SLRF 2016), 
New York, NY, USA. 
Doughty, C. J., & Long, M. H. (2003). Optimal psycholinguistic environments for distance foreign 
language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 50–80. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/pdf/doughty.pdf 
Hsieh, H.-C. (2008). The effects of type of exposure and type of post-exposure task on L2 development. 
Journal of Foreign Language Instruction, 2, 117–138. 
Leow, R. P. (1999). The role of attention in second/foreign language classroom research: Methodological 
issues. In J. Gutiérrez-Rexach & F. Martínez-Gil (Eds.), Advances in Hispanic linguistics: Papers 
from the 2nd Hispanic Linguistics Symposium (pp. 60–71). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press. 
Lin, H. (2015). A meta-synthesis of empirical research on the effectiveness of computer-mediated 
communication (CMC) in SLA. Language Learning & Technology, 19(2) 85–117. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2015/lin.pdf 
Ortega, L. (2011). SLA after the social turn: Where cognitivism and its alternatives stand. In D. Atkinson 
(Ed.), Alternative approaches to second language acquisition (pp.167–180). New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Plonsky, L. (2015). Quantitative considerations for improving replicability in CALL and applied 
linguistics. CALICO Journal, 32, 232–244. 
Plonsky, L., & Ziegler, N. (2016). The CALL–SLA interface: Insights from a second-order synthesis. 
Language Learning & Technology, 20(2), 17–37. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2016/plonskyziegler.pdf 
Sachs, R., & Suh, B.-R. (2007). Textually enhanced recasts, learner awareness, and L2 outcomes in 
synchronous computer-mediated interaction. In A. Mackey (Ed.), Conversational interaction in 
second language acquisition: A collection of empirical studies (pp. 197–227). Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press. 
Tzu-Hua Chen and Luke Plonsky 31 
 
Smith, B. (2012). Eye tracking as a measure of noticing: A study of explicit recasts in SCMC. Language 
Learning & Technology, 16(3), 53–81. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2012/smith.pdf 
Ziegler, N. (2016). Synchronous computer-mediated communication and interaction: A meta-analysis. 
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 38(3), 553–586. 
About the Authors 
Tzu-Hua Chen recently received her MA in TESOL from National Taiwan Normal University. Her research 
interests include the CALL–SLA interface, SLA (e.g., interaction approach, TBLT, instructed pragmatics), 
research methodology, research synthesis, and meta-analysis. She has published in English Teaching & 
Learning and presented or published several papers on cognitive and psycholinguistic aspects of CALL and 
SLA at major applied linguistics, SLA, and TESOL conferences in the US, Canada, and Taiwan. 
Email: tzuhuachen2017@gmail.com 
Luke Plonsky (PhD, Michigan State University) is an Assistant Professor of Applied Linguistics at 
Georgetown University where he teaches courses in SLA and research methods. His work on these and 
other topics has appeared in a variety of journals (e.g., Applied Linguistics, Language Learning) and edited 
volumes. Luke is Associate Editor of Studies in Second Language Acquisition, Managing Editor of Foreign 
Language Annals, and Co-Director of the IRIS Database for instruments in language learning and teaching. 
Email: luke.plonsky@georgetown.edu 
