Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
June 2017, Volume 21, Issue 2 
pp. 96–120 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2017 Mimi Li & Wei Zhu 
 
 
Explaining dynamic interactions in wiki-based 
collaborative writing 
Mimi Li, Georgia Southern University 
Wei Zhu, University of South Florida 
Abstract 
This article reports a case study that examined dynamic patterns of interaction that two small groups 
(Group A and Group B) of ESL students exemplified when they performed two writing tasks: a research 
proposal (Task 1) and an annotated bibliography (Task 2) in a wiki site. Group A demonstrated a collective 
pattern in Task 1, but switched to an active–withdrawn pattern in Task 2. In contrast, Group B exhibited a 
dominant–defensive pattern in Task 1, but switched to a collaborative pattern in Task 2. These patterns 
were substantiated by group members’ ongoing task approaches in terms of equality and mutuality, 
reflected via the analyses of language functions, writing change functions, and scaffolding occurrences 
over the course of joint wiki writing. The dynamic interactions within small groups were explained from a 
sociocultural theory perspective. Participants’ emic perspectives from interviews and reflection papers 
supplemented with wiki discourse revealed that three sociocultural factors help account for the variations 
of interaction patterns: dynamic goals, flexible agency, and socially constructed emotion. This study 
reinforced the role of sociocultural theory in exploring and explaining peer interactions in the online 
writing task environment. Implications of the study for research and pedagogy are also discussed. 
Keywords: Collaborative Learning, Computer-Mediated Communication, Sociocultural Theory, Writing 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English 
APA Citation: Li, M., & Zhu, W. (2017). Explaining dynamic interactions in wiki-based collaborative 
writing. Language Learning & Technology, 21(2), 96–120. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2017/lizhu.pdf 
Introduction 
Wiki-based collaborative writing has been increasingly implemented in second language (L2) classes due 
to the potential of wikis to promote and support collaboration (e.g., Kessler, 2009; Lee, 2010; Mak & 
Coniam, 2008). Wikis are web sites that allow users to jointly create and edit the web contents. With its 
distinctive features of user editability, detailed page histories, and independence of time and space, wiki 
technology encourages collaboration and continual revision (Purdy, 2009) and also affords extended 
collaborative writing practice (Storch, 2013). Wiki applications (e.g., Wikispaces, PBworks) have four 
characteristic modules: edit enables the users to freely change or revise the page in terms of texts, images, 
or hyperlinks; history reveals all the changes the page has gone through with color coding of deleted and 
inserted texts; discussion allows the users to communicate and negotiate page contents and revisions via 
asynchronous messaging; and comment, embedded in the editor toolbar, enables the users to provide 
feedback and comments or raise questions regarding specific texts in pop-up boxes. 
The current body of research on wikis in the L2 context has largely addressed students’ wiki writing 
processes (e.g., Elola & Oskoz, 2010; Kessler & Bikowski, 2010; Lund, 2008), wiki writing products (e.g., 
Elola & Oskoz, 2010; Kuteeva, 2011), and perceptions of wiki-based collaborative writing (e.g., Chao & 
Lo, 2011; Li & Zhu, 2013). Several studies (e.g., Bradley, Lindström & Rystedt, 2010; Kost, 2011; Li & 
Zhu, 2013) have identified that different patterns of interaction emerge when students work on wiki writing 
projects. The interaction patterns (i.e., the ways in which learners participate in the task and form 
Mimi Li and Wei Zhu 97 
 
relationships with each other) are associated with their use of language in the wiki communication (Li, 
2013; Li & Zhu, 2013), their revision behaviors in the wiki page (e.g., Kost, 2011), and the level or nature 
of contributions to wiki writing (e.g., Bradley et al., 2010). However, little research to date has investigated 
what interaction dynamics may occur when small groups of students work across writing tasks and what 
factors may account for dynamic interactions during collaborative wiki writing. Given the increasing role 
of collaborative wiki writing in English as a Second Language (ESL) classrooms, it is of vital importance 
to investigate how students work together over wiki writing tasks and explain why students form distinct 
online interaction patterns (Storch, 2013). Such investigations would contribute to writing pedagogy and 
inform instructors in better design and implementation of wiki projects to foster greater group collaboration. 
In the study reported below, we aimed to examine the dynamic nature of group interactions and interpret 
the interaction dynamics in the wiki writing task environment. Our study was guided by sociocultural theory 
(SCT) and was conducted in an English for Academic Purposes (EAP) course at a public research university 
in the southeast US. The study addressed the following two research questions: 
1. What patterns of interaction occur when small groups of ESL students perform collaborative wiki 
writing tasks? 
2. What sociocultural factors can explain the interaction dynamics? 
Following SCT as the theoretical framework, our study demonstrates how scaffolding and mediation help 
us understand students’ interaction in collaborative wiki writing and how goal, agency, and emotion provide 
insightful explanations for the dynamic interactions within small groups across EAP writing tasks. 
Literature Review 
SCT highlights the role of social interaction in learning and emphasizes the importance of language as a 
mediating tool in the learning process (Vygotsky, 1978). SCT has guided research on L2 collaborative 
writing and has provided a powerful theoretical lens through which we can examine learner interaction and 
collaboration (de Guerrero & Villamil, 2000; Donato, 1994; Storch, 2004, 2013). Several constructs of SCT 
are particularly important to our study and are discussed below. 
Scaffolding and Mediation 
A key construct guiding research in L2 interaction is scaffolding, which is defined as an assisting process 
“that enables a child or novice to solve a problem, carry out a task, or achieve a goal which would be beyond 
his unassisted efforts” (Wood, Bruner, & Ross, 1976, p. 90). The expert scaffolds the novice via helpful 
and structured interaction, consequently facilitating the novice’s development in the Zone of Proximal 
Development (Lidz, 1991; Vygotsky, 1978), which refers to the distance between the novice’s current state 
of knowledge and potential state of development (Vygotsky, 1978). The expert not only fine-tunes his or 
her assistance according to the novice’s level of performance, but also encourages the novice to have a 
greater participation to achieve learning goals. The construct of scaffolding is later extended from adult–
child interaction to peer interaction (e.g., Donato, 1994; Ohta, 2000; Swain, 2000), in which learners act as 
both experts and novices and provide mutual scaffolding for one another in pair or small group activities. 
For instance, Donato (1994) illustrated ‘‘collective scaffolding’’ scenarios in his study, in which ‘‘the 
speakers are at the same time individually novices and collectively experts, sources of new orientations for 
each other and guides through this complex linguistic problem solving’’(p. 46). 
The other sociocultural construct that guides our study is mediation, particularly mediation through 
language (Lantolf, 2000; Vygotsky, 1978). Language, as a critical source of mediation, is a form of social 
communication that allows the novice and the expert to plan, coordinate, and review their actions (Wells, 
1999). Previous studies (e.g., Bruner, 1978; de Guerrero & Villamil, 2000; Lidz, 1991) inform us that 
language embodies experts’ scaffolding behaviors. Lidz (1991) developed the Mediating Learning 
Experience Rating Scale that consisted of 12 scaffolding behaviors in adult–child interaction. For instance, 
one of the scaffolding behaviors, contingent responsivity, which was also observed in our study, refers to 
98 Language Learning & Technology 
 
the adult’s ability to read the child’s behavior and to make an appropriate response accordingly. de Guerrero 
and Villamil (2000) drew on Lidz’ (1991) taxonomy of adult-to-child mediating behaviors and identified a 
variety of scaffolding mechanisms (e.g., instructing, joint regard, affective involvement) employed by peers 
during peer response activity in which students critique each other’s writing. Such scaffolding strategies 
facilitated the completion of joint learning tasks through the mediation of language. 
These two concepts of SCT have informed research on collaborative writing such as the present study in 
which student interaction is essential for successful completion of the writing tasks and in which language 
constitutes a primary means for interaction. In pair and group work, language assists learners to co-construct 
knowledge and solve problems through interaction, thus affording collaboration (Anton & DiCamilla, 1998; 
Swain, 2000; Villamil & de Guerrero, 1996). Researchers (e.g., Swain, 2010; Swain & Lapkin, 2002) 
detected the occurrence of “collaborative dialogue,” in which group members or pairs orally manipulated 
language to solve problems together and jointly constructed new knowledge and understanding. Research 
on ESL student interaction during writing tasks (e.g., peer response and collaborative writing) has also 
revealed that by employing various language functions (i.e., the mediating functions of language during 
communication, such as suggesting, stating, encouraging, and questioning; see Lockhart & Ng, 1995; Zhu, 
2001), learners negotiate meanings to achieve writing goals. Li and Zhu (2013) recently applied the concept 
of language functions to understanding and interpreting ESL student interaction and task negotiation during 
collaborative wiki writing processes. 
Goals, Emotion, and Agency 
Other sociocultural concepts that have shed considerable light on student behaviors in L2 collaborative 
learning contexts and are highly relevant to our study are goals, emotion, and agency (Imai, 2010; Lantolf 
& Pavlenko, 2001; Storch, 2004). Group and pair work is regarded as a goal-directed activity in which 
one’s aims, objects of efforts, or desired results mediate interaction. According to previous literature in L2 
education (e.g., Ames, 1992; Cumming, 2012), goals have been traditionally classified into performance 
goals (i.e., simply performing and completing a task), mastery goals (i.e., mastering new knowledge and 
extending one’s abilities), and intentional learning goals (i.e., gaining greater control over one’s learning, 
mirrored in self-regulation). Cumming (2012) explained that goals are contingent on contexts and learners, 
and “people’s motivations are realized through operations or behaviors that focus on particular goals, which 
can be articulated, analyzed, and altered or shaped” (p. 138). In collaborative practice, “members define the 
goals of joint enterprise and individual’s roles in pursuing these goals,” but the individual members may 
have varied levels of commitment to the shared goals and “position themselves differently in relation to 
those goals.” (Nolen, Ward, & Horn, 2011, p. 114). Storch (2004), in an empirical study with university 
ESL students in a face-to-face collaborative writing setting, further investigated how convergent or 
divergent goal orientations mediated peer interaction from a SCT perspective. Through analyzing individual 
interviews, particularly students’ responses to questions on their perceived purposes or goals in pair work, 
Storch identified the connections between peers’ goal orientations and patterns of interaction. For instance, 
the dominant–dominant pair expressed the overriding and competing goal of displaying their knowledge, 
whereas the collaborative pair conveyed their shared goal of doing their best to complete the task together. 
Two other sociocultural concepts associated with goals are agency and emotion. Agency is defined as 
“people’s ability to make choices, take control, [and] self-regulate” while pursuing their goals (Duff, 2012, 
p. 414). It is “the socioculturally mediated capacity to act” (Ahearn 2001, p. 112) and “a contextually 
enacted way of being in the world” (van Lier, 2008, p. 163). Agency is also interpreted as students’ 
“attunements to the affordances to make important decisions that contribute to the shared goals of the 
activity” (Nolen et al., 2011, p. 121). Since agency can be exercised by both individuals and communities 
(Lantolf & Thorne, 2006), van Lier (2008) proposed individual agency and collaborative agency. Individual 
agency drives the learner to take concrete actions in pursuit of his or her goals in a specific context, whereas 
collaborative agency energizes the activity with a larger number of learners’ joint capacity. Collaborative 
agency events occur while learners volunteer to provide scaffolding and instruction to each other. In brief, 
agency, constrained by such factors as social groupings, situational contingencies, and individual or group 
Mimi Li and Wei Zhu 99 
 
capacities, helps us understand why participants act in the way they do (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006). 
Emotion, being a sociocultural factor accounting for human behavior, is also an essential part of goal-
directed action (Swain, 2013). Vygotsky (1978) proposed the interrelatedness of cognition and emotion in 
language development: emotion and cognition co-mediate learning. Departing from the traditional view of 
emotion as private and inner reactions of an individual, van Lier (1996) described emotion as an emergent 
source of motivation, including “here-and-now interest in the tasks, the joy of exploration or working 
together, [and] natural curiosity” (p. 105). Imai (2010) defined emotion from a SCT perspective as “socially 
constructed acts of communication that can mediate one’s thinking, behavior, and goals” (p. 279). Emotions 
are thus considered “interpersonal,” “socially and culturally derived,” and able to “be co-constructed as an 
event progresses” (Swain, 2013, p. 196). In sum, goals (convergent and divergent goal orientations), agency 
(individual agency and collaborative agency), and emotion (i.e., an emergent source of motivation) help us 
explain the interaction dynamics in the current study. 
Patterns of Peer Interaction 
Several SCT-informed studies that examined peer interaction in a collaborative learning task environment, 
including patterns of interaction in wiki-based collaborative writing, provided methodological insights for 
our study. Damon and Phelps (1989) initially proposed two indexes of peer interaction (i.e., equality, or 
learners taking directions from one another, and mutuality, or engagement featured by reciprocal feedback) 
when describing three forms of peer-based instruction: peer tutoring (low equality, variable mutuality), 
cooperative learning (high equality, variable mutuality), and peer collaboration (high equality, high 
mutuality). Storch (2002, 2012) operationalized the concepts of equality and mutuality for pair interaction 
in collaborative writing tasks by analyzing peer talk transcripts in terms of word count, turn count, and 
language functions. Equality referred to equal distribution of turns, equal contribution, and equal degree of 
control over the task direction. Mutuality referred to peer engagement with each other’s contributions, 
reflected in such language functions as confirmation, repair, and explanation. Based on holistic assessment 
of equality and mutuality, Storch (2002) identified four distinctive patterns of dyadic interaction: 
collaborative (high equality and high mutuality), expert–novice (low equality and high mutuality), 
dominant–dominant (high equality and low mutuality), and dominant–passive (low equality and low 
mutuality). She also reported that the students in pairs showing a collaborative orientation (i.e., 
collaborative and expert–novice patterns of interaction), demonstrated more learning scenarios than the 
pairs displaying the dominant–dominant or dominant–passive pattern. Research by Damon and Phelps 
(1989) and Storch (2002) provided useful definitions and operationalizations of constructs for indexing 
patterns of interaction. 
Researchers (e.g., Li, 2013; Li & Zhu, 2013) applied the concepts of equality and mutuality to the 
examination of peer interaction in wiki writing tasks. For example, Li and Zhu (2013) analyzed the wiki 
discourse on wiki discussions from small groups as the main source of data and examined equality and 
mutuality by reviewing and comparing group members’ language function instances (e.g., agreement, 
suggestion, and apology), supplemented with an exploratory analysis of text construction (i.e., each 
member’s contribution to group writing in terms of word counts). Three patterns of interaction were then 
derived: collectively contributing and mutually supportive (high equality and high mutuality), 
authoritative–responsive (low equality and high mutuality), and dominant–withdrawn (low equality and 
low mutuality). To extend the analysis of small groups’ text co-construction in light of writing change 
functions, (i.e., students’ writing and revising behaviors toward co-producing joint texts in wikis; see Mak 
& Coniam, 2008), Li (2013) focused on the recursive wiki writing and revising processes, taking the 
collectively contributing and mutuality supportive group as the focal case. Various types of writing change 
functions were identified: adding, deleting, rephrasing, reordering, and correcting. Equality and mutuality 
were further examined from the perspective of group members’ text contribution in terms of writing change 
function frequency counts and distinction between changes made to one’s own texts and those made to 
others’ texts. These studies provided specific analytical procedures for identifying patterns of interaction in 
wiki-mediated writing. 
100 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Other research examining wiki writing tasks focused on students’ revision behaviors and distinguished 
between two distinct patterns (i.e., collaboration and cooperation) in student wiki interaction (Arnold, 
Ducate, & Kost, 2012; Bradley et al., 2010). Bradley et al. (2010) drew on wiki history records and 
identified three distinct patterns of interaction when EFL students constructed wiki assignments: lack of 
visible interaction (merely one individual contributed to writing), cooperation (individuals contributed to 
writing in parallel), and collaboration (individuals engaged with each other’s ideas and co-produced 
writing). Similarly, in the study by Arnold et al. (2012), German as a Foreign Language students exhibited 
both cooperation and collaboration patterns in a wiki group writing project. Interestingly, more 
collaboration patterns were evident when students made formal revisions in relation to the use of language, 
whereas more cooperation patterns emerged when they made content changes. 
To date, the research on patterns of interaction in wiki collaborative writing context is still at the infancy 
stage. Very few studies (e.g., Li & Zhu, 2013) have drawn on varied data sources such as wiki discussions 
and histories, to illustrate a comprehensive picture of student interaction during wiki writing processes. 
Although the study by Li and Zhu (2013) employed triangulated data sources, it did not fully explore the 
nature of wiki interaction by examining equality and mutuality through integrating language functions, 
writing change functions, and scaffolding strategies. Moreover, little research has explored possible 
changing patterns of interaction when small groups of students perform different writing tasks. 
Additionally, explanations of why learners form certain distinct patterns of interaction have rarely been 
provided. Guided by SCT and based on multiple data sources, the study reported below examined student 
interaction in a wiki project involving two collaborative writing tasks and explored sociocultural factors 
that offer explanations for student participation and interaction in these tasks. 
Methodology 
The present study comes from a larger project in which we adopted a multiple-case study approach (Stake, 
2006; Yin, 2009) and examined and interpreted small groups’ interactions in wiki collaborative writing as 
well as students’ wiki products in an EAP course at a research university in the southeast US. The EAP 
course at this university aimed to develop students’ academic skills necessary to successfully transition into 
Master’s degree programs; students taking this course had, in general, an intermediate-advanced English 
proficiency level. The course emphasized researching and producing academic papers and presentations in 
different academic genres. Students enrolled in this course mostly came from Asia (particularly China) and 
the Middle East. In the semester during which the study was conducted, 29 ESL graduate students were 
enrolled in the EAP course taught by a cooperating instructor who had worked in the EAP program for four 
semesters. 12 of the students served as participants in four focal cases for the larger study. The wiki-writing 
project was an integral part of the course and was required for all enrolled students. For the wiki writing 
activity, small groups jointly performed two wiki writing tasks: creating a research proposal and an 
annotated bibliography. These tasks were embedded within a team research project where students worked 
together to produce research writing and an academic presentation. Details of the two wiki tasks are 
displayed in Table 1. 
The wiki project spanned nine weeks, as depicted in Figure 1. In the first two weeks of the wiki project, we 
conducted wiki training and recruited the participants. Small groups were then formed. Students first chose 
their group-mates, and then the course instructor made adjustments to the initial group formation, based on 
grouping criteria of mixed L1 and cultural backgrounds and mixed English skills. As previous studies 
(Iwashita, 2001; Polio & Gass, 1998; Storch, 2013) have indicated, students who come from different L1 
backgrounds or who have different L2 proficiency skills are more likely to engage in more task and 
language negotiations. In line with suggestions by Arnold and Ducate (2006), students were asked to select 
a group leader with the hope that group work could be well organized in the absence of teacher intervention. 
The leader was expected to monitor and facilitate online discussion and writing. We then collected 
participants’ demographic information and prior experiences in English learning, technology use, and group 
work via a pre-task questionnaire. In the following three weeks (Weeks 3–5), students in small groups 
Mimi Li and Wei Zhu 101 
 
worked on their research proposals and annotated bibliographies, sequentially. The wiki writing activity 
was automatically recorded in the discussion, comment, history, and page modules of the Wikispaces site. 
We collected these archived wiki records and began reviewing the data. In Week 5, when students 
completed the two wiki tasks, a post-task questionnaire survey was administrated regarding participants’ 
perceptions of the wiki collaborative writing tasks and their group interactions in this wiki project. The first 
author also conducted post-task interviews in English with a purposeful1 sample, namely 12 students from 
four small groups demonstrating varied L1 and cultural background combinations. These four groups 
served as focal cases in the large study. Specifically, the 12 students responded to seven guiding questions 
including the purpose of wiki-based collaborative writing and their group interactions in the wiki. In Weeks 
6–7, we collected reflection papers from the four groups. In the reflection papers, the students responded to 
six prompt questions and wrote in English about how they worked on the joint wiki writing tasks and how 
they perceived their own and their group partners’ contributions to the group writing. In Weeks 8–9, 
primarily to conduct member checking on our interpretation of the interaction patterns observed of the four 
groups, the first author organized a follow-up interview with five participants from the four groups based 
on convenience sampling. In addition, the four groups’ wiki papers in relation to the two tasks were graded 
according to the assignment rubrics in the larger study. 
Table 1. Wiki Writing Tasks 
Task Description 
Research 
Proposal 
Group members discussed the focused aspects of a specific research topic that they 
planned to analyze in the Wikispaces site. Afterwards, they co-constructed a research 
proposal under their group tab through the wiki module of projects. The students were 
required to include research background, research questions, methods, and significance in 
their research proposal. They were also encouraged to make use of the wiki discussion, 
comment, and history functions to discuss and compose their writing jointly. 
Annotated 
Bibliography 
Within the same topic that each small group decided for the research proposal, group 
members selected nine sources and wrote annotated bibliographies of these sources under 
their group tab through “projects”. Each member was responsible for three sources. For 
each source, the students were required to include a complete citation, the purpose of the 
work, a summary of the content, its relevance to the research topic, and special features of 
the source. Each member was also required to engage with the group partners’ 
annotations, including selecting sources and revising annotations. 
 
Figure 1. Data collection timeline. 
102 Language Learning & Technology 
 
In this article, we examine two focal groups from the larger study, with an in-depth look at the groups’ 
interactions across two tasks as well as the sociocultural factors that accounted for the observed interactions. 
Focusing on two groups allows us to provide a thick description (Lincoln & Guba, 1985), essential for 
qualitative case study research. At the same time, it enables us to compare findings and themes across cases, 
thus enhancing the validity of our interpretations (Yin, 2009). Both groups demonstrated the dynamic nature 
of wiki interaction as reflected in changing interaction patterns when students performed the two wiki 
writing tasks. Both groups consisted of three male ESL graduate students. Members (pseudonyms are used) 
of Group A were two Chinese students (Dong and Feng) and a Saudi Arabian student (Abdul). Members 
of Group B were two Chinese students (Gao and Chuan) and a Russian student (Vitaly). The students aged 
in the range of 23–26 and were in the second semester of their EAP program. 
Data Analysis 
Multiple data sources including wiki records, student interviews, and reflection papers were analyzed to 
answer the two research questions. With regard to Question 1 addressing patterns of interaction, we took a 
holistic view of the triangulated data sources and examined how each small group approached the writing 
tasks in terms of equality and mutuality (Damon & Phelps, 1989; Storch, 2002). In our study, equality refers 
to the degree of control over the direction of wiki joint writing through negotiating writing tasks and the 
level of contribution to the group writing text, and mutuality refers to the degree of engaging with each 
other’s ideas and each other’s wiki texts and providing scaffolding in producing joint wiki writing. Figure 
2 depicts the specific ways of examining equality and mutuality in this study. 
 
Figure 2. Analyzing two indexes of group interaction: equality and mutuality. 
As displayed in Figure 2, equality is examined with respect to (a) the instances of language functions that 
each group member performed and (b) the instances of writing change functions that each group member 
performed. Balanced contributions in terms of language functions and writing change functions performed 
by the three group members indicated high equality, while drastically different numbers indicated low 
equality. Mutuality was examined by (a) distinguishing between instances of initiating language functions 
(i.e., proposing new ideas) and responding language functions (i.e., responding to other members’ ideas), 
(b) comparing the instances of self writing change functions (i.e., making changes to one’s own texts) and 
other writing change functions (i.e., making changes to other members’ texts), and (c) analyzing scaffolding 
occurrences. High mutuality refers to mutual engagement represented by responding language functions, 
other writing change functions, and the employment of scaffolding strategies. 
We examined the small groups’ wiki discussion and comment discourse in terms of language functions; 
wiki history threads in terms of writing change functions; and wiki discourse, interviews, and reflection 
papers in terms of scaffolding strategies. Specifically, following the approach described in Li and Zhu 
(2013), we segmented wiki discussion posts into idea units, “a series of brief spurts which reflect the 
speaker’s object of consciousness” (Gere & Abbott, 1985, p. 367). We then coded each idea unit in terms 
of language functions, that is, the mediating functions of language used during wiki communication as 
revealed in the wiki discussion and comment modules (and in a few posts in the history section module 
regarding Task 2). Rather than imposing existing categories on the available data, we read and reread the 
wiki discussion and comment records, and derived a taxonomy of language functions through inductive 
reasoning (see Appendix A). Afterwards, each language function unit was labelled (e.g., elaborating, 
Mimi Li and Wei Zhu 103 
 
suggesting, agreeing) based on the taxonomy, and then each language function unit was further categorized 
into initiating (i.e., proposing new ideas) or responding (i.e., responding to other members’ ideas). 
We analyzed the wiki history records in terms of writing change functions, which refer to students’ writing 
and revising behaviors during the joint production of texts in wikis (Mak & Coniam, 2008). We traced all 
the changes since the initial post and coded each writing change in light of the coding scheme developed in 
Li (2013), meanwhile making adaptations according to the data emerging from the present study. As 
Appendix B shows, writing changes were classified into adding, deleting, reordering, rephrasing, and 
correcting. Further, we labelled those changes made to the texts constructed by a group member himself or 
herself as self writing change functions, whereas the changes to the texts constructed by other group 
members were labelled as other writing change functions. 
Scaffolding strategies in this study refer to the strategies and mechanisms that students employed to engage 
with and support group partners to jointly complete the wiki writing tasks. To examine peer scaffolding, 
we coded the wiki Discussion and Comment records under each group link in terms of episodes (i.e., units 
of discourse during which the participants discussed writing problems and task procedures; see de Guerrero 
& Villamil, 2000). We drew on scaffolding strategies established in previous literature (i.e., de Guerrero & 
Villamil, 2000; Lidz, 1991; Rommetveit, 1985) and constructed a coding scheme of scaffolding, which was 
applied to the discussion and comment data. Appendix C shows the scaffolding coding scheme. We also 
examined excerpts of interview transcripts and reflection papers to identify students’ references to instances 
of scaffolding that occurred during the wiki project. 
After analyzing equality and mutuality in terms of language functions, writing change functions, and 
scaffolding strategies, we identified corresponding interaction patterns for each group within each writing 
task in light of the grounded approach (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). For instance, Group A demonstrated a 
collective pattern featured with high equality and high mutuality in Task 1. We additionally considered the 
students’ roles or stances embedded in the examination of equality and mutuality, when necessary.2 
To explain why the small groups were oriented to wiki collaborative writing in the ways they were, we 
conducted content analyses (Denzin & Lincoln, 1994; Duff, 2008) of the interviews and reflection papers 
supplemented with wiki discourse, in an inductive manner. We allowed themes to emerge from the data 
rather than be imposed by pre-determined categories. When reading students’ responses to the interview 
questions and reflection papers, we coded their comments with key words that could represent the gist of 
their response. We then derived themes by merging the codes and connected the emerging themes to the 
constructs regarding sociocultural factors that we had identified in the relevant literature. In particular, 
students’ responses to key interview questions and reflection prompt questions, as displayed in Table 2, 
helped us derive the salient themes. The codes assigned in the earlier rounds of analyses drew our attention 
increasingly to the three sociocultural factors: goals, agency, and emotion. Post-task Interview Question 2 
and Reflection Prompt Question 2 were particularly relevant for our understanding of students’ goals for 
participating in wiki-based collaborative writing. Students’ answers to Interview Questions 3 and 5, as well 
as to Reflection Prompt Question 3 provided the most relevant data for identifying the themes of agency 
and emotion. 
For example, when responding to the question concerning the purpose or aim of wiki writing in the post-
task interview, Group A members used such words as collaboration, good score, and teamwork. We 
employed in vivo coding as these terms captured the gist of the students’ comments. Since these codes 
reflected what these students hoped to accomplish, they reflected the theme of goals. We also compared the 
relationship among the coded terms, and derived convergent goals when the goals were reciprocal or 
complementary. Divergent goals occurred when a goal was contradictory to other identified goals, as in the 
case of Group A in Task 2, to be reported below. 
Table 2. Data Sources Used to Derive Themes to Answer Research Question 2 
Theme Data Source Questions 
104 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Goals Post-task 
interview and 
reflection paper 
Interview Question 2: What did you think was the purpose of the wiki-based 
collaborative writing tasks? What was your aim in these tasks? 
Reflection Prompt Question 2: How did you and your group approach the 
two wiki writing tasks? 
Agency 
and 
Emotion 
Post-task 
interview, 
reflection paper, 
and wiki 
discourse 
Interview Question 3: What did you think was your role in the wiki-based 
collaborative writing tasks? 
Interview Question 5: What did you think of your group interactions in the 
wiki-based collaborative writing tasks? Did you enjoy it? Why or why not? 
Reflection Prompt Question 3: Did your group divide group tasks and 
labor? Did each group member play a distinct role? If yes, in which ways? 
We developed the theme of agency in a similar fashion. We first conducted a content analysis and coded 
relevant excerpts from interviews and reflection papers. Codes which referred to one’s commitment, taking 
concrete actions in pursuit of goals (Duff, 2012), or making decisions that contributed to the shared goals 
(Nolen et al., 2011) reflected the theme of agency. Informed by van Lier (2008), we also distinguished 
between the learner’s individual concrete action to achieve goals (i.e., individual agency) and learners’ joint 
capacity in goal pursuit (i.e., collaborative agency). For instance, individual agency was reflected in “I want 
to post my ideas on the wiki […] I want to do something very quickly,” and collaborative agency was 
indicated in the quote “when we have good ideas, we post on the wikis and comment on one another’s 
ideas.” Also, as agency is not just an individual trait or activity, but a “contextually enacted way of being” 
(van Lier, 2008, p. 163) in relation to other social beings, we paid additional attention to the linguistic forms 
of addressing, including the use of nouns and pronouns occurring in the wiki discourse, interviews or 
reflection papers, which further helped us identify the evidence of collaborative agency. For instance, the 
use of the collective our in the wiki discourse “Our proposal will be divided into topic, resources, method 
and problems” was indicative of collaborative agency. The quote “We respect each other’s work” in the 
interview also indicated collaborative agency, because it implied the group’s joint capacity in goal pursuit. 
Moreover, we identified excerpts in the interviews and reflection papers that demonstrated “here-and-now 
interest in the tasks, the joy of exploration or working together” (van Lier, 1996, p. 105), and the theme of 
emotion as an emergent source of motivation was derived. For instance, we labelled positive emotion to 
“We are very friendly. We are sort of like old friends. We are familiar,” which showed the joy of 
collaboration. In sum, we examined the triangulated data sources to derive emerging themes in relation to 
sociocultural factors mediating wiki collaborative writing. 
To ensure the accuracy of our data analyses, inter-coder reliability checks were conducted on the coding of 
language functions and writing change functions. Two coders reached an inter-coder agreement of 87.4 % 
and 89.4% respectively, and disagreement was resolved through discussion. Regarding the analyses of 
scaffolding strategies, goals, agency and emotion, the co-author verified the themes derived by the first 
author. 
Results 
Patterns of Interaction 
The patterns of interaction were featured in the degrees of equality and mutuality reflected in the three 
perspectives: how the group members negotiated writing tasks in terms of language functions, how they 
jointly composed writing in terms of writing change functions, and how they scaffolded each other during 
joint wiki writing processes. We found that small groups had more discussion on multiple aspects of writing 
during Task 1, such as research topic, research background, and rhetorical structure; although the groups 
demonstrated varying degrees of interaction while performing the task. The groups communicated much 
less on the wiki site during Task 2. Thus, the analysis of group interaction in Task 2 relied more on writing 
change functions and scaffolding strategies. Group A and Group B both exhibited distinctive interaction 
Mimi Li and Wei Zhu 105 
 
patterns. Below we discuss the patterns of interaction of the two groups respectively, and focus on the group 
dynamics exhibited within each group over the course of two tasks. 
Group A demonstrated a collective3 pattern in Task 1 (the research proposal), but switched to an active–
withdrawn pattern in Task 2 (the annotated bibliography). When composing the research proposal, all 
members (i.e., Dong, Feng, and Abdul) made joint contributions to and exhibited a similar degree of control 
over group writing in terms of task negotiation and text co-construction. They were also willing to engage 
with one another’s contributions. However, when they constructed the annotated bibliography, the pattern 
switched to active–withdrawn in which two group members (i.e., Dong and Feng) actively participated in 
the writing task and one (Abdul) had a much lower degree of participation, even withdrawing from the task. 
Table 3 summarizes the characteristic features of Group A’s triadic interaction that illustrate the dynamic 
patterns of interaction. Table 3 shows that the members of Group A in Task 1 demonstrated relatively high 
equality with a balanced contribution from the three members in task negotiation (showing 10, 9, and 5 
language function units) and text construction (conducting 5, 2, and 2 instances of writing change 
functions). This group also demonstrated high mutuality of interaction reflected by a high ratio of 
responding to initiating language functions: The members of Group A performed 15 initiating language 
functions and positively responded to others’ ideas in 9 instances. Their mutual engagement can also be 
mirrored by the other writing change functions (3 instances) in the process of text construction, and multiple 
occurrences of intersubjectivity (Rommetveit, 1985), a scaffolding strategy defined as sharing 
understanding of the situation and being in tune with one another. 
For instance, as displayed in Table 3, the three members used the wiki discussion and collectively discussed 
the specific topic to research and reached a consensus on the globalization of Coca-Cola as the research 
topic. The peer scaffolding observed in the interaction data was confirmed by participants’ comments in 
the interviews and reflection papers. Dong stated, “We arranged every team member specific tasks 
adequately and motivated positivity of each member. […] Everyone have the inspiration to work as 
teamwork in order to make better performance.” 
Nevertheless, both mutuality and equality decreased when the group members composed the annotated 
bibliography. The group members had little communication in the wiki, with merely 1 instance of language 
function in which Feng requested addition of two annotations from Abdul, but received no response. 
Regarding text co-construction, unequal participation was obvious. Abdul did not complete his assigned 
task. He only contributed one annotation for Task 2, which required each member to compose three 
annotations. In terms of writing change functions, Abdul merely contributed 1 instance in contrast to 7 
instances by Dong and 9 instances by Feng, which further reflected a decreased equality. Moreover, lack 
of mutuality was evident. For instance, as displayed in Table 3, Feng reminded Abdul to add one more 
annotation, but Abdul did not act on his suggestion. Feng’s potential scaffolding was not activated. 
The members of Group B exhibited dynamic interaction as well, switching from dominant–defensive in 
Task 1 to collaborative in Task 2. Table 4 displays the characteristic features of Group B’s triadic 
interaction. As Table 4 depicts, in Task 1, Group B demonstrated relatively low equality and low mutuality. 
Two members (Vitaly and Gao) took control of the writing direction, mirrored in the language functions 
(12 and 13 instances, respectively). The third member (Chuan), the selected leader, ironically contributed 
the least to group writing discussion (with merely 1 language function instance), but defended his writing 
contribution and leadership in the post-task interview, stating his responsibility for “What we should do 
first, what we should do next and separate the tasks, what you should do, what they should do, make every 
steps clear for everyone. […] I gave my recommendation face-to-face.” Also, group members were 
unwilling or unable to engage with one another’s writing, reflected in merely 1 instance of other writing 
change function against 13 instances of self writing change functions. No reciprocal interaction in terms of 
responding to initiating language functions occurred, and few scaffolding strategies were implemented 
when they performed Task 1. For instance, as shown in the first representative excerpt in Table 4, group 
members did not exhibit intersubjectivity when discussing the specific topic that they were to explore. 
When Gao suggested narrowing down the topic to Apple’s outsourcing strategy, Vitaly expressed his 
106 Language Learning & Technology 
 
disagreement by justifying that discussion of multiple companies in diverse countries better supported the 
broad topic of globalization. Gao later conveyed his agreement with Vitaly’s idea, but Chuan disagreed 
implicitly by addressing their instructor’s advice of researching “Apple in Russia and China.” In this way, 
the group members did not reach consensus and were not in tune with one another. Also, Vitaly attempted 
to instruct Chuan on constructing specific research questions after he noticed Chuan’s unsatisfactory wiki 
post, but his instruction encountered his group partner’s non-action. 
In contrast, Group B exhibited a collaborative pattern reflected in higher equality and mutuality when 
constructing the annotated bibliography. For this collaborative pattern, peer interaction occurred just 
between two group members, and no scenarios of the three members’ collective scaffolding (in which 
three members together discussed and determined the writing direction) were identified. Equality was 
revealed by the balanced contribution from three members in text construction: the completion of three 
annotations, with 24, 8, and 8 instances of writing change functions contributed by Gao, Chuan, and 
Vitaly, respectively. Mutuality in text construction was obvious between two members of the group, 
which was revealed by the five instances of other writing change functions. For instance, as depicted in 
Table 4, Chuan performed correcting acts to Vitaly’s texts, fixing such spelling mistakes as faicilities and 
demonstate. Mutuality was also reflected in the employment of scaffolding strategies between members 
during task negotiation. For example, Vitaly suggested to Chuan a useful link of source to annotate when 
Chuan struggled with a source regarding the “counter-argument,” which vividly demonstrated the strategy 
of contingent responsivity, in which the group member reads his or her partner’s behavior and responds 
appropriately. To positively respond to Vitaly’s suggestion, Chuan acknowledged Vitaly’s assistance and 
incorporated this source in his annotated bibliography. 
  
Mimi Li and Wei Zhu 107 
 
Table 3. Characteristic features of interaction in Group A 
Features of 
Interaction 
Task 1 Task 2 
Language 
Functions 
Dong: 9; Feng: 10; Abdul: 5 
15 Initiating and 9 Responding 
Example 
Dong: Hi, guys, our proposal will be divided 
into topic, resources, method and problems. 
How you think about that? (greeting, 
suggesting, eliciting) 
Feng: Sure, and rhetorical stance should be 
presented, and explain the significance of the 
research. we need a timeline for investigating 
the topic, possible sources for investigation. 
(agreeing, elaborating) 
Dong: 0; Feng: 1; Abdul: 0 
1 Initiating and 0 Responding 
Example 
Feng: “Can you find one more source to 
add?” (requesting) 
Abdul: no response. 
Writing 
Change 
Functions 
Dong: 5; Feng: 2; Abdul: 2; 
6 Self and 3 Other 
Example 
Dong: The detailed topic is the business of 
Coca-Cola in China and Saudi Arabia. (adding, 
self) 
Abdul: The detailed topic is the business of 
Coca-Cola in China and Saudi Arabia Middle 
East countries. (rephrasing, other) 
Dong: The detailed topic is the business of 
Coca-Cola in China and Middle East countries 
Saudi Arabia. (rephrasing, other) 
Dong: The detailed topic is the business of 
Coca-Cola in China and Saudi Arabia the 
Middle East (rephrasing, self) 
Dong: 7; Feng: 9; Abdul: 1; 
15 Self and 2 Other 
Example 
Dong: This article describes the nature 
and causes of the parallel trade in Coca - 
Cola between Shanghai and Hangzhou 
and […] (adding, global, self) 
Dong: The purpose of this article is to 
describe (rephrasing, self) the nature 
and causes of the parallel trade in Coca - 
Cola between Shanghai and Hangzhou 
and […]. The audience is the individuals 
who has the strong intrest with the 
business strategies of Coca-Cola in 
China. (adding, self) 
Scaffolding 
Occurrences 
Intersubjectivity 
Example 
Dong: I recommend we choose the topic of 
immigration in the United States and its 
influence on American Culture, because its the 
topic that we have already familiar with and can 
find the subtopic and resourses quickly. 
Feng: The idea is good, but we need some more 
challenges. … Globalization is a hot topic 
nowadays…So how about we make our research 
on Globalization, and we can choose Coca-Cola 
as our target. Cause it owns wide- range 
consumers and its successful development 
experience has made it standing over 100 years. 
Lack of intersubjectivity 
Example 
Feng: “Can you find one more source 
to add?” 
Abdul did not respond. 
Note. Excerpts were from the original data. Language errors were not corrected. 
108 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Table 4. Characteristic Features of Interaction in Group B 
Features of 
Interaction 
Task 1 Task 2 
Language 
Functions 
Gao: 13; Chuan: 1; Vitaly: 12 
17 Initiating and 9 Responding 
Example 
Gao: We should focus on one company because we 
should narrow the topic. Focus on Apple 
(suggesting, justifying) 
Vitaly: Apple could be just an example and I 
think it will be too narrow (disagreeing) 
Vitaly: […] Our big topic is globalization so we 
need to develop it to show that it is spread all 
over the world. Do you know that we have 
Korean “Hyundai”, German “BMW” and 
“Volkswagen” factories in Russia? We do and it’s 
also one of the examples of globalization. (stating, 
justifying) 
Chuan: The professor wants us to narrow out topic. 
She advises us use one company Apple in Russia 
and China. (stating, disagreeing) 
Gao: 0; Chuan: 1; Vitaly: 3 
3 Initiating and 1 Responding 
Example 
Vitaly: Hey…, I found a useful 
link for you […] (greeting, stating) 
Chuan: Thanks. (acknowledging) 
Writing Change 
Functions 
Gao: 7; Chuan: 4; Vitaly: 3 
13 Self and 1 Other 
Example 
Gao: Our purpose is finding the outsourcing use in 
different countries. To find why it is best way to 
make both host countries and home countries get 
benefits. (adding, self) 
Gao: Moved the above texts to the latter part of the 
essay (reordering, self) 
Gao: 24; Chuan: 8; Vitaly: 8 
35 Self and 5 Other 
Example 
Vitaly: “demonstate” 
→ Chuan: “demonstrate” 
Vitaly: “faicilities”  
→ Chuan: “facilities” 
Scaffolding 
Occurrences 
Lack of intersubjectivity 
Instructing unresponded to 
Example 
Chuan posted irrelevant texts under “Series of 
questions.” 
Vitaly: Don't you remember that last time we 
already defined the series of questions. (What is the 
contra argument, what is the argument and etc). […] 
It should be a kind of overview of our research but 
not a paragraph with concepts of writing a research 
paper (Chuan unresponded.) 
Intersubjectivity 
Contingent responsivity 
Example 
Vitaly: Hey …I found a useful link 
for you. 
(While Chuan sought sources, 
Vitaly shared with Chuan a useful 
source link about the“counter-
argument.”) 
Chuan positively responded 
Note. Excerpts were from the original data. Language errors were not corrected. 
Explaining Dynamic Interactions 
Both Group A and Group B demonstrated dynamic interaction patterns when they performed two academic 
writing tasks in the wiki site. We explored why the group members participated in wiki-based collaborative 
writing in the way they did through analyzing the participants’ own perceptions as revealed in post-task 
Mimi Li and Wei Zhu 109 
 
interviews, reflection papers, and wiki discourse. Three main themes emerged that helped explain the 
interactional dynamics within small groups: goals, agency, and emotion. 
Goals 
Students’ comments in the interviews and reflection papers helped us derive diverse goals in collaborative 
wiki writing. Connecting students’ perceived goals to their group interaction, we were able to explain how 
the individual goals and the interaction of these goals mediated the group dynamics. Below we discuss the 
two groups’ goals in situ, illustrated with representative excerpts. 
When responding to the question on the purpose of collaborative wiki writing and their aims in these wiki 
writing tasks (Interview Question 2), members of Group A conveyed convergent goals that drove their wiki 
writing for Task 1, including teamwork, good score, and collaboration. Figure 3 illustrates three convergent 
goals that group members perceived in joint wiki writing, as well as the switch of goal on the part of one 
member in Task 2 (from collaboration in wiki writing to individual personal goal). Specifically, Dong 
related the goal of wiki writing to their identity-to-be when asked about his perception of the purpose of 
wiki collaborative writing: “To have a good collaboration in the teamwork. In the society, we need 
teamwork as a business man.” Feng echoed his identity of business man, and noted the importance of 
teamwork in enterprises: “As we look around different businesses, companies, and agencies around the 
world, it's hard to deny that teams have become integral and essential components in organizations.” Abdul 
also expressed his goal of collaboration and team success: “We write in the same way. […] Do my best to 
achieve high.” Moreover, Feng claimed the goal of getting a good course score. He stated that “We have 
the same goal: we need to pass the class, need a good score.” Thus, the intrinsic and extrinsic motivational 
factors acted in a concerted environment (van Lier, 1996). 
However, a certain degree of goal switch for Abdul in Task 2 was indicated during the post-task interview 
(conducted right after the groups composed the Task 2 writing). Abdul explained that he was occupied for 
“passing a very important test” in the post-task interview. This indicated that an important personal goal 
emerging for Abdul in Task 2 might have overridden the goal of joint wiki writing. Abdul’s divergent goal 
helped explain his reduced participation, which changed this group’s collective approach to wiki group 
writing as exemplified in Task 1. 
 
Figure 3. Dynamic goals in Group A. The shadowed area shows the switching goal of Abdul in Task 2. 
Similar to Group A, Group B demonstrated dynamic goals in wiki writing. As displayed in Figure 4, the 
goals that the group members perceived included leading group work, collaboration, and task completion. 
Specifically, the three members explicitly or implicitly conveyed an overlapping goal of collaboration, 
reflected in post-task interviews, such as “to learn how to collaborate with each other,” to “achieve the goals 
with small groups,” and “teamwork.” Gao also indicated the completion of wiki tasks as one of his goals, 
the case of performance goal reported in previous studies (e.g., Cumming, 2012). He explained: “I want to 
post my ideas, and sometimes good for others to relate to the topics” and “I want to do something very 
110 Language Learning & Technology 
 
quickly.” However, Vitaly and Chuan held a competing goal of leading the group work. 
In the post-task interview, Chuan indicated that he aimed “to play the role of leader as assigned: separate 
the tasks, what you should do, what they should do, make every steps clear for everyone.” However, his 
leadership was not acknowledged by his group partner Vitaly. When asked about his role in this 
collaborative wiki writing project, Vitaly claimed that he had to assume the leadership when it was missing: 
A group leader has to manage the entire project, because he is the manager of it. I expected the 
same thing from our leader, but it was worthless. I know that this project wasn’t taken seriously but 
still it had to be done. This is why I had to take responsibility and to plan the whole project. 
A holistic examination of the triangulated data sources indicated dynamic goals that mediated joint wiki 
writing process for this group. The two goals (collaboration and leading) seemed to have had different 
weights across the two tasks. In Task 1, the goal of leading group work was predominantly obvious. When 
the individual accountability and leadership of the selected leader (Chuan) were not recognized by his 
partner Vitaly, the in situ goal of leading group work emerged for Vitaly. The emergent leader Vitaly 
appeared to “push everybody to do something.” As shown in Figure 4, Vitaly intended to lead the writing 
direction by instructing his partner, Chuan, on the section of series of questions: “It should be a kind of 
overview of our research but not a paragraph with concepts of writing a research paper.” However, Chuan 
did not respond to Vitaly’s instruction. Conversely in Task 2, the goal of collaboration seemed to outweigh 
the goal of leading as there was no indication of competing leadership goals. Also, the mild tone of students’ 
interaction suggested a more collaborative stance, as reflected, for example, in the wiki post “Hey …I found 
a useful link for you.” 
 
Figure 4. Dynamic goals in Group B. The shadowed area indicates the changing weights of leading versus 
collaboration in Task 1 and Task 2. 
Agency and Emotion 
In this study, participants’ interview transcripts and reflection papers, supplemented with wiki discourse, 
allow us to identify themes related to agency and emotion in the two groups. We also analyzed the specific 
pronouns and nouns employed to address group members in the interviews, reflection papers and wiki 
discourse, which revealed socially mediated agency (Donato, 1994; van Lier, 1996). 
Table 5 below depicts agency and emotion manifested in Group A across two tasks. The members of Group 
A showed both individual agency and collaborative agency in Task 1 (van Lier, 2008). Individual agency 
was mirrored by each member’s commitment and responsibility, revealed in both wiki discourse and 
interview transcripts. Regarding the role he played, Dong recalled, “When we have good ideas, we post on 
the wikis and comment on one another’s ideas [….] I also invited others to respond.” Collaborative agency 
was reflected in scaffolding and instruction that group members provided in pursuit of team goals as well 
as in the use of we, our, and my friends in the wiki discourse and interview data. For instance, when Dong 
Mimi Li and Wei Zhu 111 
 
proposed a structure of their research proposal, he wrote “Our proposal will be divided into topic, resources, 
method and problems.” Abdul told in the interview that “it was great experiences to work with my friends 
from other culture.” The collaborative agency was also associated with positive emotions emerging from 
the group work. For instance, in response to Interview Question 5 addressing students’ attitude toward 
group interaction, Feng resonated with joy, “We respect each other’s work. We are very friendly. We are 
sort of like old friends. We are familiar.” However, in Task 2, collaborative agency diminished, and no 
collective pronouns we or our, but you were used in the wiki discourse. An example was “Can you find one 
more source to add?” when Feng noticed Abdul’s failure to complete his three annotations. Reflection 
papers also indicated group members’ switch to not-so-positive emotion. As Feng indicated, “My team 
mate didn’t write three for their own parts,” “I could have come up with a better performance,” which 
showed his dissatisfaction. The lack of collaborative agency and less positive emotion mediated Group B’s 
interaction during Task 2. 
Table 5. Agency and Emotion in Group A 
 Task 1 Task 2 
Agency Individual agency and collaborative agency: 
we, our, my friends 
Individual agency: 
Reduction from Abdul 
Emotion Positive emotions: 
Respect, familiarity, and friendship 
Negative emotion:  
Dissatisfaction 
Group B also manifested dynamic agency and emotions, as displayed in Table 6. In Task 1, group members 
demonstrated individual agency, but did not exhibit collaborative agency, as indicated in the interview data. 
For instance, Gao stated “[When it comes to] different opinions or ideas, sometimes I will follow, 
sometimes I will have my own opinion about this.” The lack of collaborative agency can also be glimpsed 
from the way in which the group members addressed their partners, such as he, group, Russian guy, Chinese 
people, and minority. Interestingly, Vitaly commented that he was a mere member who represented a 
different culture than Chinese in this group; thus, he considered himself a “minority.” Meanwhile, negative 
affect such as distrust and frustration was noticeable when the members encountered discrepancy in writing 
direction, as was revealed in the wiki communication discourse. For example, when Vitaly read Chuan’s 
irrelevant posts regarding “Series of questions” for their research proposal, he conveyed his unhappiness 
and voiced in a chiding tone: “Don't you remember that last time we already defined the series of questions 
[…] Even in the assignment it's written: I identify a series of questions that will inform your research.” 
Both the rhetorical question and the non-collective pronouns I, you, and your indicated negative emotions 
and lack of collaborative agency during Task 1. 
Table 6. Agency and Emotion in Group B 
 Task 1 Task 2 
Agency Individual agency and no collaborative agency: 
he, group, Russian guy, Chinese people, and 
minority 
Individual agency and collaborative agency: 
Responsibility 
Emotion Negative emotions: 
Distrust, unhappiness, and frustration 
Positive emotions: 
More trust, less contention, and joy 
In contrast, when this group worked on Task 2, individual agency was manifested in self-responsibility: 
every member took an initiative to complete their part of writing three annotations. Meanwhile, 
collaborative agency co-existed, as reflected in peer scaffolding reported in reflection papers and the use of 
collective pronouns our and we in the post-task interview. To take an example, Chuan exclaimed at the nice 
collaboration with his group partners in Task 2: “Vitaly even helped me find a more proper resource for 
112 Language Learning & Technology 
 
our discussion […] we researched the articles from the library, easily created annotated bibliography on 
Refworks.” This scenario mirrored the co-existence of collaborative agency and individual agency, as well 
as the evolvement of positive emotion (i.e., less contention and more trust). The collaborative agency (van 
Lier, 2008) and the joy of working together (van Lier, 1996) demonstrated in Task 2 collectively account 
for a collaborative interaction pattern. 
Discussion 
The present study examined two research questions. In relation to our first research question regarding 
patterns of interaction, we found that the two small groups of ESL students demonstrated different patterns 
of interaction when they performed wiki writing tasks, which confirmed the results of previous studies on 
collaborative writing (e.g., Li & Zhu, 2013; Storch, 2002, 2004). On each writing task in our study, Group 
A demonstrated a different pattern of interaction when compared to Group B, which was represented by 
different degrees of equality and mutuality via an integrated examination of language functions, writing 
change functions, and scaffolding strategies. Moreover, our study also found that patterns of interaction 
varied within each group when the students worked on two writing tasks, which differed from the findings 
of previous research reporting relatively stable or static patterns of interaction (e.g., Li & Zhu, 2013; Storch, 
2002). For example, in Storch’s (2002) study, students in pairs worked on three language tasks sequentially: 
a short composition, an editing task, and a text reconstruction—all three tasks sharing the theme of 
migration. Distinctive and stable patterns of dyadic interaction were observed throughout the project. 
In our study, Group A demonstrated a collective pattern in Task 1, featured by three members’ equal 
contribution to task negotiation and text construction (high equality) and ample instances of responding 
language functions, other writing change functions, and the scaffolding strategy of intersubjectivity (high 
mutuality). However, the pattern switched to the active–withdrawn pattern exemplified by lower equality 
and mutuality on Task 2. Abdul did not complete the required workload of three annotations due to a change 
in his goals, and the other group members showed decreased mutual engagement (reflected in fewer other 
writing change functions), despite their active participation in the writing of their individual parts (three 
annotations). In contrast, Group B exhibited a dominant–defensive pattern on Task 1, in which two 
members took the control over writing directions (one in task negotiation and the other in text construction) 
and the third member, as the selected leader, defended his writing contribution despite the small amount of 
his contribution (low equality). At the same time, few instances of positive responding language functions, 
other writing change functions, and scaffolding strategies were observed (low mutuality). This pattern 
switched to a collaborative pattern in Task 2, with three members equally contributing three required 
annotations (high equality), and interactions occurring between two dyads (i.e., Vitaly and Chuan, and 
Vitaly and Gao) as they offered other writing change functions and scaffolding strategies such as 
intersubjectivity and contingent responsivity (high mutuality). 
As a new contribution, our study discovered a dynamic nature of interaction patterns. A few factors may 
help explain the different results (regarding changing patterns of interaction vs. relatively static patterns) 
between our study and those of previous studies. One factor may concern the way in which group leadership 
was established. In this study, a leader was selected by the group members based on the individual 
willingness before they worked on collaborative writing tasks. While jointly performing the tasks, group 
members seemed to evaluate the performance of the leadership role and change the leadership, as shown in 
Group B. In previous studies (e.g., Li & Zhu, 2013; Storch, 2002, 2004), however, no leader was assigned 
during group formation. The students with a higher language proficiency level tended to guide the group 
work in some way, which remained relatively stable during collaborative writing tasks. Also, Storch’s 
(2002, 2004) studies addressed dyadic interaction. It is possible that the pair tended to follow a particular 
pattern of interaction once it was set. Dynamics in small groups, however, may become more fluid, as 
shown in this study. Changes in task contribution (equality) and engagement (mutuality) on the part of any 
group member could have an obvious influence on the group’s interaction pattern. 
Group members’ communication style may also have partially influenced the peer interaction in this study. 
Mimi Li and Wei Zhu 113 
 
As Table 4 illustrates in Group B’s dominant–defensive pattern on Task 1, when Vitaly identified a 
discrepancy in his group partner’s texts, he left a comment in a demanding manner. His comment was not 
responded to by his partner (lack of mutuality). However, on Task 2 (collaborative pattern), Vitaly posted 
a message attempting to offer help in an approachable manner, to which the same group member responded 
positively, thus demonstrating mutuality. Therefore, one’s communication style or the ability to use 
language effectively to engage and scaffold peers seems to be a factor contributing to mutuality between 
peers and influencing patterns of interaction. 
In relation to the second research question, and to explore sociocultural constructs that help explain 
interaction dynamics, we identified three main sociocultural factors: goals, agency, and emotion. Our 
analyses echoed Storch’s (2004) findings that the students’ perceived goals and the relationship of the goals 
(reflected in convergence vs. divergence) influenced patterns of interaction that each group exemplified. 
Moreover, our study revealed that students’ goals were dynamic and that the convergence or divergence of 
these goals helped explain not only the variations of interactions among the groups, but also the dynamic 
interactions that each group demonstrated across the two tasks. For example, the convergent goals of 
collaboration, teamwork, and good score that members of Group A held in Task 1 accounted for their 
collective pattern. One member’s switching to the divergent personal goal of passing an important test 
explained behaviors characterizing the active–withdrawn pattern that this group demonstrated in Task 2. 
Our study also indicated that ongoing agency and socially constructed emotion helped account for the 
variation of interaction patterns across the two tasks within the small groups. In particular, agency and 
emotion were constantly co-constructed and renegotiated via interaction with others (Lantolf & Thorne, 
2006; Swain, 2013). For instance, the members of Group A exhibited positive emotions while 
demonstrating collaborative agency in wiki writing on Task 1. However, the positive affect was gradually 
reduced and complemented with the decline of collaborative agency by one member’s withdrawal from the 
wiki project on Task 2. Furthermore, our study illustrated the concept of relational agency, or the 
“awareness of the responsibility for one’s own action vis-à-vis the environment” (van Lier, 2008, p. 172). 
For example, in Group B, Vitaly reported that his intention to take more responsibility and emergent 
leadership occurred after he realized that the selected leader, Chuan, did not manage the group work 
successfully. This relational agency was tightly connected to his increasing individual agency. 
Results of our study indicate a link between interaction patterns and goals, agency, and emotion. For 
instance, the collective pattern is connected with convergent goals, collaborative agency, and positive 
emotion. The dominant–defensive pattern is related to divergent goals, individual agency, and negative 
emotion. Our study also reinforces that learning tasks are merely blueprints (Coughlan & Duff, 1994; 
Storch, 2004; Zhu & Mitchell, 2012), and that students can behave quite differently depending on their 
goals and agency. In this study, students jointly worked on two wiki writing tasks: Creating a research 
proposal required group members’ co-construction of the proposal using wikis throughout the writing 
process, while creating an annotated bibliography required each member’s contribution of three 
annotations, despite having a common writing product. While it might be reasonable to expect that students 
would demonstrate more collaboration in Task 1 than in Task 2, due to the collaborative nature of Task 1 
and the cooperative nature of Task 2, Group B actually demonstrated a more collaborative stance in Task 
2. This indicates that writing tasks interact with sociocultural factors such as learners’ agency and emotion 
in situ to co-mediate student interaction during wiki writing. 
Conclusion 
In this article, we illustrate two ESL small groups’ dynamic interactions in wiki-based collaborative writing 
and explain the group dynamics from the SCT perspective focusing on goals, agency, and emotion. SCT 
informs us to view interactions as developmental “processes in flight” (Ohta, 2000, p. 54), and the present 
study reiterates the role of SCT in exploring and explaining interactions in online collaborative writing. 
Small group interactions in the wiki environment are dynamic processes driven by sociocultural factors 
such as goals, agency, and emotion. Collaborative writing tasks in the wiki environment constitute 
114 Language Learning & Technology 
 
sociocultural sites in which goals, agency, and emotion of group members may be in harmony or in conflict. 
Joint writing tasks themselves do not bring about collaboration automatically, and collaboration in the sense 
of high equality and mutuality may depend on group members’ effort and ability to align, negotiate, and 
co-construct goals, agency, and emotion. 
Our study represents an initial exploration of changing group dynamics and interpretation of dynamic 
patterns in relation to goals, agency, and emotion in the online collaborative writing task environment. 
Limitations of the study need to be considered when interpreting the results. First, we illustrate two small 
groups’ interaction patterns across two tasks in this study. It is possible that only a limited number of 
dynamic patterns in collaborative wiki writing were identified given the sample size. An extended study of 
more cases may help provide a more comprehensive picture of peer interactions in wikis. Second, students 
only performed two wiki writing tasks in this study, and it is possible that other patterns of interaction may 
be observed with more types of writing tasks. While we did not set out to examine the connection between 
task types and interaction patterns, we believe this merits examination in future research. Additionally, we 
focused on language mediation in the study but did not examine the mediating role of the wiki tool in peer 
interactions during wiki writing tasks. However, language mediation and tool mediation may be related in 
wiki collaborative writing, and technological affordances and constraints need to be examined in future 
research to enable a deepened understanding of peer interaction in the computer-mediated learning 
environment. 
The study has yielded some pedagogical implications. First, group formation is an important factor to 
consider when implementing wiki group writing. It is beneficial to form groups of students from different 
L1 and cultural backgrounds with the purpose of promoting intercultural understanding and providing the 
opportunity for students to communicate in the target language. We emphasize, however, the importance 
of instructors’ help in developing students’ positive attitudes towards working with people from different 
backgrounds so as to maximize interaction opportunities. Instructors cannot simply assume learners’ 
positive attitudes towards collaboration when group work is assigned (Storch, 2004). In our study, for 
example, one participant had a negative perception of group work initially as he did not share the same 
cultural background with the other two members. Therefore, instructors should be aware of and respond to 
the potential problem of students’ feeling of isolation in group work, as suggested in the minority status 
reported by a group member in this study. 
Moreover, appropriate assessment can be utilized to encourage students’ active participation and 
collaboration. As our study indicated, participants’ behaviors changed over the course of joint wiki writing, 
and performance goals comprised an important part of students’ goals. In order to foster students’ 
continuous participation and interaction, it may be necessary for instructors to assign a certain portion of 
points to both each individual member’s wiki posts and group members’ mutual engagements throughout 
the joint wiki writing process. Our study also revealed that small groups’ interaction dynamics changed 
across writing tasks, influenced by such sociocultural factors as goal, agency, and emotion. We propose 
that students’ joint self-assessments of equality and mutuality of their group interaction at different stages 
of a wiki project may enable them to continually monitor and evaluate their group writing processes. Joint 
self-assessment may help facilitate interactions by maintaining shared goals, negotiating individual and 
collaborative agency, and achieving positive emotion. 
The wiki is a prominent collaborative tool for group writing, but collaborative functions of the technology 
cannot automatically result in participants’ collaborative approach to writing tasks, as shown by the results 
of our study. Multiple factors may affect participants’ interaction in small group wiki writing projects. For 
instance, writing tasks, as part of the sociocultural context, may play a mediating role in wiki group writing. 
Future studies explicating the role of tasks in wiki interaction and the interplay of tasks and group dynamics 
would contribute to our understanding of group interaction. Also, as noted in this study, the sociocultural 
factors that mediated student interaction (i.e., goals, agency, and emotion) co-occurred in a specific context. 
An examination of the interactions between the three factors would help us further understand and explain 
the dynamic group patterns. Composition of groups, in addition, constitutes an important element in 
Mimi Li and Wei Zhu 115 
 
computer-mediated collaborative writing. In this study, the majority of the participants were Chinese 
students; how students of different demographic backgrounds interact in small group writing in the wiki 
environment deserves exploration. Last but not least, the affordances of the technological tools for wiki-
mediated writing deserve examination. We believe that computer-mediated collaborative writing can be 
more effectively implemented in L2 classes when teachers and researchers understand more clearly how 
students approach online writing tasks, what sociocultural factors mediate peer interaction and how they 
co-function, and how writing tasks and technological tools jointly mediate collaborative writing in an online 
context. 
Notes 
1. The majority of the students in the course were Chinese. Based on the criterion of maximum variation 
(Miles & Huberman, 1994), we selected three groups demonstrating L1 and cultural background 
variation—each of these groups had two Chinese students and a student of a different nationality. The 
fourth group was composed of three female Chinese students; thus, this group was different from the 
other three groups in terms of gender composition. 
2. We primarily used the two indexes of interaction (see Figure 2) to explore the interaction patterns. We 
additionally considered the students’ roles or stances, when necessary. For instance, to examine the 
interaction pattern for Group B on Task 1, we identified a few instances of language functions that 
Chuan performed and meanwhile detected his defending stance from the interview transcripts. 
3. We distinguished between the collective pattern and collaborative pattern in this study. The collective 
pattern, drawn from collective scaffolding (Donato, 1994), emphasized the group members’ joint 
negotiation of writing tasks while assuming simultaneous roles of individual novices and collective 
experts. The collaborative pattern, however, emphasized the bilateral interaction between two group 
members, with little consideration of the three members as a collective. In this sense, the degree of 
mutuality in the collaborative pattern was not as high as in the collective, because there was no 
collective decision making about the writing direction. Also, the mutuality in the collaborative pattern 
mostly occurred between two members rather than between all three members. 
References 
Ahearn, L. (2001). Language and agency. Annual Review of Anthropology, 30, 109–137. 
Ames, C. (1992). Classrooms: Goals, structures, and student motivation. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 84(3), 261–271. 
Anton, M., & DiCamilla, F. (1998). Socio-cognitive functions of L1 collaborative interaction in the L2 
classroom. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 54, 314–342. 
Arnold, N., & Ducate, L. (2006). Future foreign language teachers’ social and cognitive collaboration in 
an online environment. Language Learning & Technology, 10(1), 42–66. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/pdf/arnoldducate.pdf 
Arnold, N., Ducate, L., & Kost, C. (2012). Collaboration or cooperation? Analyzing group dynamics and 
revision process in wikis. CALICO Journal, 29(3), 431–448. 
Bradley, L., Lindström, B., & Rystedt, H. (2010). Rationalities of collaboration for language learning on a 
wiki. ReCALL, 22(2), 247–265. 
Bruner, J. S. (1978). The role of dialogue in language acquisition. In A. Sinclair, R. J. Jarvella, & W. J. 
M. Levelt (Eds.), The child’s conception of language. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag. 
Chao, Y., & Lo, H. (2011). Students’ perceptions of wiki-based collaborative writing for learners of 
English as a foreign language. Interactive Learning Environments, 19(4), 395–411. 
116 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Coughlan, P., & Duff, P. (1994). Same task, different activities: Analysis of SLA task from an activity 
theory perspective. In J. P. Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.), Vygotskian approaches to second language 
research (pp. 173–191). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Cumming, A. (2012). Goal theory and second-language writing development, two ways. In R.M. 
Manchón (Ed.), L2 writing development: Multiple perspectives (pp. 135–164). Berlin, Germany: De 
Gruyter Mouton. 
Damon, W., & Phelps, E. (1989). Critical distinctions among three approaches to peer education. 
International Journal of Educational Research, 58, 9–19. 
de Guerrero, M. C. M., & Villamil, O. S. (2000). Activating the ZPD: Mutual scaffolding in L2 peer 
revision. Modern Language Journal, 84, 51–68. 
Denzin, N., & Lincoln, Y. (1994). The Sage handbook of qualitative research (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage. 
Donato, R. (1994). Collective scaffolding in second language learning. In J. P. Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.), 
Vygotskian approaches to second language research (pp. 33–56). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Duff, P (2008). Case study research in applied linguistics. New York, NY: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Duff, P. (2012). Identity, agency, and SLA. In A. Mackey & S. Gass (Eds.), Handbook of second 
language acquisition (pp. 410–426). London, UK: Routledge. 
Elola, I., & Oskoz, A. (2010). Collaborative writing: Fostering foreign language and writing conventions 
development. Language Learning &Technology, 14(3), 51–71. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num3/elolaoskoz.pdf 
Gere, A. R., & Abbot, R. (1985). Talking about writing: The language of writing groups. Research in the 
Teaching of Writing, 19, 362–385. 
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative 
research. Chicago, IL: Aldine. 
Imai, Y. (2010). Emotions in SLA: New insights from collaborative learning for an EFL classroom. 
Modern Language Journal, 94(2), 278–292. 
Iwashita, N. (2001). The effect of learner proficiency on interactional moves and modified output in 
nonnative–nonnative interaction in Japanese as a foreign language. System, 29, 267–287. 
Kessler, G. (2009). Student-initiated attention to form in wiki-based collaborative writing. Language 
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 79–95. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/kessler.pdf 
Kessler, G., & Bikowski, D. (2010). Developing collaborative autonomous learning abilities in computer 
mediated language learning: attention to meaning among students in wiki space. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 23(1), 41–58. 
Kost, C. (2011). Investigating writing strategies and revision behavior in collaborative wiki projects. 
CALICO Journal, 28(3), 606–620. 
Kuteeva, M. (2011). Wikis and academic writing: Changing the writer-reader relationship. English for 
Specific Purposes, 30, 44–57. 
Lantolf, J. P. (2000). Second language learning as a mediated process. Language Teaching, 33, 79–96. 
Lantolf, J. P., & Pavlenko, A. (2001). (S)econd (L)anguage (A)ctivity. Understanding second language 
learners as people. In M. Breen (Ed.), Learner contributions to language learning: New directions in 
research. London, UK: Longman. 
Mimi Li and Wei Zhu 117 
 
Lantolf, J. P., & Thorne, S. L. (2006). Sociocultural theory and the genesis of second language 
development. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
Lee, L. (2010). Exploring wiki-mediated collaborative writing: A case study in an elementary Spanish 
course. CALICO Journal, 27(2), 260–276. 
Li, M. (2013). Individual novices and collective experts: Collective scaffolding in wiki-based small group 
writing. System, 41(3), 752–769. 
Li, M., & Zhu, W. (2013). Patterns of computer-mediated interaction in EFL collaborative writing groups 
using wikis. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 26(1), 61–82. doi: 
10.1080/09588221.2011.631142 
Lidz, C. S. (1991). Practitioner’s guide to dynamic assessment. New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
Lockhart, C., & Ng, P. (1995). Analyzing talk in ESL peer response groups: Stances, functions, and 
content. Language Learning, 45, 605–655. 
Lund, A. (2008). Wikis: A collective approach to language production. ReCALL, 20(1), 35–54. 
Mak, B., & Coniam, D. (2008). Using wikis to enhance and develop writing skills among secondary 
school students in Hong Kong. System, 36, 437–455. 
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook (2nd ed.). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Nolen, S. B., Ward, C. J., & Horn, I. S. (2011). Motivation, engagement, and identity: Opening a 
conversation. In D. McInerney, R. Walker, & G. A. D. Liem (Eds.), Sociocultural theories of learning 
and motivation: Looking back, looking forward. Greenwich, CT: Information Age Press. 
Ohta, A. S. (2000). Re-thinking interaction in SLA: Developmentally appropriate assistance in the zone of 
proximal development and the acquisition of L2 grammar. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory 
and second language learning (pp. 51–78). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Polio, C., & Gass, S. M. (1998). The role of interaction in native speaker comprehension of non-native 
speaker speech. Modern Language Journal, 82, 308–319. 
Purdy, J. P. (2009). When the tenets of composition go public: A study of writing in Wikipedia. College 
Composition and Communication, 61(2), 351–373. 
Rommetveit, R. (1985). Language acquisition as increasing linguistic structuring of experience and 
symbolic behavior control. In J. Wertsch (Ed.), Culture, communication, and cognition: Vygotskyan 
perspectives (pp. 183–204). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Stake, R. E. (2006). Multiple case study analysis. New York, NY: The Guilford Press. 
Storch, N. (2002). Patterns of interaction in ESL pair work. Language Learning, 52(1), 119–158. 
Storch, N. (2004). Using activity theory to explain differences in patterns of dyadic interactions in an ESL 
class. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 60(4), 457–480. 
Storch, N. (2012). Collaborative writing as a site for L2 learning in face-to-face and online modes. In G. 
Kessler, A. Oskoz, & I. Elola (Eds.), Technology across writing contexts and tasks. San Marcos, TX: 
CALICO. 
Storch, N. (2013). Collaborative writing in L2 classrooms. Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond: Mediating acquisition through collaborative 
dialogue. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 97–114). 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
118 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Swain, M. (2010). Talking-it-through: Language as a source of learning. In R. Batestone (Ed.), 
Sociocognitive perspectives on language use and language learning (pp. 112–130). Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press. 
Swain, M. (2013). The inseparability of cognition and emotion in second language learning. Language 
Teaching, 46, 195–207. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (2002). Talking it through: Two French immersion learners’ response to 
reformulation. International Journal of Educational Research, 37, 285–304. 
van Lier, L. (1996). Interaction in the language curriculum: Awareness, autonomy, and authenticity. 
London, UK: Longman. 
van Lier, L. (2008). Agency in the Classroom. In J. P. Lantolf & M. E. Poehner (Eds.), Sociocultural 
theory and the teaching of second languages (pp. 163–188) London, UK: Equinox. 
Villamil, O. S., & de Guerrero, M. C. M. (1996). Peer revision in the L2 classroom: Socio-cognitive 
activities, mediating strategies, and aspects of social behavior. Journal of Second Language Writing, 
5, 51–75. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
Wells, G. (1999). Dialogic inquiry: Towards a sociocultural practice and theory of education. 
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press. 
Wood, D., Bruner, J., Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem-solving. Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry, 17, 89–100. 
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research design and methods (4th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Zhu, W. (2001). Interaction and feedback in mixed peer response groups. Journal of Second Language 
Writing, 10(4), 251–276. 
Zhu, W., & Mitchell, D. (2012). Participation in peer response as activity: An examination of peer 
response stance from an activity theory perspective. TESOL Quarterly, 46(2), 362–386. 
  
Mimi Li and Wei Zhu 119 
 
Appendix A. Taxonomy of Language Functions 
Language Functions Definition 
Acknowledging Recognizing or praising others’ ideas, comments, helpfulness, and capabilities 
Agreeing Expressing agreement with others’ viewpoints 
Disagreeing Expressing disagreement with others’ viewpoints 
Elaborating Extending and elaborating on own or others’ ideas about writing 
Eliciting Inviting or eliciting opinions, comments, and so forth from group partners 
Greeting Greeting group members 
Justifying Defending one’s own ideas or comments by giving reasons 
Questioning Asking questions that one is not clear about 
Requesting Making direct requirements or requests 
Stating Stating one’s ideas and the ideas groups have discussed earlier; posting writing 
contents or sharing information 
Suggesting Offering suggestions or recommendations about writing contents, structure, 
format, and so forth 
Two Main Categories Definition 
Initiating Proposing new ideas 
Responding Reacting to others’ ideas 
Note. Each of the above language functions can fall into the category of either initiating or responding. 
Appendix B. Taxonomy of Writing Change Functions 
Types of Writing 
Change Functions 
Definition 
Adding Contributing new content and adding language forms 
Deleting Removing existing content and language forms 
Rephrasing Stating the same ideas or meanings in a different way 
Reordering Moving around or reorganizing texts 
Correcting  Correcting or attempting to fix grammatical, spelling, or formatting mistakes 
Engagement of Writing 
Change Functions 
Definition 
Self Writing changes made to the texts composed by the member himself or herself 
Other Writing changes made to the texts composed by other group members 
  
120 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Appendix C. Coding Scheme of Scaffolding 
Scaffolding Mechanism Definition 
Affective Involvement 
(Lidz, 1991) 
Expressing warmth to group members and giving group members a sense of 
caring in the project 
Contingent Responsivity 
(Lidz, 1991) 
Reading group partners’ behaviors and responding appropriately  
Direction Maintenance 
(Wood et al., 1976) 
Maintaining pursuit of the goal for the group work 
Instructing (de Guerrero 
& Villamil, 2000) 
Giving mini-lessons in an authoritative tone 
Intersubjectivity 
(Rommetveit, 1985) 
Participating in a common task, having a shared understanding of the situation 
and being in tune with one another 
Recruiting Interest 
(Wood et al., 1976) 
Arousing interest in the task 
Note. The scaffolding mechanism listed in this table was combined based on previous literature. This list was applied 
to the entire data of the larger wiki study. Thus, some scaffolding strategies were not discussed in the present study. 
About the Authors 
Mimi Li is an Assistant Professor of Applied Linguistics and TESOL in the Department of Writing and 
Linguistics at Georgia Southern University. Her research interests include second language writing and 
computer-assisted language learning. Her work has appeared in journals such as Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, Journal of Second Language Writing, System, and Computers & Education. 
E-mail: mli@georgiasouthern.edu 
Wei Zhu is currently an Associate Professor of Applied Linguistics in the Department of World Languages 
at the University of South Florida. Her main research areas include second language writing, writing for 
academic and specific purposes, and computer-mediated communication and writing development. Her 
work has appeared in journals such as TESOL Quarterly, Journal of Second Language Writing, English for 
Specific Purposes, and Computer Assisted Language Learning. 
E-mail: wzhu@usf.edu 
