Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/news.pdf 
February 2017, Volume 21, Number 1 
pp. 42–45 
 
Copyright © 2017, ISSN 1094-3501 42 
NEWS FROM OUR SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
University of Hawai‘i Center for Language and Technology (CLT) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC) 
 
 
 
 
 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
2017 INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY FOR LANGUAGE STUDIES (ISLS) CONFERENCE 
June 15–17, 2017 
The International Society for Language Studies (ISLS), co-sponsored by the University Hawai‘i at Mānoa, 
will hold a conference June 15–17, 2017 at the University Hawai‘i at Mānoa in Honolulu, HI. The theme 
of the conference will be “Intersections of Peace and Language Studies.” 
Peace is often defined as freedom from oppression, the end of conflict or even harmony in relationships. 
Whatever the definition, the word peace means different things to different people. Peace is an important 
concept that also connects to the focus of ISLS: the intersections and meeting places of language and 
power, identity, and social justice. 
The ISLS conference is a venue for individuals from all disciplines to come together and discuss language 
from a critical, interdisciplinary lens (i.e., language use, language learning, language teaching, critical 
language studies, etc.). 
2017 NFLRC ONLINE INSTITUTE: FUNDAMENTALS OF PROJECT-BASED LANGUAGE 
LEARNING (PBLL) 
Embark on a journey of discovery in which you will learn more about the elements of high quality, 
rigorous project-based language learning (PBLL). During this year’s online institute, you’ll explore 
PBLL’s connections with experiential learning, career pathways, 21st Century Skills, performance-based 
assessment, and your own instructional context. You will also connect with colleagues who have a 
common interest in quality PBLL implementation as experts in the field guide you through the creation of 
a project blueprint. 
Complete Option 1 as part of a facilitated cohort or Option 2 via self-paced study. Registration for this 
online institute is $25. Successfully complete all assigned tasks to earn an NFLRC Digital Badge, which 
qualifies you to apply for the NFLRC Intensive Summer Institute: Pathways to PBLL, offered in 
Honolulu in 2017. Stipends available for qualifying applicants. 
  
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
2017 NFLRC INTENSIVE SUMMER INSTITUTE: PATHWAYS TO PROJECT-BASED 
LANGUAGE LEARNING (PBLL) 
August 2–9, 2017 
Facilitators: Cherice Montgomery & Cindy Kendall 
Join us in exploring the use of project-based language learning (PBLL) as a framework for crafting 
compelling environments and experiences for language learners. During the NFLRC 2017 Intensive 
Summer Institute held in Hawai‘i, inservice K–16 world language educators will learn how to orchestrate 
rich, experiential language learning opportunities that draw on a diverse array of disciplines and career 
pathways. After participating in an abbreviated, face-to-face PBLL experience, each participant will 
design a well-scaffolded project for use in their own language classes. Join a team of experts with 
background in PBLL, language pedagogy, career and technical education, and assessment in redefining 
what it means to teach, transforming what it is possible for students to learn, and discovering how to craft 
more compelling lives for ourselves in the process! 
Please note: This is not a beginner’s workshop. Applicants must first earn a digital badge from the 
Fundamentals of PBLL Online Institute as a prerequisite. Seats are limited and applications are 
competitive. Community college instructors interested in creating interdisciplinary connections will 
receive special consideration. 
JOIN THE NFLRC LISTSERV 
To get announcements and reminders on NFLRC news, publications, professional development events, 
and more, please subscribe to the official announcements email list for the National Foreign Language 
Resource Center at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa. We may occasionally post announcements of 
other news and events of interest to our listserv subscribers, but in general, posts will be kept to a 
minimum. 
If you prefer social media, you could instead join our 3,500+ fans on Facebook or 700+ followers on 
Twitter. All key announcements will be posted there as well. 
  
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
ScholarSpace 
 
NFLRC maintains a large searchable archive of free language research and 
teaching materials which currently contains over 350 items. These items 
include foreign language teaching materials (in print, audio, and video), 
language acquisition research papers, and collections of conference 
materials. 
Save the trees! Check out our other two online, open-access journals: 
  
Language Documentation & Conservation is a 
refereed, open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC 
and published by University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to 
language documentation and conservation, as well 
as book reviews, hardware and software reviews, 
and notes from the field. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed 
international journal of issues in foreign language 
reading and literacy, published twice yearly on the 
World Wide Web and sponsored by NFLRC and 
the University of Hawai‘i College of Languages, 
Linguistics, and Literature. 
 
 
View all NFLRC Publications 
  
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR) 
 
 
 
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
CLEAR is pleased to announce its professional development offerings for summer 2017. The topics are: 
• Assessment in a proficiency-based language classroom; June 26–28 
• Increasing proficiency through World Language Core Practices: June 29 (one-day workshop, 
Section 1) 
• Reaching 21st century learners through unit design: June 30 (one-day workshop, Section 1) 
• Teaching language with technology - Basic tools and techniques: July 31–August 2 
• Increasing proficiency through World Language Core Practices: August 3 (one-day workshop, 
Section 2) 
• Reaching 21st century learners through unit design: August 4 (one-day workshop, Section 2) 
Online registration is open on our website! 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We enjoyed seeing many of you at ACTFL 
in Boston, and look forward to seeing even more at the Central States Conference on the Teaching of 
Foreign Languages in Chicago in March and the conference of the Computer Assisted Language 
Instruction Consortium (CALICO) in Flagstaff in May. 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe here. 
