Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
June 2017, Volume 21, Issue 2 
pp. 179–199 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2017 Yvette Coyle & Maria José Reverte Prieto 
 
 
Children’s interaction and lexical acquisition 
in text-based online chat 
Yvette Coyle, University of Murcia 
Maria José Reverte Prieto, Centro Público de Educación Infantil y Primaria 
Diego Martínez Rico 
Abstract 
This is an empirical study in which we explore child foreign language learners’ interactional strategy use, 
uptake, and lexical acquisition in synchronous computer-mediated communication (SCMC). The study was 
carried out with 16 10-year-old Spanish English as a foreign language learners paired with age- and 
proficiency-matched English native speaker peers who worked together over a 5-week period on three 
communicative jigsaw tasks. Results show that during text-based SCMC, the children negotiated for 
meaning in ways that coincided with and differed from studies of young learners’ face-to-face 
communication. Successful uptake of target lexis occurred infrequently despite high rates of negotiation, 
although the children’s lexical knowledge improved significantly over time. Analyses of the chat scripts 
revealed that the learners noticed and retained additional lexical items embedded in the task and used 
during the interaction. They had not been the focus of negotiation, but were useful for task completion. 
Participation in SCMC also raised the children’s awareness of gaps in their lexical knowledge and 
stimulated their attempts to fill those gaps outside the classroom. The results are discussed and implications 
suggested for implementing SCMC in instructional settings. 
Keywords: Computer-Mediated Communication, Vocabulary, Task-Based Learning and Teaching 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English 
APA Citation: Coyle, Y., & Reverte, M. J. (2017). Children’s interaction and lexical acquisition in text-
based online chat. Language Learning & Technology, 21(2), 179–199. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2017/coylereverte.pdf 
Introduction 
The teaching of English as a foreign language (EFL) has steadily increased in elementary schools around 
the world due to the burgeoning interest in early language learning. At the same time, the expansion of 
technology has gradually changed the way we communicate and now plays an increasingly important role 
in language classrooms. Learners of all ages use web-based tools such as blogs, wikis, email, and digital 
platforms to interact with others and to share or showcase their work. Computer-mediated communication 
(CMC) has also become a thriving focus of research attention within the field of second language 
acquisition (SLA) and a number of studies have examined learners’ digital collaboration in both 
synchronous and asynchronous environments. Synchronous computer-mediated communication (SCMC), 
especially, is held to entail a number of advantages for language learners, enabling them to communicate 
with speakers of the target language in real time, even in foreign language learning contexts where such 
opportunities are limited. However, research on children’s CMC in general, and on SCMC1 in particular, is 
relatively scarce. The aim of the present study is to explore the text-based chat, uptake, and lexical 
acquisition of a group of young EFL learners. In doing so, we hope to offer some insights into the potential 
of digital communication for children’s language learning in instructed learning environments. 
180 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Review of the Literature 
Online chat during which writers exchange written messages in real time has been recently acknowledged 
as a potential site for second language learning. This potential is based upon the possibilities that online 
chat allows learners to produce, monitor, and modify their written output and to attend to feedback provided 
on their texts. By doing so, they activate cognitive processes such as hypothesis formation and testing, 
noticing, metalinguistic reflection, and problem solving, which are thought to lead to the consolidation of 
existing linguistic knowledge or to the development of new knowledge (Williams, 2012). Cognitive 
accounts of learning assume that SCMC can generate opportunities for language learning that are 
comparable to traditional face-to-face (FtF) oral interactions. Hence, much of SCMC research maintains 
the analytical categories that have been established for FtF studies (Ortega, 2009), including clarification 
requests, comprehension checks (Long, 1983), and uptake (Lyster & Ranta, 1997). Although the use of 
facial expression, gestures, body language, or intonation that support successful communication in FtF 
interaction are not available in online textual environments, digital communication has moved beyond the 
written word to include a variety of semiotic resources through which writers can express their attitudes 
and emotions. Consequently, SCMC is characterized by the use of nonverbal language, including symbols 
such as emoticons, punctuation, capitalization, and the like, which learners employ to indicate their feelings 
or problems during interaction (Kawase, 2006; Lee, 2002). 
Despite the real-time demands of communication, in SCMC, learners have more time to process both the 
incoming input and their own written output, since the contributions of both partners remain visible on the 
screen, thus allowing learners to review their on-going conversations (Blake, 2000; Lai & Zhao, 2006; Lee, 
2002; Pellettieri, 2000). However, SCMC is also characterized by disrupted turn adjacency (Ortega, 2009, 
p. 228), since messages are posted in the order received by the system and are likely to be non-sequential. 
The data in chat scripts often take on a format that Smith (2003) has defined as a split negotiation routine, 
in which responses to communication problems may appear on screen later in the discourse, unlike FtF 
communication where speakers’ reactions materialize straightaway. In other words, negotiation in online 
chat is not necessarily contingent to a problem signaled by one of the partners, with the result that uptake 
may be delayed (Lai & Zhao, 2006; Smith, 2005). Although the visibility of the text may increase learners’ 
noticing of language, enhancing the amplification of attention to form (Ortega, 2009, p. 229), learners also 
have greater freedom to skip messages from their partner. For this reason, meaning negotiation and the 
provision of feedback does not necessarily guarantee its reception by the learner (Ortega, 2009). This 
dilemma has been the subject of much SCMC research. 
So far, studies of online chat have focused on (a) discourse strategies used by learners in pair and small 
group chat (e.g., Kötter, 2003; Lee, 2002), (b) interaction and influence of task type with university students 
in instructional settings (e.g., Blake, 2000; Smith, 2003), (c) conversations between learners and native 
speakers (NSs) in public chat rooms (e.g., Jepson, 2005; Tudini, 2003, 2007), and (d) learner uptake from 
meaning negotiation (e.g., Shekary and Tahririan, 2006; Smith, 2005; Sotillo, 2005). Other studies have 
compared SCMC and FtF modes of communication as regards (e) noticing of interactional feedback (e.g., 
Lai & Zhao, 2006), (f) patterns of pair interaction (e.g., Tan, Wigglesworth, & Storch, 2011), and (g) 
communication strategies (e.g., Kim, 2014). Results from this research have been contradictory with 
variability reported across learning contexts regarding the amount and focus of negotiation, the influence 
of task-type, noticing, and uptake as a result of interactive exchanges. 
Kötter (2003) documented the discourse moves used by German and North American university students 
during online text-based interactions about joint cultural projects. These included similar repair moves to 
those found in oral exchanges (i.e., confirmation checks, clarification requests, comprehension checks), but 
were used differently. A high ratio (12.0%) of the discourse moves in the corpus were clarification requests, 
indicating that these learners had no misgivings about asking their partners to modify their written output. 
The use of emoticons (e.g., grins, nods, smiles) to indicate agreement or understanding, code switching, or 
the lack of repetitions in the learners’ chat script data were also representative features of the interactional 
moves of this group of learners. By the same token, Lee (2002) found that requests for assistance, 
Yvette Coyle and Maria José Reverte Prieto 181 
 
clarification requests, self-corrections, and keyboard symbols were used by her intermediate learners of 
Spanish during weekly peer chat sessions. Lee also draws attention to the simple sentence constructions in 
her learners’ written output and their tendency to ignore each other’s linguistic inaccuracies, leading her to 
suggest that fluency rather than accuracy seems to prevail when learners’ attention is focused on meaning 
and exchanges occur at a rapid pace. 
Further SCMC research has attempted to examine the focus of learners’ attention and the influence of task 
type on learners’ negotiation of meaning. These studies coincide in emphasizing lexical, rather than 
grammatical, concerns as the principal trigger of negotiation episodes (NEs), although to varying degrees. 
Blake (2000) found that lexical items were by far the most common incentive for negotiation of meaning 
with adult learners of Spanish, with jigsaw tasks proving superior to information-gap or decision-making 
tasks in fostering negotiation, although overall levels of NEs were low (4.0% of the entire corpus). Smith 
(2003) describes much higher levels of negotiation among his intermediate English as a second language 
(ESL) learners with 34.0% of the data corresponding to negotiation turns. However, both the jigsaw and 
the decision-making tasks deployed in Smith’s (2003) study had been expressly designed to stimulate 
negotiation, with unknown lexical items purposely embedded within them. Focusing on open-ended 
conversational tasks in public chat rooms with adult learners of Italian, Tudini (2003, 2007) found that in 
their interactions with NSs, the levels of negotiation of non-native speakers (NNSs) were still fairly high, 
reaching a ratio of 9.0% and 11.0% respectively. While lexis continued to be the main trigger for NEs, 
problems with grammar and syntax accounted for a substantial number of instances in the data, indicating 
a greater concern with form in a NNS–NS environment. In his study of virtual chat rooms, Jepson (2005) 
recorded data from anonymous ESL learners interacting with NSs in voice-based and text-based 
interactions. In general, levels of negotiation were low, leading Jepson to point out, like Blake (2000), that 
the infrequent use of negative feedback by all participants would seem to indicate that NNS conversational 
chat may not promote the attention to grammatical accuracy which is necessary for second language 
development. 
While there is consensus on the importance of noticing and attention for language learning (Schmidt, 1990), 
researchers have disagreed on the extent to which negotiated text-based interaction can successfully foster 
these processes. In comparing SCMC and FtF communication with mixed proficiency ESL dyads, Lai and 
Zhao (2006) found that learners’ self-reported noticing of errors and interactional feedback was 
significantly higher in online chat than in oral communication. The noticing and successful uptake of 
linguistic items from language-related episodes during SCMC with NNS peers was similarly fruitful for 
Persian EFL learners and associated with their subsequent learning of the noticed items on tailor-made post- 
tests (Shekary & Tahririan, 2006). Sotillo (2005), however, exercises greater caution in advocating a 
decisive role for negotiation and uptake in language development. Although her ESL learners responded to 
corrective feedback from NS and NNS partners on lexical and grammatical errors with a high rate of 
successful uptake (75.0%), just over half of all the feedback provided (51.0%) was neither acknowledged 
nor incorporated by learners. This leads Sotillo to warn that categorical claims for the role of uptake in 
promoting language acquisition cannot be made. A similar position is argued by Smith (2005) who found 
that successful uptake of target lexis occurred only rarely during online communication tasks, despite high 
rates of negotiation between ESL learners, and did not significantly impact their subsequent lexical 
acquisition. The question of whether and how negotiation and uptake might influence language 
development during online chat remains an open question. 
The studies of SCMC reviewed so far coincide in a number of features, including the participants, task 
types, and learning contexts investigated, thus highlighting a number of gaps that have still to be addressed 
by future research. First, all of the above studies were carried out with adult second language learners. None 
have yet focused on younger learners. However, in FtF communication there is a much longer tradition of 
research into children’s interaction and negotiation of meaning. Among others, researchers have 
investigated children’s discourse strategies while interacting with adults and children (Oliver, 2002, 2009), 
interactional feedback and question formation (Mackey & Oliver, 2002; Mackey & Silver, 2005), age-
related differences and strategy use (Pinter, 2006), oral task repetition (Pinter, 2007), interactional feedback 
182 Language Learning & Technology 
 
and task-type (Oliver, Philp, & Mackey, 2008), and negative feedback and modified output (van den 
Branden, 1997). In general terms, research has confirmed that learners as young as 5 years old can and do 
use negotiation strategies, although in ways that are different from those of adults (Ellis & Heimbach, 1997; 
Oliver, 1998, 2000, 2009). While children are essentially concerned with making meaning clear for 
themselves, they are also capable of providing feedback to their partners and modifying their output in 
response to feedback. This has been shown to have beneficial effects on their interlanguage development, 
at least for the formation of questions (Mackey & Oliver, 2002; Mackey & Silver, 2005). 
Second, research on children’s CMC is still relatively scarce. Two recent studies focused on the use of 
wikis as a tool to support children’s negotiation and decision-making during the creation of collaboratively 
written texts (Pifarré & Li, 2012; Woo, Chu, Ho & Li, 2011). More recently, Chen and Yang (2014) 
highlighted the motivational benefits of using various web-based technologies (i.e., weblogs, Skype, email) 
with 12-year old ESL learners in Taiwan to encourage intercultural project work with international partners. 
However, the above-mentioned studies explored children’s learning in an asynchronous computer-mediated 
communication mode. To the best of our knowledge, no study has yet focused on children’s interaction in 
SCMC. It therefore seems relevant for the present research to address this gap. 
Finally, the learners participating in the SCMC studies have interacted either with expert NS interlocutors 
(Jepson, 2005; Sotillo, 2005; Tudini, 2007) or with NNS peers (Blake, 2000; Lai & Zhao, 2006; Lee, 2002; 
Smith, 2003, 2005; Shekary & Tahririan, 2006). Only Kötter (2003) investigated the interaction of two sets 
of NNS tandem learners who were learning their peers’ L1 as an L2 at the time of the study. Furthermore, 
the proficiency levels of the learners participating in above-mentioned research have generally been 
overlooked. This is surprising since it is widely accepted that individual differences impact how learners 
deploy their linguistic resources (Kormos, 2012). Hence, the present study examines a number of crucial 
issues as yet unexplored in the second language research literature with a population that has often been 
neglected. Specifically, we analyze the text-based interaction of young EFL learners working with NS peers 
and its potential effect on the uptake and acquisition of target lexis. The following questions were 
formulated: 
1. What interactional strategies do young EFL learners use while working with proficiency-matched 
NS partners on communication tasks in synchronous text-based chat? 
2. What effect, if any, does participation in text-based interaction have on the EFL learners’ uptake 
and subsequent acquisition of targeted lexical items? 
Method 
Participants and Context 
The participants were 16 children (seven boys and nine girls) aged 9–10 from a Year 4 EFL class at a state 
school in Spain. The children had been learning English for six years, having begun in pre-school at the age 
of three. During this time, they participated in 90-minute weekly sessions aimed at developing oral 
comprehension skills. From age six onwards, they received 3 hours of instruction per week using 
communicative EFL textbooks designed for younger learners. The NNS children were placed in age- and 
proficiency-matched pairs with English L1 NSs from their partner school in England. The NS children, all 
of whom were girls, had been learning Spanish as a foreign language at school for two years, although their 
linguistic competence was comparable to that of their Spanish partners. In general terms, both sets of 
learners were at an A1 level of proficiency according to the Common European Framework of Reference 
for Languages (Council of Europe, 2001). For the purposes of the study, the proficiency levels of the pairs 
was determined by their respective teachers on the basis of their performance on school English and Spanish 
language tests. Although standardized tests have frequently been used to place learners, previous research 
has also acknowledged that, in ordinary classrooms, the teacher’s ratings are often used to pair pupils 
(Leeser, 2004). Both teachers’ assessments of their pupils’ L2 competence were used to pair the stronger 
and weaker language learners in each class so that eight high-proficiency pairs (1–8) and eight low-
Yvette Coyle and Maria José Reverte Prieto 183 
 
proficiency pairs (9–16) were formed. 
Initial Pilot Study and Trial Sessions 
Prior to the data collection, a pilot study was implemented with the aim of trialing a picture-description and 
a jigsaw story-sequencing task in order to select the most appropriate one for the present research in terms 
of its potential to foster online negotiation. Since the jigsaw task was found to afford greater opportunities 
for negotiation and uptake, it was chosen for the main study. Five trial sessions were then held for training 
purposes to introduce the learners to the Chatzy online platform and to enable them to meet their partners 
informally. The newly formed pairs, who remained together throughout the study, practiced over a period 
of two weeks with a jigsaw task in English and then in Spanish in order to become familiarized with the 
demands of online chat and with the task format. 
The Jigsaw Tasks 
Three original jigsaw tasks were created by the researchers for the purpose of the study (for an example, 
see Appendix A). These were story-sequencing tasks that required each pair to describe and agree on the 
correct order of a series of four pictures. The three stories shared a common underlying lexical theme related 
to clothing and certain key objects purposely embedded in the task in order to focus the NNS children’s 
attention on the unknown lexical items (Smith, 2005). The teachers instructed both groups to collaborate in 
order to solve the task. It was emphasized to the NS children that it was their responsibility to help their 
partners use English correctly. Likewise, the NNSs were told to use as much English as possible and to 
seek help if they encountered any difficulties. 
Data Collection Schedule and Procedure 
Mixed measures of data collection were used. These included vocabulary pre- and post-tests, individual 
written narratives, and chat scripts of the jigsaw tasks. The data collection was inserted into the normal 
class schedule in both schools over a period of eight weeks (see Table 1). 
Table 1. Schedule of the Research Design 
Week Task 
Week 1 Initial pre-test 
Week 2 Session 1: Jigsaw task 1, Immediate post-test 1 
Week 3 Session 2: Jigsaw task 2, Immediate post-test 2 
Week 4 Session 3: Jigsaw task 3, Immediate post-test 3 
Week 8 Delayed post-test and small group interviews 
Before the first task, the NNS children were given a pre-test to determine their knowledge of the lexical 
items included in the tasks. Following Smith (2005), the participants were shown 20 slides that contained 
twelve target lexical items projected in no particular order: four from each of the three jigsaw tasks plus 
eight distractors (see Appendix B). The children were provided with an answer sheet and asked to write the 
words in English. For each chat session, the pairs met online once a week in the computer classroom under 
the supervision of their teachers. The children were given 40 mins to complete each task. Immediately 
afterwards, the NNS learners were required to write the picture story individually. Immediate post-tests 
were held two days later. These followed the same procedure as the pre-test. On each occasion, the children 
were shown 10 slides and asked to write the words on their answer sheet. These included the four target 
words from each task plus six distractors arranged in a different order from the pre-test. Four weeks after 
the final jigsaw task, a delayed post-test, identical to the pre-test, was held with the intention of determining 
the NNSs’ retention of the target lexical items. Finally, semi-structured interviews were held with a 
representative sample of the NNS participants in order to tap into their perceptions of SCMC. 
184 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Data Analysis and Coding 
The data set for the study consisted of (a) a total of 48 chat scripts, 16 for each of the three jigsaw tasks; (b) 
a lexical pre-test, three immediate post-tests, and a delayed post-test; (c) 48 picture story descriptions 
written individually be the NNS children; and (d) video recordings of interviews with the NNS children. 
The chat scripts were read recursively to identify the range of interactional features used by the children 
while performing the tasks online. The coding scheme used to analyze the transcripts included discourse 
strategies related to task performance (Lee, 2002; Zeng & Takatsuka, 2009) and what have traditionally 
been termed negotiation strategies, as described in previous SLA interactional research (Long, 1983; Pica 
& Doughty, 1985). An additional data-driven category of social interaction was included to account for 
non-task-related discourse (see Appendix C). 
Episodes involving negotiation of meaning were then identified for the 16 pairs across all three tasks. 
Negotiation of meaning, as used in the present study, is defined as “cooperative interaction that enables 
learners to develop mutual understanding as they work together to overcome a communication breakdown” 
(Oliver, 2009, p. 137). A NE includes a trigger that causes a communication problem, an indicator of non-
understanding, and a response to the indicator. In SCMC, as noted by Smith (2005), several turns may 
occur between each of these stages. Following this author, a turn is operationalized as a “transfer of the 
floor from one participant to another” (p. 44). As such, when a learner writes several lines in succession, 
this constitutes a single turn. 
The interactional strategies identified in the data were counted for each of the 16 pairs across all three tasks. 
Reliability was established by having a second rater check the entire data corpus so that any discrepancies 
could be solved by discussion, following procedures outlined by Smagorinsky (2008). The percentage ratio 
of each strategy type was calculated for all the pairs, and then for high- and low-proficiency pairs in each 
task. The overall mean percentage ratio for each strategy across all three tasks was then computed. To check 
for significance in the strategy use by pairs of different proficiency levels, the mean scores and standard 
deviations for each interactional strategy were calculated using descriptive statistics. Given the small 
number of participants and the non-normal distribution of the data, a non–parametric Mann Whitney test 
was run to check for significance between the high- and low-proficiency pairs. 
Research Question 2 was concerned with a possible relationship between the children’s negotiated 
interaction, uptake, and lexical gains on the target items. The categories of uptake used in the present study 
are adapted from Smith (2005). Hence each episode was coded as either (a) no uptake, when the learner 
does not produce uptake in response to a NE; (b) unsuccessful, when the learner acknowledges information 
received from his partner but does not use it accurately; or (c) successful, when the learner uses the target 
item productively in the reply phase or any time thereafter. 
To calculate the ratio of each uptake category, the total number of NEs initiated by NNS was tallied for 
each task and the percentage ratio calculated as before. The results of the pre- and post-tests were counted 
and a Friedman Test was used to check for significant differences in the lexical scores across the five time 
periods. In addition, a series of Wilcoxon signed rank tests were run to compare the mean ranks of the 
NNSs vocabulary scores from the pre-test (a) to each of the three immediate post-tests and (b) to the 
immediate to the delayed post-test. 
Results 
The first research question attempted to identify the interactional strategies used by young EFL learners 
and NS peers while working on communication tasks during online chat. The results showed that the 
children interacted collaboratively using interactional strategies similar to those of studies with children in 
FtF communication. However, the virtual nature of the interaction also afforded several noteworthy 
differences, which will be discussed below. The interactional strategies identified can be categorized into 
three groups: task-specific discourse, negotiation strategies used to overcome difficulties or breakdowns in 
communication, and social exchanges. Table 2 below shows the mean proportion of strategies used by the 
Yvette Coyle and Maria José Reverte Prieto 185 
 
pairs across all three tasks. 
Table 2. Proportion of Interactional Strategies Used by Child NNS–NS Pairs across Tasks 
Strategy Mean % 
Asking for information about a picture 14.5 
Describing a picture 18.2 
Providing L2 equivalent for unknown lexis 5.7 
Providing L1 equivalent for unknown lexis 2.2 
Request for response 4.0 
Clarification request 10.7 
Confirmation check 2.7 
Comprehension check 2.0 
Self-repetition 16.3 
Seeking lexical assistance 6.5 
Self-correction 4.4 
Recast 0.7 
Explicit correction 0.2 
Social (e.g., greetings, personal chat, etc.) 11.9 
Total 100.0 
The highest percentage of individual strategies was directly related to task performance, since the children’s 
prime concern was to complete the jigsaw task successfully. Therefore, much of their interaction was taken 
up with asking for and exchanging information about each other’s pictures, as seen in the high proportion 
of questions (14.5%) and descriptions in the data (18.2%). A significant proportion of negotiation strategies 
were identified, which the children used to repair, re-establish, or maintain communication. The mean 
percentage of self-repetition (16.3%) and clarification requests (10.7%) were relatively high. Seeking 
lexical assistance (6.5%) and self-correction (4.4%) were also used to negotiate meaning, the former almost 
exclusively by NNSs when asking their partners how to express unknown words in the L2. The NS children 
responded by providing unknown the lexis in the L2 (6.5%) or, to a lesser extent, giving an L1 equivalent 
(2.2%). Self-correction (4.4%) was used primarily by the NS children to repair spelling inaccuracies in their 
messages. Confirmation checks (2.7%) and comprehension checks (2.0%) were less prominent in the data, 
while feedback, both in the form of recasts (0.7%) and explicit correction (0.2%) was used only rarely. 
Socially oriented interaction (11.9%) included greetings, farewells, and personal questions unrelated to the 
task (for a sample of the interaction between a high- and a low-proficiency pair see Appendix D). 
Use of Strategies by High- and Low-proficiency Pairs 
Table 3 shows the average use of interactional strategies by high- and low-proficiency pairs. A Mann 
Whitney test revealed significant differences (p < 0.05) on four negotiation strategies in favor of the high-
proficiency pairs that requested a response from their partners twice as much as their low-proficiency peers 
(high-proficiency M = 4.13, SD = 3.68; low-proficiency M = 1.38, SD = 1.99; z = -2.42, p = .01) and used 
clarification requests significantly more frequently (high-proficiency M = 10.13, SD = 3.83; low-
proficiency M = 4.88, SD = 3.52; z = -2.539, p = .01). Both strategies were used mainly by the NNSs. 
Consequently, the provision of lexical items in both English (high-proficiency M = 5.63, SD = 2.77; low-
proficiency M = 2.38, SD = 1.84; z = -2.408, p = .01) and Spanish (high-proficiency M = 2.63, SD = 1.84; 
low-proficiency M = 0.75, SD = 1.48; z = -2.214, p = .02), which are also significant, corresponded 
exclusively to NSs in response to their partners’ communicative needs. 
186 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Table 3. Mean Frequencies of Negotiation Strategies Used by Pairs of Different Proficiency Levels 
 High-Proficiency Pairs  Low-Proficiency Pairs 
Strategy M SD  M SD 
Asking for information about a picture 9.75 2.65  11.00 1.51 
Describing a picture 14.13 2.85  13.13 3.72 
Providing L2 equivalent for unknown lexis 5.63* 2.77  2.38 1.84 
Providing L1 equivalent for unknown lexis 2.63* 1.84  0.75 1.48 
Request for response 4.13* 3.68  1.38 1.99 
Clarification request 10.13* 3.83  4.88 3.52 
Confirmation check 2.63 1.99  1.25 1.66 
Comprehension check 1.88 1.95  0.75 0.88 
Self-repetition 13.38 6.90  10.75 9.30 
Seeking lexical assistance 5.88 5.66  3.38 2.50 
Self-correction 3.50 2.92  1.88 1.95 
Recast 0.38 0.74  0.63 0.51 
Explicit correction 0.25 0.46  0.13 0.35 
The nature of the online environment led the children to use symbols, punctuation marks, and emoticons to 
express their mood during task performance. Table 4 presents the three most frequent emoticons used by 
the pairs across the three tasks. Negative emoticons (e.g., angry, frown) were recurrent in Task 1 when a 
misunderstandings occurred, although encouragement (bravo) was also given. In Task 2, two new 
emoticons (hug and confused) appeared in the chats, although one (angry) also indicated the children’s 
frustration on struggling to communicate. In the final task, the children increased their use of the smile and 
bravo symbols while big grin emoticons were also used to express positive emotions. This gradual change 
in the children’s mood over time could be related to their growing confidence and a more collaborative and 
fluent working relationship with their partners by the final task. 
Table 4. Frequency of Emoticons Used across the Jigsaw Tasks 
 1st place 2nd place 3rd place 
Task 1  angry (16)  bravo (9)  frown (9) 
Task 2  hug (27)  angry (24)  confused (15) 
Task 3  smile (127)  bravo (44)  big grin (25) 
Research Question 2 asked about the impact of text-based negotiation on the NNS children’s uptake and 
acquisition of target lexis. The chat corpus contained a total of 108 NEs across the three tasks (37, 41, and 
30, respectively), approximately 9.5% of the total turns (N= 1132). The mean number of NEs per pair across 
all three tasks ranged from 0.3 to 6.0, with an overall average of 2.4 episodes for all pairs. Although the 
number of episodes per task was similar, negotiation between the pairs reached a peak during Task 2 and 
declined to the lowest number of episodes in the final task. 
Successful uptake of the target lexis by the NEs occurred infrequently, averaging at about 20.0%. The 
percentage of lexical items incorporated by the NNS reached a peak in Task 2 before falling in the final 
task (Task 1, 17.0%; Task 2, 27.5%; Task 3, 20.0%). Unsuccessful uptake gradually increased across tasks 
(Task 1, 12.0%; Task 2, 15.0%; Task 3, 20.0%) while no uptake was by far the most frequent response to 
Yvette Coyle and Maria José Reverte Prieto 187 
 
the NEs. No opportunity for uptake (when NNSs were simply clarifying meanings they did not understand) 
and missed opportunities for uptake (when NNSs failed to incorporate input) account for more than half of 
the outcomes following a NE. The percentage ratio of no uptake decreased slightly from Task 1 to Task 2 
and increased again slightly in Task 3 (Task 1, 72.0%; Task 2, 57.5%; Task 3, 60.0%). Table 5 shows the 
results of the percentage of NNS uptake across the three jigsaw tasks. 
Table 5. Percentage Ratio of Uptake by NNSs across Tasks 
 Task 1  Task 2  Task 3 
 n %  n %  n % 
Successful 6 17.0  11 27.5  6 20.0 
Unsuccessful 4 11.0  6 15.0  6 20.0 
No Uptake 26 72.0  23 57.5  18 60.0 
Total NEs 36 100.0  40 100.0  30 100.0 
The target lexis, which had been purposely integrated into the tasks, was either overlooked or not 
incorporated by the NNSs even when they had received feedback from their partners. Only two or three 
target items were successfully incorporated into their written output by some of the NNS across the three 
tasks. However, additional words, which were not targeted in the vocabulary tests, also became the focus 
of NEs, some of which were then used by the NNSs. This was the case of lexis related to actions and 
descriptions of the main characters in the picture story in Task 1 and Task 2 (i.e., speaking, sitting, sleeping, 
sunbathe, wet) or the weather in Task 3 (i.e., cloudy, rain, storm). The lexis that resulted in uptake from 
negotiation during task performance is included in Appendix E. Further analysis of the chat scripts also 
revealed incidental uptake by the NNS children of a number of words that had not been actively negotiated, 
but that were used by NSs during the exchange. These included words and expressions that were especially 
useful for identifying the picture their partners were describing. They included concrete references to the 
time of day in Task 1 (e.g., moon, stars), location in Task 2 (e.g., beach, sea, castle), and monuments in 
Task 3 (e.g., Big Ben, London Eye). The individual written narratives that the NNSs wrote immediately 
after finishing each task included such words (see Appendix F). 
Results of the Vocabulary Tests 
The second research question also addressed the potential acquisition of target lexis by the NNS children. 
A Friedman test showed that there were statistically significant changes in the children’s acquisition of the 
target vocabulary x2 (2, n = 16) = 33.15, p < .000 across the five time periods covered by the pre- and post-
tests. A comparison of the mean ranks for the five sets of scores indicated that from the original pre-test 
(2.28), there was a peak after Task 2 (3.50), a drop after Task 3 (2.41), and a final increase on the delayed 
post-test (4.16). Further comparative analysis of the lexical scores between the pre-test and (a) each of the 
immediate post-tests and (b) the delayed post-test using Wilcoxon signed rank tests revealed statistically 
significant improvement in the children’s vocabulary scores from the pre-test to Task 2 (z = -2.807, p = 
.005), and from pre-test to delayed post-test (z = -2.816, p = .005). However, the scores did not improve 
significantly from the pre-test to Task 1 (z = -1.732, p = .083) and from the pre-test to Task 3 (z = -1.000, 
p = .317). The mean and median scores obtained by the children before and after carrying out the jigsaw 
tasks are shown in Table 6. 
Table 6. Lexical Scores by NNS across the Jigsaw Tasks 
 Vocabulary scores (n = 16) 
 Pre-test Post-test 1 Post-test 2 Post-test 3 Delayed post-test 
188 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Mean 0.000 0.187 0.750 0.625 1.750 
Median 0.000 0.000 1.000 0.000 1.500 
SD 0.000 0.403 0.856 0.250 1.732 
Discussion 
The aim of the present study was to explore the interactional strategies, uptake, and lexical acquisition of 
young EFL learners working with age- and proficiency-matched peers on task-based SCMC tasks. The 
principal findings can be summarized as follows: (a) The children willingly negotiated for meaning when 
communication difficulties arose during online interaction. (b) Interactional strategies were used similarly 
despite differences in proficiency levels, which affected only a limited number of negotiation strategies. (c) 
Codeswitching was widely used by both groups of children to avoid communication breakdown. (d) 
Semiotic resources including emoticons, capital letters, and punctuation were implemented 
translinguistically to convey attitudes and emotions in the virtual environment. (e) Successful uptake of 
target lexis by NNS children occurred infrequently, despite high rates of negotiation. (f) The NNS children 
acquired incidental vocabulary after socially interacting with their NS partners. And (g) the NNS children’s 
lexical acquisition improved after participating in text-based SCMC. These findings suggest that text-based 
SCMC would seem to be a potentially useful site for SLA with young language learners. 
Children’s Interactional Strategies and Negotiation of Meaning 
The negotiation strategies that the EFL children most resorted to in order to overcome communication 
difficulties were self-repetitions and clarification requests. These findings are in consonance with earlier 
studies of FtF communication with both younger (5–7 years) and older (8–12 years) children (Oliver, 2002, 
2009). The high proportion of self-repetition strategies in the present study (16.0%) is slightly lower than 
in Oliver’s (2009) data (24.0%). However, the percentage of clarification requests (10.7%), doubles that 
found by Oliver (2009), which accounted for 6.0% of the negotiation moves in oral interaction tasks. 
Despite slight variation, the overall coincidences between children’s strategy use in FtF and SCMC are 
striking. This might be explained by younger children’s lower levels of L2 competence. When faced with 
having to clarify a meaning for their NS partners, the NNSs’ limited L2 competence meant that they were 
largely unable to modify their output and so tended to re-state the original message. Exact self-repetition 
was more characteristic of children’s SCMC than either partial or expanded repetitions, which are found in 
oral data. Interestingly, self-repetition was not found in online interaction with older learners (Kötter, 2003; 
Lee, 2002), yet it was used frequently by adults in FtF situations (Oliver, 1998), particularly in NS–NNS 
dyads. This might be attributed to the increased processing time afforded by the online environment that 
would enable more competent adult learners to rethink and modify their problematic or incomprehensible 
output. 
The high proportion of clarification requests found in children’s interaction in both online and FtF modes 
suggests, as pointed out by Oliver (2009), that children’s egocentricity influences their interactional 
behavior, leading them to be less concerned with making meanings clear for their partners and more 
concerned with focusing on their own needs. This would also account for the less frequent use of strategies 
that involved helping their partners, such as ensuring that messages were understood (comprehension 
checks) or helping partners use language more accurately by reformulating or explicitly correcting their 
output (recasts and explicit corrections). In text-based SCMC, the need for learners to make meanings clear 
for themselves is even more accentuated since they cannot see their interlocutor and lack the paralinguistic 
input that oral communication entails. Without this crucial support, learners were forced to ask their partners 
to continually explain or rephrase the original messages. The high percentage of clarification requests in 
our data coincides with findings from SCMC studies with adults (Kötter, 2003; Lee 2002). However, unlike 
Kötter´s (2003) dual nationality learners who spent equal amounts of time communicating in both 
languages, it was mostly the Spanish EFL learners who used clarification requests to access the meaning of 
Yvette Coyle and Maria José Reverte Prieto 189 
 
input that was beyond their comprehension. 
Seeking lexical assistance and self-correction were also prominent in the children’s text-based interaction. 
Yet, while neither of these strategies are documented in children’s FtF communication, Lee (2002) 
identifies both as among the most characteristic features of the peer interaction in her SCMC research and 
Kötter (2003) points out that the majority of the appeals for assistance in his research were made by the 
less-advanced American learners. The prominence of these particular strategies would also seem to be 
linked to low levels of linguistic competence, as well as to the characteristics of the online environment. It 
should be recalled that the children in Oliver’s (2002, 2009) studies were second (rather than foreign) 
language learners, acquiring the language in a naturalistic context. Hence, their additional exposure to the 
L2 meant that they almost certainly had greater lexical knowledge than the EFL children in this study, 
whose competence was very low. In order to formulate written output in the FL, the NNS children sought 
help from their partners to compensate for gaps in their lexical knowledge. Many such requests frequently 
involved the use of intra-sentential code switching, whereby the children stated the L1 equivalent of single 
items or phrases they needed to produce in the L2. On other occasions, the NNSs borrowed explicitly from 
the L1 when describing their pictures. NS learners were also found to codeswitch into Spanish in order to 
sustain negotiation when attempts at communicating in English had broken down. As in Kötter’s (2003) 
study, codeswitching was used here by the NNS children to compensate for their lexical shortcomings and 
by the NSs to scaffold and assist their partner’s task performance. Self-correction may also be more 
important in online communication because of the visibility of the written language on the screen, which 
facilitated the NS children’s detection of errors and subsequent editing of their output. 
An additional feature of the children’s SCMC was their frequent use of emoticons, capital letters, 
exclamation marks, and question marks to express their feelings during the negotiation tasks. Interestingly, 
these young learners had no inhibitions about openly showing their anger, frustration, or confusion, 
especially when their partners failed to respond to requests for help. By the same token, more positive 
attitudes including apologies, encouragement, and smiley faces served to establish and improve rapport 
between partners. These distinguishing features of SCMC seem to have played a central role not only in 
signaling interaction problems in the absence of prosodic and paralinguistic markers, but also in establishing 
social bonds between learners. As noted by Ortega (2009), it is still an open question as to how exactly such 
features might contribute to opportunities for L2 learning. 
Proficiency Level and Strategy Use 
Proficiency affected the use of four strategies: clarification requests, requests for a response, the provision 
of lexis in the L2, and the provision of lexis as an L1 translation. While all the NNSs used clarification 
requests in order to obtain comprehensible input, higher-proficiency learners did so significantly more than 
their lower-proficiency peers. This suggests that learners with higher proficiency levels are better prepared 
for negotiating meanings during communication breakdowns. As Pinter (2007) has suggested, since 
children, unlike adults, are unashamed of not knowing or misunderstanding meanings in the L2, they are 
willing to seek help in order to clarify L2 input. The provision of lexis by the NS children, both in the L2 
and in the L1, was also determined by proficiency, since the more linguistically competent NS children 
provided ample assistance to meet the demands of their high proficiency NNS partners. Thus, the 
proficiency levels of young NS learners in their interactional partner’s first language could be an important 
factor to take into consideration when pairing learners during CMC. Had the pairing been made in such a 
way that more-competent children were placed with less-linguistically-proficient partners, the less-
competent NS children may have had greater difficulty in providing feedback, especially when doing so in 
their partner’s L1. 
Negotiation, Uptake, and Lexical Acquisition 
Online jigsaw tasks provided the young EFL learners with a site for the negotiation of meaning in the L2. 
Lexical NEs corresponded to 9.5% of all turns across the three tasks. Judging by Ortega’s (2009) 
comparison of SCMC studies with adult learners, these levels are fairly high. Although falling well below 
190 Language Learning & Technology 
 
the results of Pellettieri (2000) and Smith (2005) who reported negotiation rates of 31.0% and 42.0%, 
respectively, the amount of negotiation the children engaged in was comparable to Kötter’s (2003) tandem 
learners (12.0%) and Tudini’s (2003, 2007) analyses of public chat rooms (9.0% and 11.0%, respectively). 
The high rate of negotiation found in our research was largely determined by the task type, which, as a bi-
directional information-gap activity, was specifically designed to encourage the exchange of information 
held by each of the partners. Other studies of pairs (Blake, 2000), small groups (Lee, 2002), and whole 
classes (Sotillo, 2005) have reported lower negotiation rates of between 3.0% and 7.5%. Those studies that 
have compared negotiation rates in SCMC and FtF communication (e.g., Fernandez & Martinez, 2002; Lai 
& Zhao, 2006) have come out in favor of the latter. This conflicting evidence suggests that the possible 
benefits of SCMC as a medium for fostering negotiation is largely dependent on who the participants are, 
the tasks they engage in, and the learning context (Ortega, 2009). The differences identified in negotiation 
rates by learners of different proficiency levels, with higher proficiency children negotiating twice as much 
as their lower proficiency peers (6.0% and 3.5%), a variable that was not reported by any of the above 
studies, would suggest that proficiency may also influence the potential of online interaction for meaning 
negotiation. 
The variability identified in the amount of negotiation across tasks is worth careful consideration. NEs 
increased from Task 1 to Task 2 before dropping in Task 3. This finding would initially appear to be in 
conflict with research on oral task repetition in adults (Bygate, 2001). Such studies have shown that when 
learners repeat a series of identical tasks in short succession, they generally improve their performance as 
the task becomes more familiar. This, in turn, can enhance the accuracy of language output. The first time 
learners engage in a task, they are likely to be focused on meaning. On subsequent occasions, they may 
improve their performance and focus more on language form (Adams, 2003). The lower number of NEs 
found in the final jigsaw task suggests that the children may have improved in terms of language 
comprehension, since clarification requests were used half as often as in the previous tasks (Task 1, 15.0%; 
Task 2, 12.0%; Task, 3.5%). However, this improvement did not carry over to productive lexical 
knowledge, since requests for assistance with writing unknown words doubled in Task 3 (Task 1, 3.8%; 
Task 2, 5.6%; Task 3, 10.0%), as did the use of emoticons (Task 1, 8.0%; Task 2, 7.7%; Task 3, 20.0%). 
The results of immediate post-test 3 also show no significant improvement in the retention of target lexis. 
A linguistic analysis of the chat scripts using comprehensibility, accuracy, and fluency measures was 
beyond the scope of the present study, yet there are some indicators that practicing with the jigsaw task 
may have led to improved performance. For instance, more children successfully completed the task within 
the given time limit than before, and some progression was evident in the length of learner turns in the final 
task, especially with the higher-proficiency learners (see Appendix G). These findings are in line with 
Pinter’s (2006) study of the benefits of oral task repetition with young EFL learners. Hence, the gains from 
practicing with task-based SCMC may reside in terms of increasing younger learners’ understanding of the 
task, as well as their confidence and fluency in exchanges with NS partners. 
Regarding uptake and lexical acquisition, the findings of this study are not straightforward. Despite 
engaging in negotiation with their NS peers, successful uptake did not occur frequently. Even when 
opportunities were provided, the learners often failed to integrate the target lexis into their ongoing 
interaction. Smith (2005) has argued that the pressure to respond quickly to partners’ incoming messages 
and complete the task may distract learners’ attention away from the target lexis. It is also true that many 
of the target items embedded within the tasks were not actually the focus of the children’s negotiations, and 
that additional vocabulary, which they perceived as more essential to successful task performance, was 
noticed and incorporated into their subsequent written texts. This suggests that the NNSs did, in fact, acquire 
incidental lexis while interacting with their NS peers. Surprisingly, they also improved their knowledge of 
target items significantly from the pre-test to immediate post-test 2 and on the delayed post-test. This is 
important because Task 2 had, in fact, produced the highest rate of NEs among pairs, thus suggesting a 
possible link between negotiation and lexical acquisition. While in the initial task, the EFL learners may 
have been overwhelmed by competing demands on their attention from having to type, read, and draw 
simultaneously. By the final task, greater familiarity with the task format and with their partners may have 
Yvette Coyle and Maria José Reverte Prieto 191 
 
reduced the level of challenge involved, as well as their motivation, thus lowering negotiation rates. The 
second task, then, appeared to be the most operative in terms of striking a balance between challenge and 
performance outcomes. The children’s interview data also contributed a further explanation to account for 
improvements in lexical scores, since some of the learners acknowledged that engaging in the tasks with 
NS partners had raised their awareness of gaps in their lexical knowledge. This led them to search for 
unknown words in dictionaries, in textbooks, and on the internet and to consult with their NNS peers outside 
of class. It is clear that the learners’ post-task searches for target vocabulary also contributed to 
improvements in their performance on the delayed post-test. 
Conclusions 
The present study is an attempt to explore the language-learning potential of task-based CMC with young 
foreign language learners. In doing so, it broadens the empirical database on SCMC by extending it to an 
under-studied population in SLA research. Evidence has been provided that SCMC can facilitate children’s 
second language learning in several ways. First, the NNS children’s progress in terms of lexical knowledge 
can be traced, in part, to episodes of meaning negotiation and uptake within the context of the online tasks. 
Second, their participation in SCMC played an important role in raising awareness of gaps in their lexical 
knowledge and in stimulating subsequent endeavors to fill those gaps. As such, this study also contributes 
theoretically to the debate within SLA concerning the potential of writing to foster noticing and second 
language learning. Finally, some support is also provided for related research that emphasizes the 
translingual nature of communication (Canagarajah, 2013). In this sense, the children’s dynamic mixing of 
language codes and deployment of additional semiotic systems during SCMC actively worked together as 
strategic resources to support the development of their second language competence. 
The pedagogical implications of the study are important. The NNS children’s low levels of competence in 
EFL and their initial inability to formulate even simple questions points to a need for language teachers to 
train young learners in the use of basic formulae which would foster more fluent communication. Regarding 
task sequencing, while jigsaw tasks were found to be useful for encouraging interaction, the learners’ 
investment in negotiation was lower in the third task, possibly due to their loss of interest. Teachers might 
introduce alternative task types (e.g., spot-the-difference or decision-making) and vary their order so as to 
maintain suitable levels of pressure and challenge on learners to promote optimum levels of negotiation. 
Finally, learners could be given access to their chat scripts after task completion to encourage class 
discussion of grammatical, lexical, and social aspects of the second language that were largely overlooked 
during meaning-based interaction. 
The study has several limitations that should be considered for future research. The lack of time for children 
to complete the tasks was a clear handicap. While this was largely dependent on the availability of the 
partner school, raising teachers’ awareness of the learning potential of SCMC could be a first step to 
ensuring that sufficient class time is set aside for online interaction. Implementing SCMC tasks with 
partners alternatively in both foreign languages is also likely to increase interest from all parties involved. 
Regarding the data, the coding of the children’s interaction and the uptake categories would also benefit 
from a more fine-grained analysis. One of the most frequently identified strategies in the NNS discourse 
was seeking lexical assistance. However, we did not distinguish between those occasions when learners 
requested an L1 or an L2 equivalent for unknown vocabulary, and whether this was influenced by 
proficiency level. Similarly, the category of no uptake could be analyzed further to separate no opportunities 
for uptake from opportunities that were simply missed by the learners. This would give a subtler picture of 
the relationship between negotiation and uptake. Future research might continue to examine the online 
interactions of young learners in real time since there is much that we do not know. Issues such as the 
impact of different task types, learner groupings, individual personality traits, and nationality could all be 
analyzed, as well as the potential of SCMC to improve different aspects of language competence including 
oral and written skills. 
192 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Acknowledgements 
This study is part of the work conducted within two research projects financed by the Spanish Ministerio 
de Economía y Competitividad (research grant FF12016-79763) and by Fundación Séneca, the research 
agency of the Autonomous Government of the region of Murcia, Spain (research grant 19463/PI/14). 
Notes 
1. SCMC is used in this study to refer to written communication. Any allusion to non-text-based SCMC 
will be specified. 
References 
Adams, R. (2003). L2 output, reformulation, and noticing: Implications for IL development. Language 
Teaching Research, 7(3), 347–376. 
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language 
Learning and Technology, 4(1), 120–136. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/blake/default.html 
Bygate, M. (2001). Effects of task repetition on the structure and control of oral language. In M. Bygate, 
P. Skehan, & M. Swain (Eds.), Researching pedagogic tasks: Second language learning, teaching, 
and testing (pp. 23–38). Harlow, UK: Longman. 
Canagarajah, S. (2013). Global Englishes and cosmopolitan relations. Abingdon, UK: Routledge. 
Chen, J., & Yang, S. (2014). Fostering foreign language learning through technology-enhanced 
intercultural projects. Language Learning & Technology, 18(1), 57–75. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/chenyang.pdf 
Council of Europe (2001). Common European framework of reference for languages: Learning, teaching, 
assessment (CEFR). Retrieved from http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/linguistic/source/framework_en.pdf 
Ellis, R., & Heimbach, R. (1997). Bugs and birds: Children’s acquisition of second language vocabulary 
through interaction. System, 25(2), 247–259. 
Fernandez, M., & Martinez, A. (2002). Negotiation of meaning in nonnative speaker–nonnative speaker 
synchronous discussions. CALICO Journal, 19(2), 279–294. Retrieved from 
http://www.jstor.org/journal/calicojournal 
Jepson, K. (2005). Conversations and negotiated interaction in text and voice chat rooms. Language 
Learning & Technology, 9(3), 79–98. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/jepson/default.html 
Kawase, A. (2006). Second language acquisition and synchronous computer mediated communication. 
Teachers College, Columbia University Working Papers in TESOL & Applied Linguistics, 6(2), 1–27. 
Retrieved from http://www.tc.columbia.edu/tesolalwebjournal 
Kim, H. Y. (2014). Learning opportunities in synchronous computer-mediated communication and face-
to-face interaction. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 27(1), 26–43. doi: 
10.1080/09588221.2012.692386 
Kormos, J. (2012). The role of individual differences in L2 writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 
21(4), 390–403. 
Kötter, M. (2003). Negotiation of meaning and codeswitching in online tandems. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 145–172. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/kotter/default.html 
Yvette Coyle and Maria José Reverte Prieto 193 
 
Lai, C., & Zhao, Y. (2006). Noticing and text-based chat. Language Learning & Technology, 10(3), 102–
120. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num3/pdf/laizhao.pdf 
Lee, L. (2002). Synchronous online exchanges: A study of modification devices on non-native discourse. 
System, 30(3), 275–288. 
Leeser, M. J. (2004). Learner proficiency and focus on form during collaborative dialogue. Language 
Teaching Research, 8(1), 55–81. 
Long, M. (1983). Linguistic and conversational adjustments to non-native speakers. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 5(2), 177–193. 
Lyster, R., & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learner uptake. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 19(1), 37–66. 
Mackey, A., & Oliver, R. (2002). Interactional feedback and children’s L2 development. System, 30(4), 
459–477. 
Mackey, A., & Silver, R. (2005). Interactional tasks and English L2 learning by immigrant children in 
Singapore. System, 33(2), 239–260. 
Oliver, R. (1998). Negotiation of meaning in child interactions. Modern Language Journal, 82(3), 372–
386. 
Oliver, R. (2002). The patterns of negotiation for meaning in child interactions. Modern Language 
Journal, 86(1), 97–111. 
Oliver, R. (2009). How young is too young? Investigating negotiation of meaning and feedback in 
children aged five to seven years. In A. Mackey & C. Polio (Eds.), Multiple perspectives on 
interaction: Second language research in honor of Susan M. Gass (pp. 135–156). New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Oliver, R., Philp, J., & Mackey, A. (2008). The impact of teacher input, guidance, and feedback on ESL 
children's task-based interactions. In J. Philp, R. Oliver, & A. Mackey, (Eds.), Second language 
acquisition and the younger learner: Child's play? (Vol. 23) (pp. 131–147). Amsterdam, Netherlands: 
John Benjamins. 
Ortega, L. (2009). Interaction and attention to form in L2 text-based computer-mediated communication. 
In A. Mackey & C. Polio (Eds.), Multiple perspectives on interaction: Second language research in 
honor of Susan M. Gass (pp. 226–253). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical 
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and 
practice (pp. 59–86). Cambridge, UK: Cambrige University Press. 
Pica, T., & Doughty, C. (1985). The role of group work in classroom second language acquisition. Studies 
in Second Language Acquisition, 7(2), 233–248. 
Pifarré, M., & Li, L. (2012). Teaching how to learn with a wiki in primary education: What classroom 
interaction can tell us. Learning, Culture, and Social Interaction, 1(2), 102–113. doi: 
10.1016/j.lcsi.2012.05.004 
Pinter, A. (2006). Verbal evidence of task related strategies: Child versus adult interactions. System, 
34(4), 615–630. 
Pinter, A. (2007). Some benefits of peer-peer interaction: 10-year-old children practising with a 
communication task. Language Teaching Research, 11(2), 189–207. 
Schmidt, R. W. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 
11(2), 129–158. 
194 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Shekary, M., & Tahririan, M. H. (2006). Negotiation of meaning and noticing in text-based online chat. 
Modern Language Journal, 90(4), 557–573. 
Smagorinsky, P. (2008). The method section as conceptual epicenter in constructing social science 
research reports. Written Communication, 25, 389–411. doi: 10.1177/0741088308317815 
Smith, B. (2003). The use of communication strategies in computer-mediated communication. System, 
31(1), 29–53. 
Smith, B. (2005). The relationship between negotiated interaction, learner uptake, and lexical acquisition 
in task-based computer-mediated communication. TESOL Quarterly, 39(1), 33–58. 
Sotillo, S. (2005). Learning activities in NS–NNS and NNS–NNS dyads. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 467–
496.  
Tan, L. L., Wigglesworth, G., & Storch, N. (2011). Pair interactions and mode of communication: 
Comparing face-to-face and computer mediated communication. Australian Review of Applied 
Linguistics, 33(3), 27.1–27.24. Retrieved from http://www.jbe-
platform.com/content/journals/10.2104/aral1027 
Tudini, V. (2003). Using native speakers in chat. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 141–159. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/pdf/tudini.pdf 
Tudini, V. (2007). Negotiation and intercultural learning in Italian native speaker chat rooms. Modern 
Language Journal, 91(4), 577–601. 
van den Branden, K. (1997). Effects of negotiation on language learners’ output. Language Learning, 
47(4), 589–636. 
Williams, J. (2012). The potential role(s) of writing in second language development. Journal of Second 
Language Writing, 21(4), 321–331. 
Woo, M., Chu, S., Ho, A., & Li, X. (2011). Using a wiki to scaffold primary-school students’ 
collaborative writing. Educational Technology and Society, 14(1), 43–54. 
Zeng, G., & Takatsuka, S. (2009). Text-based peer-peer collaborative dialogue in a computer-mediated 
learning envirnment in the EFL context. System, 37(3), 434–446. 
Appendix A. Sample Jigsaw Task 
  
Yvette Coyle and Maria José Reverte Prieto 195 
 
Appendix B. Sample Slides and Lexis from the Pre- and Post-Tests 
 
Lexical items Target lexis Distractor 
1. Tent X  
2. Sunshade  X 
3. Wellies X  
4. Sleeping bag X  
5. Umbrella X  
6. Bucket   X 
7. Torchlight  X 
8. Swimsuit X  
9. Scarf  X 
10. Torch X  
11. Flip flops X  
12. Rain coat X  
13. Flask X  
14. Sun cream  X 
15. Gloves X  
16. Rope  X 
17. Towel X  
18. Woolen hat  X 
19. Beach mat X  
20. Ear muffs  X 
 
Appendix C. Coding of Children’s Text-based Interactional Strategies 
Interactional Feature Description Example 
Asking for information 
on the picture task 
Requesting genuine information 
on the task content 
NNS: what is in picture B? 
Describing the picture Giving genuine information on 
the task content 
NS: in picture D there is a boy watching tv a 
girl getting glue and scissors from a shelf 
Providing unknown lexis 
in L2 
Explaining the meaning of 
unknown words in English 
NNS: wath llorar in ingles 
NS: crying 
Providing unknown lexis 
in L1 
Using Spanish to explain the 
meaning of unknown words 
NNS: the clock marca the seven o'clock 
Requesting a response  Insisting that one’s partner 
respond to a previous question 
or demand 
NS: What happens in picture E  
NS: please answer 
Self-correction Correcting one’s own mistakes NNS: the mates 
NNS: maths 
196 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Interactional Feature Description Example 
Social interaction  Interacting on non-task-related 
items including greetings, 
personal questions, and so forth 
NS: Oh, and I am sorry that I kept you waiting 
for SO long. Do you have any siblings? 
Clarification request Clarifying an incomprehensible 
message (because it was ill-
formed), including I don’t 
understand, wh-questions, tag 
questions, and yes/no questions 
NNS: in picture a is a girl crying y el niño 
ayudandole 
NS: pardon? what does y el nino ayudandole 
mean? 
Confirmation check Checking by the speaker that he 
or she had correctly understood 
the message 
NNS: in picture it´s quarter past eight 
NS: Quarter past 8 on the clock, you mean? 
Comprehension check Checking that the message was 
understood by the listener 
NS: are you stuck  
Self-repetition Repeating by the speaker of the 
same utterance (partially or 
expanded) within five turns 
NS: NOT ORDER 
NNS: 1 c 2 e 
NS: I KNOW, WHAT IS IN PICTURE E 
NOT THE ORDER! 
Seeking assistance Requesting help on how to 
produce an unknown word or 
expression in the L2 
NNS: what pintar in engish 
Recast Reformulating all or part of the 
speaker’s utterance 
NNS: and the boy making homework 
NS: doing homework, right. 
Explicit correction Correcting the L2 explicitly NNS: there a mamy, cryner girl and liring-
roon 
(3 turns later) 
NS: you write it mummy, crying and living-
room 
Appendix D. Sample Chat Scripts from Task 2 
High Proficiency Pair 
NS: hello  
NNS: hello 
NS: hi 
NNS: what´s in the picture a? 
NNS: what´s toalla in english 
NS: towel 
NS: in picture a, a girl in the rush matting, flip-flops and a girl in the sea 
NS: the girl wears a hat 
NNS: I do not understand 
NS: what is in picture b?? 
NNS: what´s rush in español 
NS: rush matting is esterilla in spanish 
Yvette Coyle and Maria José Reverte Prieto 197 
 
NS: come on! 
NS:  
NS: minerva? are you ok? 
NNS: in the picture b, 
NS: hello 
NS: ?????????????????????? 
NNS: swiminng girl atras rush y al lado a girl 
NNS: there a hat 
NS: I don´t understand 
NNS: what´s bolso in english 
NS: bag 
NNS: what´s flip -flops in español 
NS: in picture c, there are two girls, swimsuit, a bag, a hat and it s sunny. They are  
walking in the street and go to the beach. 
NS: flip-flops are shoes to go to the beach 
NS: what is in d? 
NS: hello 
NS: are you there?? 
NNS: inthe picture d girl rush shoes y a girl in the towel 
NS: i dont understand rush shoes 
NS: do you mean flip flops? 
NNS: what´s swimsuit inespañol 
NS: bañador I have got to go 
NS: bye bye 
Low Proficiency Pair 
NS: hi 
NNS: b and girl sad and girl suimmin 
NNS: hello 
NS: ok 
NS: wait 
NS: in picture a, two girls, a girl in the sea and rush matting 
NNS: what is on picture a? 
NS: i told uo 
NS: in picture a, two girls, a girl in the sea and rush matting 
NS:    
NS:  
NS: whats i b?? 
NS: dddd? 
NS: please 
NS:  
NNS: b and girl sad and girl suimmin 
NS: in pcture c, tow girls, its sunny, a hat, and a bag. 
NS: ok 
198 Language Learning & Technology 
 
NNS: whaa 
NNS: what hat a bat en Spain? 
NS: bye bye  
NS:  
NNS: bey bey   
Appendix E. Uptake by NNSs from NEs during Task Performance 
NNS Task 1 Task 2 Task 3 
1 0 Sunbathe 0 
2 Speaks 0 0 
3 0 0 0 
4 0 Flip flops, wet Raincoat 
5 0 Rush matting, wet Boots, says 
6 Tent, rucksack, tree, sitting Towel, hat, rush Rain 
7 Sleeping bag, skate, ready to sleep Flip flops Pocket, waterproof boots, raincoat 
8 Sleeping bag Rush matting Waterproof boots 
9 0 Other, wet, mummy 0 
10 0 Rush matting 0 
11 0 Flip flops Cloudy, raincoat 
12 0 0 0 
13 0 0 0 
14 0 Beach Cloudy, storm 
15 Walking 0 0 
16 0 Rush matting 0 
Appendix F. Lexical Uptake in the Individual Written Texts of EFL Learners 
NNS Written Narrative 1 Written Narrative 2 Written Narrative 3 
1 Stars, moon, sky 0 0 
2 Night time Sand, wet London Eye, Big Ben 
3 Left, right, stars, speaking Sunbathe London Eye, Big Ben 
4 Forest, torch, shining Sea, walking, wet 0 
5 0 wet Big Ben, London Eye 
6 Stars, moon, rucksack Sea, bag 0 
7  Sleeping bag, moon 0 Big Ben 
8 Moon, stars Beach  Big Ben, London Eye 
9 Moon Wet Big Ben, London Eye 
10 0 Beach London Eye 
11 Tent, stars, moon Sea Big Ben, London Eye, boats  
Yvette Coyle and Maria José Reverte Prieto 199 
 
NNS Written Narrative 1 Written Narrative 2 Written Narrative 3 
12 0 0 Big Ben 
13 Angry 0 0 
14 0 Beach Big Ben, storm 
15 Lost, walking Castle Big Ben 
16 Moon 0 Big Ben, London Eye 
Appendix G. A Sample of the Development of EFL Children’s Writing across Tasks 
Pair 14 (low proficiency) 
Task 1 NNS: the boy is seelp 
Task 2 NNS: in picture b is beach and girl bañandose 
Task 3 NNS: in picture D is storm boy and girl Big Ben 
Pair 2 (high proficiency) 
Task 1 NNS: the girl is sad and the boy is sleep  
Task 2 NNS: in picture B the chancls is in the beach and the girl is swimming 
Task 3 NNS: in picture b is claudy is watching a London Eye and the Big Ben 
the boy speking "wow I LIKE THEM 
 
