Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2017, Volume 21, Issue 3 
pp. 63–66 
BOOK REVIEW  
 
 
Copyright © 2017 Senta Goertler 
 
 
Review of Blended language program evaluation 
Senta Goertler, Michigan State University 
 
Blended language program evaluation 
Gruba, P., Cárdenas-Claros, M., Suvorov, R., & Rick, K. 
2016 
ISBN: 978-1-137-51436-3 
US $100.00 
248 pp. 
Palgrave MacMillan 
Basingstoke, UK 
 
As computer-assisted language learning (CALL) implementations and blended instruction become more 
prominent, it is—as many CALL researchers have argued—crucial that such pedagogical innovations be 
founded in second language acquisition (SLA) theory, building on SLA and CALL SLA research results, 
and evaluated using best practices and newest methodologies (see Chapelle, 2009). Blended language 
program evaluation by Gruba, Cárdenas-Claros, Suvorov, and Rick is an excellent example of combining 
program evaluation research and theory from a variety of disciplines with CALL, specifically blended 
language instruction. 
Chapelle (2009) has outlined how different theoretical approaches can be implemented in CALL curricula. 
Furthermore, I have argued that blended and online education can be justified based on SLA research and 
theory (Goertler, 2011). Even though blended language learning already has a long tradition in comparison 
to newer formats such as the flipped classroom (see Kim, Park, Jang, & Nam, 2017), many blended program 
developments are still driven by logistical, and not pedagogical, considerations and top-down rather than 
bottom-up processes (Goertler, 2011). Early reports on blended learning mostly summarize the pedagogical 
building blocks of curricula and report on enrollment trends, logistical benefits, or student satisfaction. The 
second wave of blended research focuses on quasi-experimental comparison studies comparing blended 
delivery formats with face-to-face or solely online formats (for summary see Grgurović, 2011). As I and 
others have argued, quasi-experimental studies may be insufficient for evaluating the learning outcomes of 
blended learning, since the approach is built on the assumption that learning in a blended environment has 
to lead to the same learning outcomes as a face-to-face environment. This assumption closes off the 
possibility that blended delivery formats may lead to unique learning outcomes that go beyond the outcomes 
typically seen in face-to-face formats (e.g., improved digital literacy). It also assumes that pure face-to-face 
delivery formats will always be an alternative option, which, in reality, might not be true. To fully capture 
the challenges and benefits of blended learning, an evaluation framework is necessary that involves more 
stakeholders, data points, and analyses and that can accommodate greater complexity than simple 
comparison of test results and perception survey reports between face-to-face and blended course 
participants. To impact language teaching practice positively, such research needs to be conducted ethically 
and with maximal buy-in from a range of stakeholders. 
Gruba et al. present a comprehensive and contemporary evaluation framework expanding Kane’s (2006) 
64 Language Learning & Technology 
 
argument-based approach. Their proposed evaluation approach overcomes several shortcomings of 
previous research on blended learning and is a good guide for language program evaluation in general—
and blended language programs in particular. The book is divided into three parts: (1) an overview of 
previous research and theories, (2) an introduction of the three different levels of program evaluation (i.e., 
micro, meso, and macro), and (3) sample case studies for the different levels across four contexts (i.e., 
Chile, USA, Vietnam, and Australia). Each part includes several dense chapters with a plethora of 
invaluable summarizing tables and graphs. The book is framed by a foreword by Chapelle and a concluding 
reflective chapter. 
In Chapter 1, the author team introduces blended learning from a program evaluation perspective. This 
chapter builds on Gruba’s previous co-authored book on blended learning (Gruba & Hinkelman, 2012). 
This chapter poignantly summarizes the shortcomings and challenges of language program evaluation, 
especially blended language learning. First, they point to the common issue of technology not being fully 
integrated, which leads to technological concerns being put above pedagogical and learner needs. Secondly, 
they correctly point to issues in teacher training, attitudes, and skills for CALL integration (see also Arnold 
& Ducate, 2015). Next, they discuss issues in blended and CALL evaluation such as the dynamic nature of 
technological advancement; the need for involving a multitude of stakeholders in evaluation and looking at 
outcomes over different time spans; and the lack of training and expertise of team members in program 
evaluation, research methodology, and data analysis. These shortcomings pose great difficulties for iterative 
program design and evidence-based decision making. In the final section of the chapter, the authors present 
their arguments for why program evaluation is the appropriate theoretical and methodological basis for 
improving blended language instruction. It is notable that this is the only chapter in which the work is 
contextualized in blended learning research, since discussion of blended learning is missing in much of the 
research typically presented in North American contexts. 
If one were to only read one chapter in this book, it should be Chapter 2. This chapter is an incredible (and 
incredibly dense) synthesis of program evaluation theories and methodologies drawing from multiple 
disciplines and spanning both traditional and the most recent approaches. The chapter begins by presenting 
six challenges in language program evaluation: social and political context, stakeholder involvement and 
diversity, assessment criteria, data types, use of project outcomes, and technology integration. Their 
comprehensive review of program evaluation approaches particularly focuses on action research and those 
evaluations that are intended to positively impact the program being evaluated. In their proposed model of 
evaluation, they identify three evaluation levels (i.e., micro, meso, and macro). They further differentiate 
what these terms mean depending on the scope of the evaluation project, and neatly and compactly 
summarize information in tables. Building on Gruba and Hinkelman (2012), they further identify four 
primary considerations for blended language teaching: purpose, appropriateness, multimodality, and 
sustainability. In the section following, they present argument-based approaches to testing and evaluation 
as defined by Kane (2006). This approach to evaluation includes four phases: (1) planning an argument, (2) 
gathering the evidence, (3) presenting the argument, and (4) appraising the argument. What is particularly 
striking about the proposed model is the focus on complexity of context, ethics, and the impact of the 
evaluation approach. While an argument-based approach might be new to readers in North American 
foreign language education, it is an approach that has found a following in English language teaching circles 
around the world. 
Chapters 3, 4, and 5 are the most applied chapters in this book and can serve as a guidebook for practitioners. 
Each chapter is dedicated to a different level of evaluation (i.e., micro, meso, and macro). In each chapter, 
the authors summarize concerns, considerations, questions, and data points for each of the four research 
project phases. The authors go to great lengths to exemplify how rich data can be collected in ethical and 
methodologically sound ways with the intention of positively impacting the program being evaluated, 
carefully weighing the benefits and appropriate uses of qualitative and quantitative data. The authors 
mention several useful concrete instruments and offer tables and questions that can be used as road maps 
in all phases of a language program evaluation project. Once again, it should be noted that these chapters 
are relevant not only for blended language program evaluation, but also for language program evaluation 
Senta Goertler 65 
 
in general. 
The practitioner reading this book may want to skip Chapters 6, 7, 8, and 9, while those interested in 
research on blended language learning may want to skip ahead to these case study chapters after reading 
Chapter 2. In these four chapters, the authors present four case studies implementing the evaluation 
approach illustrated in Chapter 2. What is particularly impressive about these case studies is that they 
include all three evaluation levels and they take place on four continents in different program types. They 
are each written by four research teams led by one of the co-authors of the book. They share the same 
approach, are primarily conducted on English learners, and are all in college settings. Hence, the differences 
and commonalities provide an excellent overview of issues with regards to the implementation of the 
research framework and the implementation of a blended curriculum. Normally, switching between co-
authored chapters and team-written chapters might lead to stylistic inconsistency and be challenging for 
readers. However, breaking up the co-authored book with these essentially single-authored book chapters 
is an effective way of illustrating the diversity and complexity of blended learning. The details in which the 
contexts and procedures are described in each of these four case study chapters serve as excellent examples 
of qualitative research and of the importance that contextual factors may play in program outcomes. In 
reviewing these four case studies, one finds great value in Kumaravadivelu’s post-method argument for a 
pedagogy of particularity, practicality, and possibility (Kumaravadivelu, 2006). 
The honesty of the authors’ reflection in Chapter 10 is a refreshing reminder that both curriculum design 
and research is an iterative process where each iteration builds on the findings from the previous one. After 
brief individual reflections, the chapter revisits and redefines the evaluation approach presented in Chapter 
2 by first walking the reader through the elements that were successful and then pointing out challenges. 
Notable strengths of this approach include its connection to existing applied linguistics research and its 
promise to make research results more transferable due to the rigor in methodology, as well as the salient 
focus on transparency and program improvement. A clear roadmap for the evaluation process, which makes 
all elements transparent for all stakeholders, is key to ethical research and to promoting buy-in from 
stakeholders. The most valuable aspect of the approach is the focus on providing programs with evidence 
for decision-making and program improvement. The authors also acknowledge that implementing the 
approach was not without challenges. Most notable was the complexity of the framework, which was not 
learned easily (indeed, this excellent overview chapter should help future researchers overcome some of 
the shortcomings of the case studies). In the final section of the chapter, the authors provide directions for 
future research and modifications to the approach. They propose adding a fourth consideration to the 
considerations of Gruba and Hinkelman (2012), namely alignment, which demands that macro, meso, and 
micro level initiatives and evaluations are linked to each other for more cohesion. Furthermore, they point 
out the value in learner analytics and their potential in blended and online learning. As might be expected, 
they also encourage a stronger connection and possible foundation in complexity theory, specifically the 
theory of complex adaptive systems. While the connection to complexity theory was just a small note in 
the book overall, given the approach presented and the context (blended learning), a stronger connection to 
and integration of complexity theory would have made the book even stronger. 
For those working in language program administration or in language resource centers, Gruba et al. have 
put together an excellent resource to assist in evaluation and program development. Rarely does one see 
such a diverse presentation of contexts and resources in a single volume, as each author clearly provides an 
integral component. The publication is also a good reminder of the different discourses held in North 
America and elsewhere and in English language teaching in comparison to foreign language education, 
which is both a strength and a weakness of the book. On one hand, it is an important contribution to the 
discussion of language program evaluation and blended language learning in US venues for CALL research. 
On the other hand, in various places, the connection to these discussions is missing, especially in regard to 
blended learning. Finally, the book title is somewhat misleading. As illustrated in this review, the book is 
an excellent practical and theoretical guide for program evaluation. However, the first two words in the 
title, blended language, do not receive as much attention, which might have been intentional, since the first 
author has already published a book on blended language learning. A reader interested in the topic may 
66 Language Learning & Technology 
 
want to consider reading both books in sequence to truly gain expertise in both fields. Similarly, those who 
are new to program administration and evaluation might want to also consult Lord’s (2013) guide for 
language program coordinators and the language program evaluation guide by Norris, Davis, Sinicrope, 
and Watanabe (2009). Those already experienced and knowledgeable in program administration and 
research on language programs will find in this book an invaluable resource for comprehensive, 
contemporary, inclusive, and innovative language program evaluation that takes into account the 
complexities and particularities of specific contexts. 
References 
Arnold, N., & Ducate, L. (2015). Contextualized views of practices and competencies in CALL teacher 
education research. Language Learning & Technology, 19(1), 1–9. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2015/commentary.pdf 
Chapelle, C. (2009). The relationship between second language acquisition theory and computer-assisted 
language learning. Modern Language Journal, 93, 741–753. 
Goertler, S. (2011). Blended and open/online learning: Adapting to a changing world of language 
teaching. In N. Arnold & L. Ducate (Eds.), Present and future promises of CALL: From theory and 
research to new directions in language teaching (pp. 471–501). San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Grgurović, M. (2011). Blended learning in an ESL class: A case study. CALICO Journal, 29(1), 100–117. 
Gruba, P. & Hinkelman, D. (2012). Blending technologies in second language classrooms. Basingstoke, 
UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Kane, M. (2006). Validation. In R. Brennen (Ed.), Educational measurement (pp. 17–64). Westport, CT: 
Praeger. 
Kim, J., Park, H., Jang, M., & Nam, H. (2017). Exploring flipped classroom effects on second language 
learners’ cognitive processing. Foreign Language Annals, 50(2), 260–284. doi: 10.1111/flan.12260 
Kumaravadivelu, B. (2006). TESOL methods: Changing tracks, challenging trends. TESOL Quarterly, 
40(1), 59–81. 
Lord, G. (2013). Language program direction: Theory and practice. New York, NY: Pearson. 
Norris, J. M., Davis, J. M., Sinicrope, C., & Watanabe, Y. (Eds.). (2009). Toward useful program 
evaluation in college foreign language education. Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai‘i National 
Foreign Language Resource Center. 
About the Author 
Senta Goertler (PhD, University of Arizona) is Associate Professor of Second Language Studies and 
German at Michigan State University and currently serving as Resident Director for the Academic Year in 
Freiburg program in Germany. Her research focuses on blended and online learning, computer mediated 
communication, and education abroad. 
E-mail: goertler@msu.edu 
