Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/cunningham.pdf 
February 2017, Volume 21, Number 1 
pp. 76–99 
 
Copyright © 2017, ISSN 1094-3501 76 
METHODOLOGICAL INNOVATION FOR THE STUDY OF  
REQUEST PRODUCTION IN TELECOLLABORATION 
D. Joseph Cunningham, Georgetown University 
Second language (L2) request production has long been a central area of inquiry in interlanguage 
pragmatics, including how L2 learners mitigate their requests and whether such strategies correspond 
to or differ from those of first language (L1) speakers. Methodologically, such research often involves 
elicited speech and tends to isolate the speech act from the surrounding discourse using instruments 
such as discourse completion tasks. While some naturalistic speech contexts (e.g., academic advising 
sessions) have been investigated, few studies to date have analyzed requesting in synchronous 
computer-mediated communication (SCMC). The current study responds by presenting a 
multifactorial analysis of L1 and L2 request production that occurred during eight one-hour web 
conferences between L2 learners of German for professional purposes and L1 German professionals. 
Three taxonomies traditionally used in face-to-face pragmatics research were adapted for analysis of 
the SCMC, enabling the use of a generalized linear mixed model. Findings indicate that while both 
groups of speakers used predominantly direct requesting behavior, L1 speakers used significantly 
more internal modification devices than did L2 learners. 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: German 
Keywords: Telecollaboration, Computer-mediated Communication, Pragmatics, Research 
Methods 
APA Citation: Cunningham, D. J. (2017). Methodological innovation for the study of 
request production in telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 21(1), 75–98. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/cunningham.pdf 
Received: November 1, 2015; Accepted: July 19, 2016; Published: February 1, 2017 
Copyright: © D. Joseph Cunningham 
INTRODUCTION 
A central area of inquiry in pragmatics research has been the production of requests by second language 
(L2) learners, including the means by which L2 learners mitigate their requests and how such strategies 
correspond to or differ from strategies employed by native speakers and more proficient users of the target 
language (e.g., Blum-Kulka & Olshtain, 1984; Economidou-Kogetsidis, 2008, 2009, 2012; Faerch & 
Kasper, 1989; Félix-Brasdefer, 2007; Rose, 2000; Trosborg, 1995). 
Methodologically, much research has tended to isolate speech acts from surrounding discourse using 
controlled instruments such as discourse completion tasks (DCTs; e.g., Blum-Kulka & Olshtain, 1984, 
1986; Economidou-Kogetsidis, 2008, 2009, 2010; Faerch & Kasper, 1989; Woodfield & Economidou-
Kogetsidis, 2010). Although DCTs, especially in written form, are simple to administer and yield 
quantifiable data, they have been criticized for a lack of authenticity and inattention to social parameters 
(Golato, 2003). As it more closely approximates authentic spoken discourse than data gathered from written 
or oral DCTs (Kasper, 2000; Sasaki, 1998; Yuan, 2001), another instrument used widely in ILP studies is 
the open role play (e.g., Economidou-Kogetsidis, 2012; Göy, Zeyrek, & Otcu, 2012; Hassall, 2001, 2012; 
Otcu & Zeyrek, 2008; Woodfield, 2012). In an effort to capture even more authentic production data, 
researchers have also collected and analyzed naturally occurring conversations (e.g., Beebe & Cummings, 
1996; Félix-Brasdefer, 2007; Golato, 2003; Yuan, 2001). The analysis of naturally occurring data is 
methodologically complex, and these studies are invariably linked to a specific speech context. While such 
communicative contexts as telephone conversations (Beebe & Cummings, 1996), academic advising 
sessions (Reinhardt, 2010) and e-mails (Chen, 2001; Economidou-Kogetsidis, 2011; Hartford & Bardovi-
Harlig, 1996) have been investigated, little research has investigated synchronous computer-mediated 
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
communication (SCMC). An exception is Golato and Taleghani-Nikazm (2006), who investigated request 
production by first language (L1) speakers in synchronous chat, finding that the participants “take practices 
from ordinary conversation and apply them to their interaction within this new form of communication” (p. 
316). In order to shed further light on request production in SCMC, the current study presents an empirical 
analysis of L1 and L2 request production that occurred during eight 1-hour web conferences between L2 
learners of German for professional purposes and L1 German professionals. In so doing, the study 
illustrates two methodological innovations that facilitated the analysis of request production in 
telecollaboration: 1) examination of telecollaborative discourse as a context for naturalistic pragmatic 
production and data collection and 2) application of multilevel statistical models that allowed for 
exploration of different aspects of request production. 
BACKGROUND 
L2 Request Production and Mitigation 
Requests are an inherently face-threatening act (Brown & Levinson, 1987) that often must be mitigated to 
maintain interpersonal relations while also achieving the requestive end (Weizman, 1989). Mitigation of 
requesting behavior can be achieved through indirectness, internal modification, and external modification. 
Direct requests occur when a speaker states without ambiguity what he or she desires, whereas indirect 
requests contain an implicit meaning that may not be readily deducible from the linguistic expression itself. 
Internal modification is achieved through “elements within the request utterance proper [i.e., head act]...the 
presence of which is not essential for the utterance to be potentially understood as a request” (Blum-Kulka, 
1989, p. 60). Faerch and Kasper (1989) further classify internal modifiers into two groups: syntactic 
modifiers (i.e., conditional sentences, tense and aspect markings, interrogatives, etc.) and lexical modifiers 
(i.e., word choices such as the politeness marker please). External modifiers, in contrast, are “supporting 
statements that are used by requesters to persuade the hearer to carry out a desired action” (Schauer, 2007, 
p. 201). They are extraneous to the head act of the request and instead address the context in which the 
speech act is embedded, thus indirectly modifying the illocutionary force. External modifiers serve a range 
of functions, from signaling that a request is shortly forthcoming (i.e., the alerter or preparator) to 
expressing gratitude for the granting of the request (i.e., the appreciator). 
In the following sections, I review existing research of request modification, as achieved through 
(in)directness, internal modification, and external modification. Although the review addresses L2 German 
requesting behavior, it is organized according to the three focal features described previously and, in order 
to be comprehensive, studies examining other languages have also been included. 
Directness in Request Production across Languages 
Much research examining directness in requesting behavior can be traced to the Cross-Cultural Study of 
Speech Act Realization Patterns (CCSARP) project (Blum-Kulka & Olshtain, 1984; Blum-Kulka, House, & 
Olshtain, 1989). Rating requests from most direct (1) to least direct (9) allowed the researchers to compare 
the linguistic realization of requests in eight languages and language varieties. The CCSARP project proved 
foundational for the study of directness in requesting behavior, with many researchers adopting the project’s 
investigative framework for research of pragmatic production in face-to-face communication (e.g, 
Economidou-Kogetsidis, 2010; Fukushima, 1996; Ogiermann, 2009; Taguchi, 2006, 2011; Trosborg, 1995). 
As regards request directness in L1 German and English, studies have shown differing results: whereas 
House (2006) suggests that “Germans prefer more direct expressions when complaining or making a 
request” (p. 251), often drawing on explicit imperative structures to perform requests, Ogiermann (2009) 
argued that both English and German speakers dispreferred the use of direct request expressions (as 
compared to Polish and Russian speakers). To wit, English speakers used direct expressions (i.e., 
imperatives) in only 4% of cases and German speakers used direct expressions in only 5% of the requests 
analyzed (p. 209). Research comparing the directness of L1 and L2 German request production has not, to 
my knowledge, drawn on the CCSARP framework. Instead, such studies are situated in the tradition of 
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
conversation analysis and have shown, for instance, that both L1 and L2 speakers of German “treat the 
social action of requesting as dispreferred” (Taleghani-Nikazm & Huth, 2010, p. 190) and instead rely on 
pre-request sequences designed to elicit offers. 
Internal Modification in L2 Request Production 
Research has indicated that L2 learners tend to underuse internal modifiers when compared to native 
speakers or learners of higher proficiency levels (Chen, 2001; Economidou-Kogetsidis, 2008, 2009; Faerch 
& Kasper, 1989; Hassall, 2001, 2012; Göy et al., 2012; Trosborg, 1995; Wigglesworth & Yates, 2011). 
Faerch and Kasper (1989) showed that Danish learners of German used comparatively fewer syntactic 
modifications than German native speakers. Regarding lexical modifications, Danish learners of English 
and German overused conventionalized politeness markers (e.g., please) and underused downtoners in 
comparison to native speakers. Trosborg’s (1995) study of Danish learners of English shows that, across 
proficiency levels, they underused internal modifiers compared to native speakers, but that this usage went 
up as proficiency in the target language increased. Göy et al. (2012) investigated request production in three 
different populations: two groups of Turkish learners of English with differing proficiency levels and a 
group of American English speakers. Subjects performed similarly in situations where the difference in 
power between speakers was minimal; however, when this difference became greater, the native speakers 
used more syntactic and lexical downgraders than the learner groups, except for the politeness marker 
please.1 
External Modification in L2 Request Production 
In comparison to L1 speakers, L2 learners tend to overuse external modifiers (Blum-Kulka & Olshtain, 
1986; Faerch & Kasper, 1989; Hassall, 2001, 2012; Kasper, 1981). Faerch and Kasper (1989) explain this 
tendency by pointing to the very explicit politeness function associated with their use, while Hassall (2001) 
notes that learners may be able to use these linguistic elements more easily than comparatively complex 
internal modification devices. Regarding specific devices, learners tend to make use of the grounder more 
frequently than other modifications (Economidou-Kogetsidis, 2008, 2009); however, their overuse 
sometimes resulted in provision of repetitive information and compromised pragmatic ability (Hassall 2001, 
2012). 
To summarize the previous sections, research suggests that differences in request directness by German and 
English speakers may exist, but are likely minimal, especially when compared with speakers of Polish and 
Russian. Given the prevalence of the CCSARP framework, it is surprising that no such studies could be 
found that compared the directness of requests between L1 and L2 speakers of German, making the current 
study all the more urgent. Regarding request modification, L2 learners have shown preference for external 
modification over internal modification (excepting the lexical modifier please), but overuse of external 
modifiers may lead to compromised pragmatic ability. With these findings in mind, the focus of the 
literature review will now shift to methodological concerns regarding collection of requesting data. 
Data Collection Procedures for the Study of Requests  
When researching request production, there exists a certain tension among various data collection methods. 
A great many studies utilize DCTs. DCTs present L1 or L2 speakers of a language with a particular social 
setting and interlocutor in order to elicit a linguistic response. DCTs are most often written instruments and 
have been used to examine many aspects of requests, including L1 request production across languages and 
cultures (Blum-Kulka & Olshtain, 1984; Blum-Kulka et al., 1989; Economidou-Kogetsidis, 2010; Faerch & 
Kasper, 1989), request production of L1 and L2 speakers (Byon, 2004; Woodfield & Economidou-
Kogetsidis, 2010), request modification in L2 speakers (Economidou-Kogetsidis, 2008, 2009), selection of 
request strategy by L2 learners (Kuriscak, 2015), and the effect of instruction on L2 request production 
(Cohen & Shively, 2007; Li, Q. 2011). Less common are DCTs that collect oral production data. Such 
studies have probed L1 request strategies in British English and Japanese (Fukushima, 1996), the effect of 
instruction on L2 request production (Li, S. 2011; Pearson, 2006), and the influence of proficiency and 
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
study abroad on L2 request production (Taguchi, 2011).  
From a research perspective, the advantages of DCTs are numerous. Researchers can collect large data sets 
quickly (Beebe & Cummings, 1996), while, in the case of written DCTs, avoiding the time-consuming 
process of transcription. Despite these benefits, the use of DCTs is not without criticism. Golato (2003) 
notes that “while DCTs provide researchers with data rather quickly, that data can be very different from 
naturalistically collected data” (p. 110). They therefore do not shed light on how pragmatic knowledge is 
realized in more naturalistic settings. Golato (2003) further argues that DCTs are essentially metapragmatic 
in nature, enabling researchers to understand how learners might react in situations that—although 
possible—remain nonetheless hypothetical at the time of data collection. 
In response to the perceived lack of authenticity that characterizes DCTs, many research protocols 
implement role-play tasks, noting that they are more likely to elicit authentic language use while still 
allowing a certain measure of control and standardization (Kasper & Dahl, 1991). Such studies have 
investigated development in L2 request production as a result of study abroad (Barron, 2003; Schauer, 
2004; Woodfield, 2012), L2 request mitigation (Economidou-Kogetsidis, 2012), the impact of recasts on L2 
request production (Fukuya & Zhang, 2002), the influence of bilingualism on third language request 
production (Safont Jordà, 2003), and the effect of proficiency level on L2 request production (Al-Gahtani & 
Roever, 2012, 2014; Göy et al., 2012; Roever & Al-Gahtani, 2015). Among this latter group of studies, Al-
Gahtani and Roever (2014) is of particular interest since the participants did not know that they were 
participating in a role play.2 The authors characterize this data collection method as “semi-authentic” (p. 
197) in that there was less control and contrivance than a traditional role play, but it still did not have the 
same degree of authenticity that characterizes naturally occurring data. Although role plays can 
approximate natural interaction more closely than DCTs, Kerbrat-Orecchioni (2005) cautions that they still 
do not constitute a “faithful representation of reality” (p. 29). 
If authenticity and granularity are prized, researchers may opt to collect request production data from 
naturally occurring conversations, despite the methodological complexity involved. In the case of Ellis 
(1992), the researcher used a case-based, longitudinal approach to study the development of L2 requests in 
two school-aged boys in the context of classroom discourse. More recently, language corpora have 
facilitated the study of naturally occurring request data. For example, Placenia (2008) created a small 
corpus of 171 interactions collected from five different corner stores in Ecuador in order to compare request 
production in two varieties of Spanish. Reinhardt (2010) utilized two large corpora, ITAcorp (International 
Teaching Assistant Corpus) and MICASE (Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English), to compare 
novice and expert produced directives in office hour consultations. (To be clear, only the data from 
MICASE represent naturally occurring conversation; the data from ITAcorp had been collected from office 
hour role plays.) 
Ultimately, choices regarding data collection should reflect the particular focus and research goal of the 
study (Placenia, 2008). If we seek insight into learner intuitions and metapragmatic awareness, the use of 
DCTs is a methodologically sound choice. If, on the other hand, the goal is to investigate how learners can 
operationalize their metapragmatic awareness under the pressure of actual communication, as in the current 
study, then it is appropriate to collect and analyze more naturalistic production data. 
Pragmatics and Telecollaboration 
Before moving to a discussion of the methodology used in the current study, it is first necessary to 
illuminate the specific relationship between pragmatics and telecollaboration. As Belz (2007) notes, 
“telecollaborative activity, by nature, is tightly aligned with the teaching and learning of L2 pragmatics” (p. 
54). Accordingly, many studies have focused on the development of pragmatic competence and the role of 
instruction in telecollaboration in such areas as German da-compounds (i.e., pronominal referential 
constructions) and modal particles (Belz & Vyatkina, 2005, 2008; Vyatkina & Belz, 2006), modality 
markers (Cunningham & Vyatkina, 2012), and modified external support moves in requesting behavior 
(Cunningham, 2016). These studies demonstrate that pedagogical intervention based on participant 
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
production data can lead to development in a variety of morphosyntactic features that index pragmatic 
intent. 
To my knowledge, no studies to date have compared L1 and L2 production in telecollaboration, despite the 
rich history of such comparative research in other contexts. A small number of studies, however, have 
examined the naturalistic production of requests in non-telecollaborative asynchronous CMC (ACMC). 
Hartford and Bardovi-Harlig (1996) examined request production in e-mails of L1 speakers and L2 learners 
of English, finding that L1 speakers more often downgraded face-threatening requests through mitigators, 
which resulted in more positive evaluations from the faculty member recipients. Chen’s (2001) analysis of 
e-mail requests of American and Taiwanese speakers of English revealed that the L1 speakers used more 
internal modifications in their requests than their L2 counterparts, both syntactically and lexically. 
Economidou-Kogetsidis (2011) found that e-mails written by L2 learners of English were overly direct, 
lacked sufficient lexical and syntactic modifications, and used inappropriate address forms. It thus seems 
that even in ACMC, wherein L2 learners are afforded as much time as necessary to compose their 
messages, there are still gaps between their pragmatic abilities and those of L1 users. 
As the above review demonstrates, studies comparing the pragmatic performance of L1 and L2 speakers are 
well represented in the literature. However, the setting for such studies tends to be in-person communication 
or, in rare cases, ACMC. Furthermore, studies that examine pragmatics in telecollaboration predominantly 
have a developmental focus. The current study attempts to bridge this divide by comparing the oral request 
production of L2 learners of German with expert speakers of German in SCMC-based telecollaboration.3 
The following research questions guided the investigation: 
1. Is the request directness of L2 German learners similar to or different from the request directness of 
expert German speakers in SCMC-based telecollaboration? 
2. Is the use of internal modification by L2 German learners similar to or different from the use of 
internal modification by expert German speakers in SCMC-based telecollaboration? 
3. Is the use of external modification by L2 German learners similar to or different from the use of 
external modification by expert German speakers in SCMC-based telecollaboration? 
Based on my review of the literature, I expected that the requesting behavior of the L2 German learners 
would differ from the expert participants in the following ways: 1) learners would use more direct request 
strategies than experts; 2) learners would use fewer internal modifiers than experts; and 3) learners would 
use more external modifiers than experts. 
METHODS 
Participants and Research Context 
The study took place in the context of an intermediate-level language for specific purposes course, German 
for the Professions, at a large public university in the Midwest of the United States. Participants were L1 
speakers of English (N = 17) who communicated synchronously with L1 German speakers (N = 5) 
employed in a variety of professions in Germany. As the instructor of the course, I was present during all 
SCMC interactions and, in certain instances, needed to produce requests of my own. As a highly proficient 
speaker of L2 German, my request production was classified as that of an expert speaker for analytical 
purposes. Recognizing, however, that my own presence could potentially influence the output of the 
participants (Placenia, 2008), I attempted to mitigate this possibility by maintaining as unobtrusive a 
presence as possible. In this regard, my requests were constrained to management of logistical and technical 
details during the web conferences. 
The learner participants in the study also took part in an instructional intervention that focused on the use of 
indirectness and internal modification for request mitigation. Analysis of the pre-intervention and post-
intervention production data showed statistical non-significance. Although linguistic development did take 
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
place in certain learners, it was subtle and only revealed through qualitative analysis (Cunningham, 2016). 
For that reason, I do not differentiate between learner pre-intervention and post-intervention production data 
in the design of the current study. 
Web Conferencing with Adobe Connect Pro 
During two fall semesters, L2 learners of German participated in eight web conferences with L1 German-
speaking professionals in Germany. A web conference is a type of multi-person, multimodal SCMC, in 
which participants interact in a virtual conference room. The moderator of a virtual conference room can 
design the space to facilitate the intended communicative purpose of the interaction by selecting the 
preferred modes of communication and arranging the visual layout of the room. In this case, participants 
used video, audio, text chat, and a virtual white board to communicate. The main channel was oral/aural, 
with occasional use of the text chat box for informal small talk or management of technical issues. 
Although the video was turned on, due to its relatively small size and low resolution, it did not always 
clearly show the current speaker’s face. 
Table 1. Invited Guests, Areas of Expertise, and Discussion Topics 
Guest  Area of expertise Discussion topic  
Cohort 1   
Guest  Area of expertise Discussion topic  
Roland Teacher at upper-level vocational school Discussion 1: Vocational education and entry 
into the working world 
Erika Project manager at Siemens  Discussion 2: Project management at a 
multinational corporation 
Thomas Employee of community bank and student 
internship coordinator 
Discussion 3: Banking in Germany 
Thomas  Employee of community bank and student 
internship coordinator 
Discussion 4: Internships and other 
professional opportunities in Germany 
Cohort 2 
Thomas  Employee of community bank and student 
internship coordinator 
Discussion 1: Internships and other 
professional opportunities in Germany 
Gisela Active member of Social Democratic Party 
of Germany (SPD) 
Discussion 2: Comparing German and 
American politics 
Roland Teacher at upper-level vocational school Discussion 3: Controversies in the German 
educational system 
Manfred Managing editor of Die Sendung mit der 
Maus (“The Show with the Mouse”)  
Discussion 4: The influence of television on 
children 
Learner and Expert Roles 
The web conferences, each lasting approximately one hour, were moderated by student dyads and triads. 
Student moderators prepared a set of 10–12 discussion questions that focused on the invited experts’ 
respective areas of expertise (see Table 1). Student non-moderators were directed to respond to discussion 
questions, but were also free to question the invited expert on their own. The role of the invited expert was 
to respond to students’ questions, providing both linguistic and topical expertise. Prior to participating, 
experts were briefed as to their expected role in the web conferences. It was explained to them that the web 
conferences were an integrated part of the course curriculum designed to provide course participants the 
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
opportunity to engage in meaningful interaction and acquire new content knowledge. The experts were also 
invited to prepare visual support for their talk in the form of PowerPoint slides. Three of the invited experts 
(Roland, Thomas, and Erika) prepared such slides, while two (Manfred and Gisela) did not. Similarly, 
Roland, Thomas, and Erika produced multiple requests in their interaction with the learners, whereas 
Manfred and Gisela did not produce any requests. 
Data Collection with Adobe Connect Pro 
Although the web conferencing platform enabled multimodal communication, the main channel was 
oral/aural. Accordingly, data for the current study come from oral interactions between the web conference 
participants. Given the communicative context, the data cannot be considered as naturalistic as other 
contexts in which unmonitored language production is recorded (e.g., Placenia, 2008); nevertheless, the 
data more closely approximate naturalistic data than data collected via DCTs or role plays and may help 
further our understanding of how requests are produced in SCMC. 
As both the instructor of the course and the primary investigator, I reviewed the audio data for all instances 
of request production (N = 239) and transcribed them. Understanding that requests are not produced in 
isolation, but usually occur over multiple turns, I began transcription of each request sequence at the first 
instance of external modification, or, when lacking external modification, at the beginning of the head act. I 
concluded transcription of request sequences after the interlocutor’s response to the request. 
Taxonomies Used in the Study 
For coding purposes, the study draws on three taxonomies previously utilized in the study of pragmatics. 
These taxonomies were developed based on a thorough review of existing literature and an extensive 
process of piloting and revision undertaken with two other raters (see below). In so doing, the study 
repurposed existing frameworks in order to elucidate further the relationship between second language 
acquisition (SLA) and computer-assisted language learning. 
Directness Taxonomy 
To measure the focal construct of directness, I developed an 8-level taxonomy (Appendix A). As noted 
previously, many studies have adapted the directness taxonomy first developed for the CCSARP project. 
For example, Economidou-Kogetsidis (2010) compared the directness level of British speakers of English 
and Greek speakers of English as a second language, noting the emergence of two new requesting strategies 
not present in the original framework: the “reminder request” and “pre-decided statements” (p. 2270). In 
Taguchi (2006), the author investigated the request directness of Japanese learners of English, adding three 
additional levels to the coding taxonomy (for a total of 12) “in order to fine-tune the linguistic analysis” (p. 
521). Taguchi (2011) utilized a 9-level scale of directness, plus an additional category of “conventional 
questions.” It is thus clear that there is flexibility in determining the number and nature of directness levels, 
according to the specific research setting and goals. Based on the taxonomy developed for the present study, 
raters were able to identify the directness of the head act in transcribed request sequences. 
Internal Modification Taxonomy 
To measure the focal construct of internal modification, I developed a taxonomy to include both syntactic 
and lexical modification (Appendix B). In adapting the framework of Blum-Kulka et al. (1989), I combined 
both categories of internal modification (syntactic and lexical downgraders) into one taxonomy for ease of 
use. Only those categories that could be attested with examples from the oral production data were 
included. Each level of the revised internal modification taxonomy features a description of the modifier 
and attested examples coming directly from the transcribed data set. Based on this taxonomy, raters were 
able to identify the type and frequency of internal modifiers in transcribed request sequences. 
External Modification Taxonomy 
To measure the focal construct of external modification, I developed a taxonomy based on Schauer’s (2007) 
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
model, but with certain adaptations (Appendix C). First, the category of Head was eliminated due to the fact 
that it is not actually an external modifier, but instead signifies the core requestive move. Additional 
external modification categories (i.e., imposition minimizer, sweetener, promise of reward, and 
considerator) were not included in the revised taxonomy due to the fact that they were not attested in the 
actual production data. Based on this taxonomy, raters were able to identify type and frequency of external 
modifiers in transcribed request sequences. 
Interrater Reliability 
Two additional raters rated a portion of the data independently. One was a native speaker of German and 
participated as an expert guest during both instances of the study. The other was a PhD student of German 
Applied Linguistics at the institution where the study took place. After reviewing a set of coding 
instructions and participating in a norming session, each additional rater received an identical set of 24 
randomly selected request sequences, an amount sufficient for establishing confidence in the rating 
procedures (Mackey & Gass, 2005). Reliability was calculated using Fleiss’ Kappa, a variation of Cohen’s 
Kappa that allows for the inclusion of more than two raters. Fleiss’ Kappa demonstrated a high degree of 
agreement among the three raters as shown in Table 2. 
Table 2. Interrater Reliability 
Focal area Fleiss’ Kappa 
Directness 0.873  
Internal modification 1.000  
External modification 0.884  
Analytical Methods 
The study employed a mixed-methods, multifactorial analysis in order to compare the requesting behavior 
of L2 German learners and expert German speakers along three dimensions: directness, internal 
modification, and external modification. Quantitative analysis was performed using a Generalized Linear 
Mixed Model (GLMM), a relatively new statistical tool in SLA research. An assumption underlying the use 
of most statistical analyses (e.g., ANOVA, T-tests, etc.) is that the data must fit a Gaussian distribution. 
GLMMs, in contrast, allow for analysis of a data set that is not normally distributed, which, due to the small 
sample size in this study, is the case. GLMMs are also useful for analyzing data collected in non-clinical 
settings because they are robust against missing data and they effectively account for the influence of 
randomness that is not part of the research design (Baayen, Davidson, & Bates, 2008), making 
interpretation of dynamic linguistic phenomena more feasible (Cunnings, 2012). A final advantage lies in 
the fact that the model can include multiple predictors, allowing the researcher to consider the simultaneous 
influence of several factors (Baayen et al., 2008; Cunnings, 2012). Accordingly, GLMMs can accommodate 
binary data (one of two possible outcomes), ordinal data (outcomes that can be organized into a set 
beginning at X and ending at Y), or count data (more than two outcomes, but the data are not ordered). 
Binary analysis was used for the following predictors: Conditional, Tense, Mood, Subjectivizer, Disarmer, 
Small Talk, and Appreciator. Ordinal analysis was used for Directness, Internal syntactic modification, 
Internal lexical modification, Politeness markers, Downgraders, and Understaters. Count analysis was used 
for the remaining predictors: Consultatives, Appealers, External modification, Alerters, Preparators, and 
Grounders. Parallel to the quantitative analysis, I performed a qualitative discourse-based analysis to 
provide further insight into meaningful differences in the request production of the two groups. 
 
 
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
RESULTS 
Quantitative Analysis 
With statistical significance set at p < .05, the results show that directness in L1 and L2 requests was not 
significantly different (Table 3). However, L1 speakers used significantly more internal modifiers than L2 
speakers. No significant difference was observed in the use of external modification by L1 and L2 speakers. 
In sum, one of the predicted outcomes (i.e., higher frequency of internal modification in expert group) was 
met, whereas two of the predicted outcomes (i.e., higher degree of directness and higher frequency of 
external modification in the learner group) were not observed in the data. 
Table 3. Learner versus Expert Performance 
Predictor Estimate SE Wald-Z p 
Directness  1.21 0.66 1.84 .0655 
Internal modification  1.11 0.25 4.35 .0000* 
  syntactic:  1.42 0.49 2.90 .0038* 
    conditional clause  1.65 0.61 2.70 .0069* 
    subjunctive mood  1.28 0.69 1.85 .0646 
  lexical:  1.15 0.34 3.38 .0007* 
    politeness marker  0.63 0.57 1.10 .2720 
    downtoner 1.33 0.47 2.85 .0044* 
    understater 1.13 1.02 1.12 .2640 
    appealer -0.14 0.83 -0.17 .8640 
External modification  -0.10 0.34 -0.29 .7710 
    alerter  -0.14 0.40 -0.35 .7267 
    preparator  -0.60 0.41 -1.49 .1365 
    grounder  1.86 1.31 1.42 .1550 
    disarmer  18.12 8829.00 0.00 .9980 
    small talk  -0.79 0.90 -0.88 .3810 
    appreciator  -17.89 5197.13 -0.00 .9970 
Qualitative Analysis 
The qualitative analysis compares the proportional use of directness, internal modification, and external 
modification in the L2 learner group and the expert group. I present several salient tokens in each of the 
focal areas to exemplify similarities and differences in request production. Due to low frequencies of certain 
tokens, I performed a simple count analysis, illustrating the results in the form of proportional graphs. 
Learner Directness versus Expert Directness 
The difference in directness level between groups was not statistically significant (p = .0655); however, 
despite both groups using an overall majority of direct request strategies, the L2 German learners used 
proportionally more direct expressions than expert speakers (Figure 1). I will first discuss directness in the 
learner group, before proceeding to a discussion of directness in the expert group. 
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
 
Figure 1. Comparison of within-groups distribution of request strategies by directness 
Table 4. Ratio of Direct to Indirect Requests per Individual Learner 
Pseudonym Frequency of direct 
requests (N=130) 
Frequency of indirect 
requests (N=23) 
Beth 9 2 
Tim 7 4  
Karl 5 0 
Gregor 7 1 
Andrea 3 5  
Jackson 3  1 
Kate 15 1 
Bill  7 0 
Jenny  9 2 
Chuck 3  4 
Henry 8 0 
Grant 9 0 
Carson 16 0 
Lisa 9 2 
Max 11 0  
82% of the requests produced by learners were direct requests (i.e., rated between directness levels 1–4), 
whereas only 18% of requests were indirectly formulated (i.e., rated between directness levels 5–8). On an 
individual level, only two learners, Andrea and Chuck, produced indirect requests with greater frequency 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Novices (N=153) Experts (N=86)
Direct requests
Indirect requests
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
(Table 4). Qualitative analysis revealed a possible explanation for the directness strategies of the L2 speaker 
group: In order to maintain the flow of conversation and consistently engage their interlocutors, learners 
produced a high frequency of direct requests for information. Illustrative tokens of such requests are 
presented in Table 5. 
Table 5. Direct Requests for Information in the Learner Group 
Pseudonym Request head act  
Beth Als Managerin, wie motivieren Sie Ihre Mitarbeiter? 
As a manager, how do you motivate your employees?  
Gregor Ähm, und wie schwer ist es aus als Ausländer äh in Deutschland zu studieren? 
Um, and how difficult is it to study in Germany from as a foreigner?  
Andrea Also, wie wichtig ist es für Ihre Mitarbeiter und Sie äh Fremdsprachen zu kennen? 
So, how important is it for your employees and you uh to know foreign languages?  
Jackson Wie wurde Siemens von der Wirtschaftkrisis getroffen? 
How was Siemens affected by the economic crisis?  
Kate Was für eine Arbeit machen Sie in der Kreditabteilung der Volksbank Eutin? 
What kind of work do you do in the credit division of the People’s Bank of Eutin?  
Bill  Wie gut sollen Praktikanten Deutsch sprechen können?  
How well should interns be able to speak German?  
Chuck Gibt es Studenten, die...zweimal oder dreimal Praktikum machen? 
Are there students who...do an internship twice or three times?  
Joshua Also, ist eine Ausbil–Ausbildung in Deutschland total kostenlos? Oder..muss man 
bezahlen? 
So, is an educ–education in Germany totally free? Or..do you have to pay?  
Similar to the learners, experts produced an overall greater proportion of direct requests (see Figure 1 and 
Table 6). Three of the four expert participants produced a greater frequency of direct requests than indirect 
requests, while John produced an equal proportion of direct and indirect requests. One explanation for this 
outcome lies in the difference between requests for information and requests for action. In the case of Erika, 
three of the four indirect requests she produced were requests for action and occurred in the context of John 
helping her to navigate through her slides using the Whiteboard function of Adobe Connect Pro (Table 7). 
Similarly, John’s indirect requests occur primarily in the context of attending to logistical aspects of the 
web conference administration and, as such, are also requests for action. 
Table 6. Ratio of Direct to Indirect Requests per Individual Expert 
Pseudonym Frequency of direct 
requests (N=61) 
Frequency of indirect 
requests (N=25) 
Erika  8 4 
Roland 33 2 
Thomas 6 5 
John  14 14 
Gisela 0 0 
Manfred 0 0 
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
Table 7. Erika’s Indirect Requests for Action 
Request number Request head act  
2 Ähm, John, könntest du dann bitte mal die erste Folie aufblenden bitte? 
Um, John, could you please go ahead and show the first slide then please? 
8 Ähm, John, wenn wir mal auf Folie sieben gehen könnten. 
Um, John, if we could go to slide seven.  
12 Ähm, John, könntest du mal bitte auf Folie drei springen? 
Um, John, could you jump over to slide three?  
In contrast to her indirect formulations, Erika produces direct requests for information when engaged in 
dialogue with the students, often using these questions to prompt the learners and facilitate conversation 
(Table 8). In this regard, the use of direct questions reflects a similar discourse strategy to that seen in the 
learner group. 
Table 8. Erika’s Direct Requests for Information 
Request number Request head act  
3 Weiß denn jemand von Ihnen, wie viele Mitarbeiter Siemens hat heute? 
So do any of you know how many employees Siemens has today?  
6 Ähm..kennt jemand von Ihnen den Unterschied zwischen einem Projekt und einem 
Programm? 
Um..do any of you know the difference between a project and a program?  
10 Ähm, wie wird denn in den USA mit dem Thema ähm Fortbildung umgegangen? 
Um, how does one handle the topic of continuing education in the USA?  
Expert participant Roland also produced a majority of direct requests, and like both Erika and participants 
in the learner group, these are requests for information and serve to stimulate conversation and build 
rapport. A particular salient example of this is found in Roland’s interaction with the learner Jenny (Excerpt 
1). 
Learner Internal Modification versus Expert Internal Modification  
The overall frequency of internal modification was significantly higher in the expert group (p = .0000) and 
both groups produced approximately the same ratio of syntactic to lexical modifiers, using twice as many of 
the latter type than the former. In fact, the entire range of internal modifications produced by the two groups 
shows a similar distribution (Figure 2). 
  
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
Excerpt 1. Roland’s Interaction with Jenny 
Request 13 Roland (expert) Was haben Sie denn in Stuttgart studiert? 
  So what did you study in Stuttgart then?  
 Jenny (learner) Architektur. 
  Architecture. 
 Roland Ah ja, okay.  
  Oh yes, okay.  
Request 14 Roland Und das Studium war aber dann auf Deutsch? 
  And your studies were in German then? 
 Jenny Ja, genau. 
  Aber mit Architektur ist ein bisschen anders 
  weil es soviel mit Bildern hat zu tun 
  hat so viel mit Bildern zu tun. 
  Yes, exactly. 
  But with architechture is a little different 
  because it has so much with pictures to do 
  has so much to do with pictures 
 Roland Ja, das verstehe ich.  
Request 15  Und haben Sie dann Ihr ganzes Studium in Deutschland 
gemacht? 
  Oder nur ein Semester oder zwei oder wie auch immer? 
  Yes, I understand.  
And did you complete your entire course of studies in 
Germany? 
  Or just a semester or two or what ever? 
 Jenny Ja, zwei Semestern. Also ein Jahr. 
  Yes, two semesters. So one year.  
 Roland Okay. Mm hm. Na, gut. 
Request 16  Und haben Sie noch Kontakt nach Stuttgart? 
  Okay. Mm hm. So, good. 
  And are you still in touch with Stuttgart? 
 Jenny Ja..ein bisschen. 
  Yes..a little. 
 
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
 
Figure 2. Comparison of within-groups distribution of internal modifiers 
In the case of the lexical modifier Understater, no significant difference was found between groups (p 
= .2640). This similarity in the use of the modifier type Understater, however, does not reflect the difference 
between the two groups’ use of specific lexical tokens. A token analysis of the L2 production data revealed 
seven instances of an Understater: ein bisschen (a little bit) was used six times (86%), and kurz (briefly) was 
used just once (14%). There are also seven instances of an Understater in the native speaker production 
data: five occurrences of kurz (72%), one instance of irgendwie (sort of, 14%), and only one instance of ein 
bisschen (14%). The difference between the two groups therefore lies in the speakers’ choice of specific 
lexical items, a fine-grained distinction not captured by the quantitative analysis of modifier types. While it 
is possible to analyze for such differences using a GLMM, the overall low frequency of such modifiers in 
the production data would result in quantitatively insignificant results. 
Learner Internal Modification versus Expert Internal modification 
Although the two groups did not exhibit statistically significant differences in their use of external 
modification (p = .7710), there are certain variances in the proportional use of external modifiers between 
the L2 and L1 groups (Figure 3). 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Novices (N=20) Experts (N=90)
Conditional structure
Subjunctive mood
Politeness marker
Consultative device
Downtoner
Understater
Subjectivizer
Appealer
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
 
Figure 3. Comparison of within-groups distribution of external modifiers 
Of the 35 external modifiers coded in the expert group, 23 of these instances (66%) occurred as Alerters or 
Preparators. Similarly, the learner group produced a total of 80 external modifiers, 65 of which (81%) 
occurred as Alerters or Preparators. Grounders, Disarmers, Small talk, and Appreciators comprise a 
comparatively small part of the data set for both groups, showing that these strategies were dispreferred 
when modifying requests externally. The preponderance of Alerters and Preparators in both the learner and 
expert data reflect the need for all participants to signal availability and manage turn-taking in a very 
explicit manner. In the learner group, however, not all participants managed their contributions to equal 
effect. Excerpt 2 illustrates a felicitous usage of external modification to manage the discourse. 
Excerpt 2. Andrea’s Interaction with Erika 
 Andrea (learner) Sehr gut. Guten Tag. 
  Wir freuen uns darauf, Sie durch diese Sitzung zu führen 
  äh Jackson und ich sind heute zuständig 
  für die Leitung des Gespräch, 
  aber alle in dieser Klasse 
  werden in die Diskussionen teilnehmen. 
  Wir haben einige Fragen vorbereitet, 
  und wir möchten damit anfangen, 
  und vielleicht werden Sie einige unsere Fragen beantworten, 
  und neue Fragen geweckt könnten. 
  Äh vielen Dank für Ihre Aufmerks–äh–samkeit, 
Request 1  und ich darf Sie nun bitten, sich vorzustellen. 
  Very good. Hello. 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Novices (N=80) Experts (N=35)
Alerter
Preparator
Grounder
Disarmer
Small talk
Appreciator
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
  We are looking forward to leading you through this meeting 
  uh, Jackson and I are responsible today  
  for leading the discussion 
  but everyone in this class 
  will take part in the discussion 
  We have prepared some questions, 
  and we would like to begin with that, 
  and perhaps you will answer some of our questions, 
  and could awake new questions. 
  Uh thank you very much for your atten–uh–tion,  
  and I would now ask that you introduce yourself.  
 Erika (expert) Ja, mein Name ist Erika Schmidt. 
  Yes, my name is Erika Schmidt.  
Prior to the request head act (ich darf Sie nun bitten, sich vorzustellen), Andrea utilized several external 
modifiers: an Alerter (Guten Tag); Small talk (Wir freuen uns darauf, Sie durch diese Sitzung zu führen); 
and an Appreciator (vielen Dank für Ihre Aufmerksamkeit), which have the effect of not only laying the 
groundwork for a successful discussion, but also appropriately frame the forthcoming request that Erika 
introduce herself. In contrast to Andrea’s introduction, we see a less successful instance in Carson’s request 
sequence (Excerpt 3). 
Excerpt 3. Carson’s Interaction with Gisela 
Request 1 Carson (learner) Ja, äh...bitte...äh vorstellen Sie...unsere ähm, ja. 
  Yes, uh...please...uh introduce...our um, yes.  
 Gisela (expert) Ja...vorstellen. Mein Name ist Gisela Ziegler. 
  Yes...introduce. My name is Gisela Ziegler.  
Whereas Andrea made extensive use of external modifiers to frame her request, Carson produced the 
request with no framing through external modification. The difference in production is all the more striking 
given that both learners are essentially making the same request of their respective interlocutors in the same 
SCMC context. One potential explanation could be the relative amount of preparation that the two learners 
completed prior to the discussion. Whereas the more elaborate formulations of Andrea point to a planned 
introduction, the lack of external modification coupled with the frequent pausing in Carson’s production 
seem to indicate that he produced his request with little or no planning. 
DISCUSSION 
This study investigated requesting behavior in learner-expert telecollaborative interaction. Comparison of 
the two groups through statistical analysis showed that they varied in just one aspect of their requesting 
behavior, with the L2 German speakers producing a lower frequency of internal modifiers than the experts. 
These results were in keeping with the research hypothesis and largely support previous research 
observations that L2 speakers underuse internal modification as compared to expert speakers (Chen, 2001; 
Economidou-Kogetsidis, 2008, 2009; Faerch & Kasper, 1989; Hassall, 2001, 2012; Göy et al., 2012; 
Trosborg, 1995; Wigglesworth & Yates, 2011). A qualitative token analysis of the lexical modifier type 
Understater showed further differences between groups. Even though the quantitative analysis showed a 
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
non-significant difference for this particular modifier, the learners preferred to use ein bisschen (a little bit), 
whereas the experts preferred to use kurz (briefly). Such differences in production should therefore be made 
salient to the learners through focused instruction. 
Regarding directness of requests, no significant differences were found between groups. In this regard, the 
study corroborates previous research that showed similarity in the request directness of L1 speakers of 
English and German (Ogiermann, 2009) and of L1–L2 speakers of German (Taleghani-Nikazm & Huth, 
2010); however, the study does not support House’s (2006) contention that German speakers use more 
direct requesting behavior than English speakers. There are two possible explanations for this result. One is 
an effect for task: the student moderators needed to prevent the discussion from flagging and produced a 
high frequency of direct requests for information to keep the invited experts engaged and talking. Of 
interest here is also the respective requesting behavior of the experts. Whereas Roland and Erika produced 
many direct requests, in essence adopting shared responsibility for maintaining an active discussion, Gisela 
and Manfred produced no requests, meaning that the expert data set was heavily weighted towards Roland 
and Erika, possibly skewing the overall picture of L1 German request directness. As for the second 
explanation, it may be that the learner group did not produce many indirect requests because they did not 
need to address logistical or technical difficulties. Such requests were usually made on an expert–expert 
basis, obviating to a large extent the need for the learners to produce action-oriented requests that would 
have called for more indirect request formulation. 
There was no observable difference regarding external modification in both groups. The most likely 
explanation is that both groups used such moves to manage synchronous computer-mediated interaction in a 
group setting. The Preparator in particular played a crucial role in signaling intent to claim the floor and was 
proportionally the most frequently produced external modifier in both groups. This tendency would seem to 
contradict the findings of Economidou-Kogetsidis (2008, 2009) and Hassall (2001, 2012) that the Grounder 
represents the most frequently employed external modifier in L2 speakers’ requests; however, the 
communicative context and goals of the requests must be considered. Whereas Economidou-Kogetsidis 
(2008, 2009) and Hassall (2001, 2012) focused on requests for action in face-to-face interaction, the current 
research predominantly dealt with requests for information in computer-mediated interaction, wherein the 
Preparator was indispensable for managing turn-taking and negotiating topics. 
Study Limitations 
The present research is limited to a small sample of students and experts in a particular SCMC context, and 
the claims should be understood as preliminary. Because two of the expert participants did not produce any 
requests during interaction, the expert data set is limited to requests produced by four people in total. It will 
therefore be of considerable interest to determine whether future investigation of SCMC-based interaction 
between L2 and expert speakers bear out these findings. 
Methodological Considerations 
This study contributes important methodological innovations to the study of pragmatic production in 
SCMC. First, it demonstrates that telecollaboration provides a context for more naturalistic request 
production and data collection. Second, the study shows that it is possible to conduct mixed-methods 
research in a SCMC context by combining multilevel statistical models and type-token qualitative analysis. 
This research approach allowed for in-depth exploration of different aspects of request production and may 
serve as a template for future investigations of pragmatic production in SCMC interaction. Although 
transcription, adaptation of existing taxonomies, and establishing interrater reliability are time-intensive and 
complex endeavors, they are essential elements of the process if we seek to understand what learners 
actually do in SCMC interaction. 
 
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
APPENDIX A. Coding Taxonomy for Directness (based on Blum-Kulka & Olshtain, 1989; Taguchi, 
2011) 
Directness 
level 
Request 
Strategy  
Descriptors Tokens 
Direct expressions 
1 
Direct questions  
(requests for 
information)  
The request is conveyed by a 
direct question.  
Wie lange arbeiten Sie schon bei einer 
Bank? 
(How long have you worked at a bank?)  
Imperatives 
(requests for 
action)  
The grammatical mood of the 
verb in the utterance marks its 
illocutionary force as a request  
Sagen Sie doch mal was! 
(Go ahead and say something!)  
2 
Indirect questions 
(requests for 
information) 
The request is conveyed by an 
indirect question. 
Wissen Sie, wie viele Bundesländer es 
in Deutschland gibt?  
(Do you know how many federal states 
there are in Germany?) 
Performatives 
(requests for 
action)  
The illocutionary force of the 
request is named by the 
speaker  
Ich bitte unsere zwei Moderatoren, die 
Diskussion zu starten.  
(I request that our two moderators begin 
the discussion.) 
3 
Obligation 
statements 
The illocutionary force is 
derivable in obligatory 
sentences  
Du musst wohl wieder auf diese andere 
Seite gehen.  
(You probably need to go back to the 
other page.)  
4 
Want statements  The illocutionary force is 
derivable in want/wish/need 
sentences  
Ich möchte wissen, wie viel Deutsch 
muss man sprechen können.  
(I would like to know how much 
German one must be able to speak.)  
Indirect expressions  
5 
Preparatory 
questions and 
statements 
Reference to preparatory 
conditions such as the hearer’s 
ability, willingness or 
possibility to perform the 
action 
Können Sie sich alle bitte vorstellen? 
(Can you all please introduce 
yourselves?) 
6 
Suggestions The illocutionary intent is 
phrased as a suggestion  
Ich würde vorschlagen, dass wir jetzt 
beginnen.  
(I would suggest that we get started.) 
7 
Permissions  The speaker asks for the 
hearer’s permission  
Ich darf Sie nun bitten, sich 
vorzustellen.  
(May I ask that you introduce yourself?) 
8 
Hints Questions or statements with 
implicit reference to the action  
Er hat ein bisschen mehr vorbereitet. 
(He has prepared a little bit more.)  
 
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
APPENDIX B. Coding Taxonomy for Internal Modification (based on Blum-Kulka et al., 1989) 
Lexical modifiers 
Name Definition  Tokens 
Politeness marker  an optional element added to a request to 
bid for cooperative behavior 
bitte; gerne 
(please; feel free) 
Consultative devices expressions by means of which the 
speaker seeks to involve the hearer 
directly bidding for cooperation 
glauben Sie, ist es nicht so... 
(don’t you think it’s the case..) 
Downtoners modifiers which are used by a speaker in 
order to modulate the impact his or her 
request is likely to have on the hearer 
vielleicht; eigentlich; doch; mal; eher; 
einfach; denn  
(perhaps; actually; in fact; just; rather; 
simply; then)  
Understaters adverbial modifiers by means of which 
the speaker underrepresents the state of 
affairs denoted in the proposition 
irgendwie; ein bisschen; kurz; ein 
paar  
(somehow; a little bit; briefly; a 
couple) 
Subjectivizers elements in which the speaker explicitly 
expresses his or her subjective opinion 
vis-à-vis the state of affairs referred to in 
the proposition, thus lowering the 
assertive force of the request  
ich glaube...; ich denke... 
(I believe...; I think...) 
Appealers addressee-oriented elements occurring in 
a syntactically final position. They may 
signal turn-availability and are used by 
the speaker whenever he or she wishes to 
appeal to his or her hearer’s benevolent 
understanding 
...oder?  
(...right?)  
Syntactic modifiers  
Name Examples 
Conditional clause Wenn ich zu schnell spreche, bitte geben Sie mir Bescheid. 
(If I speak too quickly, please let me know.) 
Subjunctive mood Wenn Sie ein paar Kommentare zu dieser Frage hätten, wäre das auch interessant 
zu hören. 
(If you had a couple of comments on this question, that would be interesting to 
hear.) 
 
  
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
APPENDIX C. Coding Taxonomy for External Modification (based on Schauer, 2007) 
Name Definition  Tokens 
Alerter linguistic device that is used to get the 
interlocutor’s attention; precedes the Head [act]  
Entschuldigung, hey, Herr/Frau... 
(Excuse me; hey; Mr./Mrs...) 
Preparator short utterance that intends to prepare the 
interlocutor for the request; can follow or 
substitute the Alerter  
ich habe eine Frage; ich möchte eine Frage 
stellen; darf ich eine Frage stellen?  
(I have a question; I’d like to ask a question; 
May I ask a question?) 
Grounder provides an explanation for the request  dann können wir mit unseren Fragen anfangen 
(Then we can begin with our questions) 
Disarmer used to preempt the interlocutor’s potential 
objections  
Entschuldigung, ich möchte nicht unterbrechen 
(Sorry, I don’t mean to interrupt) 
Small talk  short utterance at the beginning of the request 
that is intended to establish a positive 
atmosphere  
wir freuen uns darauf, Sie durch diese Sitzung 
zu führen 
(We are pleased to lead you through this 
meeting) 
Appreciator usually employed at the end of the request to 
positively reinforce it  
vielen Dank 
(Thank you very much) 
 
NOTES 
1. Many other studies (e.g., Barron, 2003; Faerch & Kasper, 1989; House, 1989; Taguchi, 2011) have 
pointed out the overuse of please by L2 learners. 
2. The researchers obtained permission from their institutional review board and potential risks to 
participants were kept to a minimum. 
3. The term SCMC-based telecollaboration is used to mean synchronous audio interaction taking place in 
a video-enhanced environment. The study does not treat synchronous text-based interaction, which also 
took place in certain instances. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Many thanks to the expert reviewers whose feedback helped to improve this article. Special recognition 
goes to Dr. Nina Vyatkina for her assistance with an early draft of this article. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
D. Joseph Cunningham is an Assistant Professor of German at Georgetown University with specialization 
in applied linguistics and second language acquisition. His research is situated at the intersection of 
technology-mediated second/foreign language pedagogy and instructed pragmatic development. 
E-mail: joe.cunningham@georgetown.edu 
 
 
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 96 
REFERENCES 
Al-Gahtani, S., & Roever, C. (2012). Proficiency and sequential organization of L2 requests. Applied 
Linguistics, 33(1), 42–65. 
Al-Gahtani, S., & Roever, C. (2014). Insert and post-expansion in L2 Arabic requests. System, 42, 189–206. 
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008). Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects 
for subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 390–412. 
Barron, A. (2003). Acquisition in interlanguage pragmatics: Learning how to do things with words in a 
study abroad context. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Beebe, L., & Cummings, M. C. (1996). Natural speech act data versus written questionnnaire data: How 
data collection method affects speech act performance. In S. M. Gass & N. Joyce (Eds.), Speech acts across 
cultures: Challenges to communication in a second language (pp. 65–86). Berlin, Germany: Mouton de 
Gruyter. 
Belz, J. A. (2007). The role of computer mediation in the instruction and development of L2 pragmatic 
competence. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 27, 45–75. 
Belz, J. A., & Vyatkina, N. (2005). Learner corpus analysis and the development of L2 pragmatic 
competence in networked intercultural language study: The case of German modal particles. The Canadian 
Modern Language Review, 62(1), 17–48. 
Belz, J. A., & Vyatkina, N. (2008). The pedagogical mediation of a developmental learner corpus for 
classroom-based language instruction. Language Learning & Technology, 12(3), 33–52. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/default.html 
Blum-Kulka, S. (1989). Playing it safe: The role of conventionality in indirectness. In S. Blum-Kulka, J. 
House, & G. Kasper (Eds.), Cross-cultural pragmatics: Requests and apologies (pp. 37–70). Malden, NJ: 
Ablex. 
Blum-Kulka, S., & Olshtain, E. (1984). Requests and apologies: A cross cultural study of speech act 
realization patterns. Applied Linguistics, 5(3), 196–213. 
Blum-Kulka, S., & Olshtain, E. (1986). Too many words: Length of utterance and pragmatic failure. Studies 
in L2 Acquisition, 8(2), 165–179. 
Blum-Kulka, S., House, J., & Kasper, G. (1989). The CCSARP coding manual. In S. Blum-Kulka, J. 
House, & G. Kasper (Eds.), Cross cultural pragmatics: Requests and apologies (pp. 273–294). Norwood, 
NJ: Ablex. 
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. (1987). Politeness: Some universals in language usage. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Byon, A. S. (2004). Sociopragmatic analysis of Korean requests: Pedagogical settings. Journal of 
Pragmatics, 36(9), 1673–1704. 
Chen, C.-F. E. (2001). Making e-mail requests to professors: Taiwanese vs. American students. Paper 
presented at the American Association for Applied Linguistics, St. Louis. 
Cohen, A. D., & Shively, R. L. (2007). Acquisition of requests and apologies in Spanish and French: Impact 
of study abroad and strategy-building intervention. Modern Language Journal, 16(2), 101–132. 
Cunningham, D. J. (2016). Request modification in synchronous computer-mediated communication: The 
role of focused instruction. Modern Language Journal, 100(2), 484–507. 
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 97 
Cunningham, D. J., & Vyatkina, N. (2012). Telecollaboration for professional purposes: Towards 
developing a formal register in the foreign language classroom. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 
68(4), 422–450. 
Cunnings, I. (2012). An overview of mixed-effects statistical models for second language researchers. 
Second Language Research, 28(3), 369–382. 
Economidou-Kogetsidis, M. (2008). Internal and external mitigation in interlanguage request production: 
The case of Greek learners of English. Journal of Politeness Research, 4, 111–138. 
Economidou-Kogetsidis, M. (2009). Interlanguage request modification: The use of lexical/phrasal 
downgraders and mitigating supportive moves. Multilingua, 28, 79–112. 
Economidou-Kogetsidis, M. (2010). Cross-cultural and situational variation in requesting behaviour: 
Perceptions of social situations and strategic use of request patterns. Journal of Pragmatics, 42(8), 2262–
2281. 
Economidou-Kogetsidis, M. (2011). ‘‘Please answer me as soon as possible’’: Pragmatic failure in non-
native speakers’ e-mail requests to faculty. Journal of Pragmatics, 43(13), 3193–3215. 
Economidou-Kogetsidis, M. (2012). Modifying oral requests in a foreign language: The case of Cypriot 
Greek learners of English. In M. Economidou-Kogetsidis & H. Woodfield (Eds.), Interlanguage request 
modification (pp. 163–201). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Ellis, R. (1992). Learning to communicate in the classroom: A study of two language learners' requests. 
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 14, 1–23. 
Faerch, C., & Kasper, G. (1989). Internal and external modification in interlanguage request realization. In 
S. Blum-Kulka, J. House, & G. Kasper (Eds.), Cross-cultural pragmatics: Requests and apologies (pp. 
221–247). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Félix-Brasdefer, J. C. (2007). Pragmatic development in the Spanish as a FL classroom. Intercultural 
Pragmatics, 4(2), 253–286. 
Fukushima, S. (1996). Request strategies in British English and Japanese. Language Sciences, 18(3–4), 
671–688. 
Fukuya, Y. J., & Zhang, Y. (2002). Effects of recasts on EFL learners' acquisition of pragmalinguistic 
conventions of request. Second Language Studies, 21(1), 1–47. 
Golato, A. (2003). Studying compliment responses: A comparison of DCTs and recordings of naturally 
occurring talk. Applied Linguistics, 24(1), 90–121. 
Golato, A., & Taleghani-Nikazm, C. (2006). Negotiation of face in web chats. Multilingua, 25, 293–321. 
Göy, E., Zeyrek, D., & Otcu, B. (2012). Developmental patterns in internal modification of requests. In M. 
Economidou-Kogetsidis (Ed.), Interlanguage request modification (pp. 51–86). Amsterdam, Netherlands: 
John Benjamins. 
Hartford, B. S., & Bardovi-Harlig, K. (1996). “At your earliest convenience:” A study of written student 
requests to faculty. In L. F. Bouton (Ed.), Pragmatics and Language Learning, Monograph Series, Vol. 7 
(pp. 55–69). Urbana Champaign, IL: University of Illinois, Division of English as an International 
Language. 
Hassall, T. (2001). Modifying requests in a second language. International Review of Applied Linguistics in 
Language Teaching (IRAL), 39(4), 259–283. 
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 98 
Hassall, T. (2012). Request modification by Australian learners of Indonesian. In M. Economidou-
Kogetsidis & H. Woodfield (Eds.), Interlanguage request modification (pp. 203–242). Amsterdam, 
Netherlandd: John Benjamins. 
House, J. (1989). Politeness in English and German: The functions of please and bitte. In S. Blum-Kulka, J. 
House, & G. Kasper (Eds.), Cross-cultural pragmatics: Requests and apologies (pp. 96–119). Norwood, 
NJ: Ablex. 
House, J. (2006). Communicative styles in English and German. European Journal of English Studies, 
10(3), 249–267. 
Kasper, G. (1981). Pragmatische Aspekte in der Interimsprache. Tübingen, West Germany: Narr. 
Kasper, G. (2000). Data collection in pragmatics. In H. Spencer-Oatey (Ed.), Culturally speaking (pp. 316–
341). New York, NY: Continuum. 
Kasper, G., & Dahl, M. (1991). Research methods in interlanguage pragmatics. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 13(2), 215–247. 
Kerbrat-Orecchioni, C. (2005). Politeness in France: How to buy bread politely. In L. Hickey & M. Stewart 
(Eds.), Politeness in Europe. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Kuriscak, L. (2015). Examination of learner and situation level variables: Choice of speech act and request 
strategy by Spanish L2 learners. Hispania, 98(2), 300–318. 
Li, Q. (2011). Effects of instruction on adolescent beginners acquistion of request modification. TESOL 
Quarterly, 46(1), 30–55. 
Li, S. (2011). The effects of input-based practice on pragmatic development of requests in L2 Chinese. 
Language Learning, 62(2), 403–438. 
Mackey, A., & Gass, S. M. (2005). Second language research: Methodology and design. New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Ogiermann, E. (2009). Politeness and in-directness across cultures: A comparison of English, German, 
Polish, and Russian requests. Journal of Politeness Research, 5, 189–216. 
Otcu, B., & Zeyrek, D. (2008). Development of requests: A study on Turkish learners of English. In M. 
Puetz & J. Neff-Van Aertslaer (Eds.), Developing contrastive pragmatics: Interlanguage and cross-cultural 
perspectives. Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Pearson, L. (2006). Patterns of development in Spanish L2 pragmatic acquisition: An analysis of novice 
learners’ production of directives. Modern Language Journal, 90(4), 473–495. 
Placenia, M. E. (2008). Requests in corner shop transactions in Ecuadorian Andean and Coastal Spanish. In 
K. P. Schneider & A. Barron (Eds.), Variational pragmatics (pp. 307–332). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John 
Benjamins. 
Reinhardt, J. (2010). Directives in office hour consultations: A corpus-informed investigation of learner and 
expert usage. English for Specific Purposes, 29, 94–107. 
Roever, C., & Al-Gahtani, S. (2015). The development of ESL proficiency and pragmatic performance. 
ELT Journal, 69(4), 395–404. 
Rose, K. R. (2000). An exploratory cross-sectional study of interlanguage pragmatic development. Studies 
in Second Language Acquisition, 22, 27–67. 
Safont Jordà, M. P. (2003). Metapragmatic awareness and pragmatic production of third language learners 
of English: A focus on request acts realizations. The International Journal of Bilingualism, 7(1), 43–68. 
D. Joseph Cunningham Request Production in Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 99 
Sasaki, M. (1998). Investigating EFL students' productino of speech acts: A comparison of production 
questionnaires and role plays. Journal of Pragmatics, 30(4), 457–484. 
Schauer, G. A. (2004). May you speak louder maybe? Interlanguage pragmatic development in requests. 
EUROSLA Yearbook, 4, 253–273. 
Schauer, G. A. (2007). Finding the right words in the study abroad context: The development of German 
learners’ use of external modifiers in English. Intercultural Pragmatics, 4(2), 193–220. 
Taguchi, N. (2006). Analysis of appropriateness in a speech act of request in L2 English. Pragmatics, 16(4), 
513–533. 
Taguchi, N. (2011). Pragmatic development as a dynamic, complex process: General patterns and case 
histories. Modern Language Journal, 95(4), 605–627. 
Taleghani-Nikazm, C., & Huth, T. (2010). L2 requests: Preference structure in talk-in-interaction. 
Multilingua, 29, 185–202. 
Trosborg, A. (1995). Interlanguage pragmatics: Requests, complaints, and apologies. Berlin, Germany: 
Mouton de Gruyter. 
Vyatkina, N., & Belz, J. A. (2006). A learner corpus-driven intervention for the development of L2 
pragamtic competence. In K. Bardovi-Harlig, J. C. Félix-Brasdefer, & A. S. Omar (Eds.), Pragmatics and 
Language Learning (pp. 315–357). Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa National Foreign 
Language Center. 
Weizman, E. (1989). Requestive hints. In S. Blum-Kulka, J. House, & G. Kasper (Eds.), Cross-cultural 
pragmatics: Requests and apologies (pp. 71–95). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Wigglesworth, G., & Yates, L. (2011). Mitigating difficult requests in the workplace: What learners and 
teachers need to know. TESOL Quarterly, 41(4), 791–803. 
Woodfield, H. (2012). “I think maybe I want to lend the notes from you”: Development of request 
modification in graduate learners. In M. Economidou-Kogetsidis & H. Woodfield (Eds.), Interlanguage 
request modification (pp. 9–50). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Woodfield, H., & Economidou-Kogetsidis, M. (2010). “I just need more time”: A study of native and non-
native requests to faculty for an extension. Multilingua, 29(1), 77–118. 
Yuan, Y. (2001). An inquiry into empirical pragmatics data-gathering methods: Written DCTs, oral DCTs, 
field notes, and natural conversations. Journal of Pragmatics, 33(2), 271–292. 
