Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/yimwarschauer.pdf 
February 2017, Volume 21, Number 1 
pp. 146–165 
 
Copyright © 2017, ISSN 1094-3501 146 
WEB-BASED COLLABORATIVE WRITING IN L2 CONTEXTS: 
METHODOLOGICAL INSIGHTS FROM TEXT MINING 
Soobin Yim, University of California at Irvine 
Mark Warschauer, University of California at Irvine 
The increasingly widespread use of social software (e.g., Wikis, Google Docs) in second 
language (L2) settings has brought a renewed attention to collaborative writing. Although 
the current methodological approaches to examining collaborative writing are valuable to 
understand L2 students’ interactional patterns or perceived experiences, they can be 
insufficient to capture the quantity and quality of writing in networked online 
environments. Recently, the evolution of techniques for analyzing big data has 
transformed many areas of life, from information search to marketing. However, the use of 
data and text mining for understanding writing processes in language learning contexts is 
largely underexplored. In this article, we synthesize the current methodological 
approaches to researching collaborative writing and discuss how new text mining tools can 
enhance research capacity. These advanced methods can help researchers to elucidate 
collaboration processes by analyzing user behaviors (e.g., amount of editing, participation 
equality) and their link to writing outcomes across large numbers of exemplars. We 
introduce key research examples to illustrate this potential and discuss the implications of 
integrating the tools for L2 collaborative writing research and pedagogy. 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English  
Keywords: Collaborative Learning, Writing, Digital Literacies, Research Methods 
APA Citation: Yim, S., & Warschauer, M. (2017). Web-based collaborative writing in L2 
contexts: Methodological insights from text mining. Language Learning & Technology, 
21(1), 146–165. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/yimwarschauer.pdf 
Received: November 2, 2015; Accepted: September 19, 2016; Published: February 1, 2017 
Copyright: © Soobin Yim & Mark Warschauer 
INTRODUCTION 
Developing collaborative writing skills is an important prerequisite for the extensive coauthoring that 
occurs in most academic and career settings. In the fast-paced knowledge economy, collaborative writing 
tasks are increasingly popular due to the practical benefits of task efficiency and productivity (Jones, 
2007). Collaborative writing skills are particularly important in academic settings: they are essential, both 
in accessing and participating in an academic community and in contributing to the knowledge-building 
process in scholarly disciplines. To equip students with collaboration skills essential for academic and 
career excellence in the 21st century, educators have integrated collaborative group work as a core 
component of instructional strategies and curriculum standards across multiple disciplines (e.g., Bunch, 
Kibler, & Pimentel, 2012; Koehler, Bloom, & Milner, 2015). 
Recently, the widespread availability of technology-enhanced writing platforms, such as wikis, blogs, or 
Google Docs, has expanded the range, scope, and pattern of collaboration even more dramatically. 
Research suggests that collaborative online writing can be particularly beneficial for second language 
(L2) learners because it can provide them with communicative opportunities to practice English in a non-
threatening and engaging environment with little restriction on time and space (Sun & Chang, 2012; 
Warschauer, 1997). Drawing from sociocultural theories of L2 learning, several studies have discussed 
the positive impacts of L2 collaborative writing, such as enhanced writing quality (Storch, 2005), 
increased writing fluency (Bloch, 2007), a sense of audience (Sun & Chang, 2012), the pooling of 
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 147 
knowledge and ideas (Donato, 1994), and socialization opportunities with specific discourse communities 
(Yang, 2014). 
The language learning benefits of collaborative writing, as well as the practical needs to prepare students 
to keep up with the essential 21st century literacy demands, continue to draw a great deal of research 
attention. However, as most studies have used qualitative methods using a small sample size (e.g., Li & 
Zhu, 2013), they can be insufficient to capture the quantity and quality of writing in collaborative 
environments, particularly those involving large student populations or extended periods. This challenge, 
in turn, makes it difficult to compare and synthesize findings and to explore how students’ collaborative 
behaviors may relate to writing outcomes or perceptions. To better understand the characteristics of 
collaborative scaffolding and mediation, the field may benefit from quantifiable information that can 
provide a layer of data triangulation to the qualitative evidence. 
Recent advances in text mining, which refers to the technique of converting text into data for measurable 
analysis (Srivastava & Sahami, 2009), can provide a viable methodological alternative for researching 
collaborative writing. Text mining encompasses a wide range of data mining techniques, which include 
text categorization, information extraction, and visualization (Feldman & Sanger, 2006). Although text 
mining has been widely utilized for analyzing data in diverse fields including information search, 
marketing, and bioinformatics, we have seen little use of text mining for understanding learning processes 
in education. Particularly, the potential of using text mining as a research tool for L2 collaborative writing 
research is still largely underexplored. 
In this article, we first synthesize the current methodological approaches to investigating collaborative 
writing based on major research strands. Then we discuss how new text mining tools specifically 
designed to analyze writers’ collaboration patterns in a cloud-based writing system (i.e., Google Docs) 
can expand the research capacity. Particularly, we introduce research examples to illustrate the potential 
of using text mining to advance the field by (a) extracting collaboration-related variables from large 
datasets, (b) visualizing collaboration patterns of emerging documents, and (c) facilitating reflective 
discussion on collaborative writing process through a stimulated recall. We will also discuss the 
implications of integrating the tools for collaborative writing research and pedagogy. 
MAJOR RESEARCH STRANDS AND METHODOLOGICAL APPROACHES 
Research from a sociocultural perspective of L2 acquisition suggests that collaborative writing involving 
two or more writers working together (Ede & Lunsford, 1990) pushes learners to reflect on their language 
use and solve their language-related problems (Swain, 2000). Recent advancements in collaborative 
technology, such as computer-mediated communication and social software, have expanded the forms and 
patterns of collaborative group work. This technology has the potential to render human interaction as 
something easily transmitted, archived, reevaluated, and edited (Warschauer, 1997), all of which lead to 
new discourse practices, norms, and communicative processes (Dobson & Willinsky, 2009). In 
educational settings, the value of technology-based collaborative writing has been increasingly recognized 
as a way to apprentice L2 learners into new literacies practices (Thorne & Black, 2007), or the 
transformation of literacy practices through the affordances of new media technology (Lankshear & 
Knobel, 2007). 
Drawing from these sociocultural views, L2 researchers have examined the affordances of technology-
based collaborative writing, mainly in three research strands. These include studies that focus on (a) 
collaborative writing processes, (b) collaborative writing outcomes, and (c) perceptions of collaborative 
writing. In this review, relevant studies published between 2000 and 2015 were selected via keyword 
search using major databases (e.g., ProQuest, Google Scholar, ERIC, JSTOR Education) and fourteen 
journals in the fields of computer-assisted language learning (CALL) and applied linguistics (e.g., 
CALICO Journal, Computer Assisted Language Learning, Language Learning & Technology, System, 
Journal of Second Language Writing, Language Learning; selection of journals guided by Smith & 
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 148 
Lafford, 2009). 
Guided by Chapelle’s (1997) CALL evaluation principles, we included studies that address either (a) the 
descriptive nature of the language learning process during computer mediated collaboration or (b) the 
effect of collaboration on L2 learning. Using a grounded approach, we identified the major research 
strands and limited the review to include empirical studies. Where applicable, we included L1 studies, as 
well as studies on face-to-face collaboration, in order to diversify the review base and gain a 
comprehensive understanding of available methodological approaches that can be incorporated in L2 
settings. The Appendix summarizes the key information about the representative studies for each strand, 
including their research contexts and methods. This review is not intended to be a comprehensive 
literature review, but rather to selectively discuss research examples that represent specific 
methodological approaches. 
Collaborative Writing Processes 
Studies that analyze collaborative writing processes usually focus on the strategies, behaviors, roles, and 
responsibilities of collaborators, as well as the collaborative structure underlying writing tasks. In an 
attempt to capture the diverse types of collaboration, these studies are often carried out in naturalistic 
settings by observing how writers collaborate or by using self-reported data (e.g., interview, survey) from 
writers engaged in collaborative writing. Studies examining collaborative writing processes can be 
divided into two categories: (a) patterns of collaboration and (b) phases of collaboration. 
Patterns of Collaboration  
The term patterns of collaboration refers to the ways students negotiate the writing tasks and jointly 
construct text to convey their negotiated meaning (Li & Zhu, 2013). Most common methods include 
qualitative observation and analysis of participants’ group behaviors based on oral (peer talk) and written 
(comments, chats, documents) interaction data (Storch, 2002), interviews (Posner & Baecker, 1993), and 
surveys (Noël & Robert, 2004). For example, Noël & Robert (2004) analyzed survey data from 42 
professionals who undertook collaborative writing projects online, and identified three distinct patterns 
with differing levels of collaboration: sequential writing (i.e., frequent exchange of ideas and co-
construction of texts), parallel writing (i.e., cooperative text construction by individuals working in a 
parallel fashion), and single author writing with peer feedback. 
In an L2 context, several studies examined interactional patterns in collaborative writing tasks using 
transcribed peer talk and observations. For example, Storch (2002) identified four patterns of face-to-face 
interactions in her longitudinal case study of ESL pair writing work: collaborative, dominant–dominant, 
dominant–passive, and expert–novice. In the collaborative pattern, pairs work in a mutually supportive 
manner, whereas in the dominant–dominant pattern, pairs contribute equally to the task, yet with little 
signs of interaction. The dominant–passive pattern is characterized by an authoritarian–subservient role, 
but in expert–novice pattern, a higher ability peer supports and facilitates the participation of a less-able 
peer. By relating the interactional patterns to writing outcomes (i.e., analysis of instances suggesting the 
take-up of language learning opportunities in a subsequent task), she concluded that students in the 
collaborative pattern and expert–novice pattern performed better in writing tasks than pairs observed in 
the other patterns. 
Using a small group case study, Li and Zhu (2013) found similar patterns of group dynamics in wiki-
based essay composition. Their analysis of data from the wiki modules and interviews suggested that in 
each pattern (i.e., collectively contributing or mutually supportive, authoritative–responsive, and 
dominant–withdrawn), L2 group members exhibited differences in their roles and task approaches, which 
in turn influenced their perceived learning experiences. Although the results provide valuable insights into 
the scaffolding benefits as posited in the sociocultural learning theory, they contain limited 
generalizability due to their small sample sizes. 
Other studies noted a distinct pattern of online collaboration, potentially due to the availability of web 
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 149 
features that allowed both synchronous and asynchronous collaboration. For example, Lund (2008) 
examined high school EFL learners’ wiki-based collaborative writing process using a videotaped corpus 
of group interaction and wiki activity logs. He also analyzed two types of collaborative activity that differ 
in terms of the level and scope of the collaboration: local collaborative mode (i.e., members working to 
develop topics in an autonomous mode) and distributed collective mode (i.e., jointly constructing new 
information in a synchronous, interdependent mode). The findings suggest that the cloud-based features 
helped students easily transition from local collaboration to collective networked production, and also 
from consecutive to mixed activity mode, which implied the fluid and flexible nature of knowledge co-
construction processes in online contexts. 
Phases of Collaboration  
Researchers have emphasized the importance of considering the developmental phases in collaborative 
writing research, arguing that the sub-processes of writing place different demands on the writers (Hayes 
& Flower, 1980) and may involve different interactional patterns for each sub-process (Onrubia & Engel, 
2009). Several studies report the existence of distinct phases in technology-based collaboration. For 
example, based on the qualitative analysis of wiki revision histories, the L2 study by Kessler and 
Bikowski (2010) identified three consecutive phases of collaboration during a group essay composition: 
build and destroy (i.e., initial content constantly being deleted and rebuilt), full collaboration (i.e., 
iterative revision of content, yet without a large-scale deletion), and informal reflection (i.e., exchanging 
personal reflections using the commenting function). These phases are characterized by wiki 
functionalities that allow iterative revision and commenting. Student interviews and analysis of wiki 
archives revealed an increasing participation rate and students’ growing comfort as the phases progressed. 
In another study on collaborative writing in a virtual class taught through Moodle, Onrubia and Engel 
(2009) analyzed multiple data sources, including chats, comments, group documents, interviews, and self-
reflections, and found four distinct stages of L1 collaborative writing processes (i.e., initiation, 
exploration, negotiation, and co-construction). The results suggest that the groups tended to stay at the 
second of the four established phases, exploration, with few reaching the highest phase of co-
construction. The authors explain that this was partly due to the collaborative writing strategies 
implemented in phases. Most groups utilized the cooperative strategy (i.e., division of labor) in the 
exploration phase and settled with a summative product, whereas only a few groups moved forward to the 
more advanced phases of collaborative knowledge construction, where they employed mutually-
supportive strategies for group revision of the document. 
Other studies on face-to-face collaboration raised similar concerns, reporting the complexity and 
difficulty in transitioning from the initial phases to more advanced phases of collaborative knowledge 
construction (Dillenbourg, 2002). The results also align with Storch’s (2005) claim that collaborative 
writing tends to occur only within a limited range of writing processes, rather than across all writing 
processes. Collaborative scaffolding tends to be limited to the brainstorming or to the final stages of 
writing—the peer review stage when students review each other’s written texts and make suggestions on 
how they could be improved. 
Unlike previous findings that identified the distinct phases of collaborative writing in a wiki, Strobl 
(2014) reported that the collaborative writing stages in Google Docs are hardly distinguishable. Using the 
Google Docs revision history function, she found that the group writing process was characterized by a 
constant intertwining of writing and revising (e.g., deleting, rewriting, reshuffling) activities, potentially 
because of the synchronous writing and editing functionality of Google Docs. The results indicate that the 
technological characteristics of a collaborative platform can bring about new forms of collaboration, 
which illustrates the point that technology tools do not merely serve as a medium for collaboration, but as 
an integral part of collaboration (Thorne, 2003; Brodahl, Hadjerrouit, & Hansen, 2011). 
The new patterns and processes of collaborative writing brought by increasingly widespread use of 
synchronous interaction can be arduous and insufficient to interpret with qualitative text analysis (e.g., 
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 150 
analysis of written interaction, final text) alone. Although several studies have provided descriptive data 
on collaborative behavior by analyzing data archives in wikis or blogs (e.g., Arnold, Ducate, & Kost, 
2012), these studies carry low statistical power due to their small sample sizes. This is understandable 
given how manual coding of group interactions can be intensive and time-consuming. When triangulated 
with a computational technique that automatically generates usage statistics related to collaborative 
writing and revision behaviors, the insightful results from qualitative approaches can be enhanced to gain 
greater reliability and interpretive power. 
Collaborative Writing Outcomes 
Previous research has long highlighted the benefits of collaboration in terms of both L2 learning and text 
quality (e.g., Elola & Oskoz, 2010; Kost, 2011; Storch, 2005). When it comes to online collaboration, 
empirical studies on the effects of the collaboration process on writing products are scarce (Wang & 
Vásquez, 2012). Existing studies typically utilized descriptive textual (e.g., Elola & Oskoz, 2010; Mak & 
Coniam, 2008) or quasi-experimental analyses (e.g., Strobl, 2014; Wichadee, 2011) of small samples, 
with few studies involving a control condition (see Appendix). 
Mak and Coniam (2008) authored one of the earliest studies that examined the textual quality of 
technology-based collaborative products. In their study of ESL secondary students’ wiki-based 
collaborative writing, they traced textual changes in the amount and the types of writing (e.g., word count, 
t-unit, purpose of revision) that one group produced across multiple phases of collaboration. Using both 
descriptive textual analysis and qualitative analysis, the authors suggested that the students produced 
increasingly complex and coherent texts in greater quantity due to the collaborative nature of the task and 
the presence of authentic purpose. 
Other studies adopted quasi-experimental designs to understand the differences between individual and 
collaborative writing outcomes. Findings from these studies suggest that the strength of collaborative 
writing primarily lies in improving content and organization. For example, using a quasi-experimental 
design, Arslan and Şahin-Kizil (2010) examined how blog-based writing instruction affects EFL students’ 
writing performance, controlling for participants’ age, educational background, and baseline language 
proficiency. Compared to the control group, the blog intervention group displayed greater improvement in 
content and organization, but not in other areas such as vocabulary and grammar. Findings from other 
studies (e.g., Wichadee, 2011) suggest that using collaborative online platforms may heighten students’ 
awareness of audience, which helps them focus on the clarity of their message and organization. 
Kuteeva’s (2011) discourse analysis study conducted in an English for Academic Purposes setting also 
advocates for a stronger reader–writer relationship in collaborative environments. She employed meta-
discourse textual analysis to compare the use of reader-oriented features and interactional meta-discourse 
markers in individual and collaborative corpora (i.e., compilation of collaboratively-written texts). The 
results that revealed a higher use of engagement markers (i.e., personal pronouns, questions) in the wiki-
based argumentative texts, combined with participants’ questionnaire responses, suggested that writing on 
the wiki can contribute to raising students’ audience awareness, resulting in more reader-oriented texts. 
In addition to examining the differences in the outcome texts, several studies indicated how writing 
processes or behaviors during collaboration could be related to writing outcomes. For example, Strobl 
(2014) used a quasi-experimental design to examine the processes and outcomes of individual versus 
collaborative writing. Using taxonomy-based analysis of revision histories and peer discussion produced 
by L2 undergraduate students, the researcher suggested that the in-depth discussions that typically occur 
during the planning phase of collaboration might have led to an improvement in content and organization 
of the group documents. This aligns with previous findings that suggest the important role of the planning 
phase as a predictor of writing quality (e.g., Saddler et al., 2004), and also as the most time-consuming 
and valued activity during the collaborative writing process (Storch, 2005). 
Elola and Oskoz (2010) raised a similar point in a L2 wiki-based study that compared writing outcomes 
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 151 
between individual and collaborative modes. Although they did not find notable differences in writing 
outcomes (i.e., fluency, complexity, accuracy)—admittedly due to a small sample size (N = 8)—their in-
depth qualitative analysis of wiki drafts and chats noted the differences in the participants’ strategies for 
producing a text between the two modes. When working individually, learners tended to wait until the 
final drafts for close editing of grammar and vocabulary, whereas such adjustments appeared at multiple 
points in the collaborative writing process. This difference in the correction pattern could have been due 
to the presence of readers in the collaborative mode, which may have encouraged writers to pay attention 
to grammatical accuracy throughout the process of composing multiple drafts. 
The diversity and complexity of collaboration context (e.g., task type, students’ language proficiency), as 
well as the different outcome measures used across the studies, may account for the mixed results on 
collaborative writing outcomes. Moreover, the lack of measurable data on writers’ collaborative behavior 
(e.g., the amount of writing, revision, feedback) makes it challenging to understand how these 
characteristics may contribute to writing outcomes. This calls for the need to implement more objective 
measurements of writers’ collaborative behaviors. For example, as we possess little empirical data about 
how much—and in what ways—diverse students collaboratively write and revise their work, it is unclear 
how these collaborative behaviors may contribute to students’ writing outcomes (Olson, Wang, Zhang, & 
Olson, 2017). 
Perceptions of Collaborative Writing 
Researchers have examined L2 students’ perceptions of collaborative writing through surveys, interviews, 
and observations primarily using qualitative approaches (see Appendix), producing evidence both for and 
against the pedagogical argument for utilizing collaborative technology. A salient characteristic of social 
media that L2 learners perceive as beneficial is the presence of a real audience. For example, Turgut’s 
(2009) analysis of EFL students’ wiki posts, interviews, and reflective journals revealed that students 
found the presence of a real audience to be helpful to improve their writing skills by raising their 
awareness of local issues, such as word choice. Students also claimed that the wiki was a generative 
source for creative ideas, helping them gain more confidence in experimenting with their writing. 
Students’ positive perceptions toward web-based collaborative writing were also noted in Kessler, 
Bikowski, and Boggs’ (2012) study on the use of Google Docs in an L2 academic context. Content 
analysis of participants’ in-text communication showed that students maximized the collaborative space 
for a wide range of purposes, such as planning logistics and sharing strategies in handling writing 
concerns, which the students perceived to make the writing process more effective. Sun and Chang (2012) 
similarly argued for the potential of web-based collaboration for developing academic literacy skills. 
Based on content analysis of blog pages produced by L2 graduate students, they suggested that informal 
writing practices provide a non-threatening environment where L2 students experiment with the academic 
genre and bridge the gap between their home languages and academic English.  
Despite the overall positive attitudes toward technology-based collaborative writing, there are several 
noteworthy cautions in using collaborative technology for writing. Based on the analysis of a videotaped 
corpus of student face-to-face interactions and interviews, Lund (2008) has suggested that students 
express reluctance towards having their unfinished work seen by others and editing others’ work due to 
concerns regarding their own editing inexperience. Other L2 studies suggest the psychological ownership 
of a text might lead to hesitancy to change another writer’s contribution, particularly in content revision 
(e.g., Arnold et al., 2012), thus displaying more of a cooperative work pattern (i.e., editing one’s own 
text) than a collaborative pattern (i.e., editing others’ texts). One of the students’ major concerns centered 
around the overriding of each other’s ideas, as the networked online tools permit more than one person to 
edit the same text simultaneously (Lee, 2010). 
The lack of student accountability and unequal contributions to the collective product has also been raised 
as an issue. In Strobl’s (2014) study based on survey and document analysis, collaboration failed in one 
group due to some free riders. Given that accountability is an important prerequisite for successful 
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 152 
collaboration, it is important to design tasks and evaluation strategies that encourage balanced 
participation (Hew & Brush, 2007). 
METHODOLOGICAL CHALLENGES 
The reviewed studies suggest important implications on the affordances of technology-based 
collaborative writing in three different, yet related, areas: writing processes, outcomes, and perceptions. 
The Appendix shows that most studies have typically analyzed student interaction (e.g., comments, chats, 
discussions), text (student-produced documents), interviews, and surveys to qualitatively examine 
collaborative writing processes or perceptions in small group settings. The role of in-depth, qualitative 
studies will continue to be important in understanding how L2 learners negotiate meaning and scaffold 
each other in collaborative online contexts. This is especially so as ecological approaches that value the 
particularities of contexts and the social embeddedness of technology (van Lier, 2000; Warschauer, 1997) 
are generally deemed more appropriate than experimental studies that test the efficacy of integrating tools 
(Chapelle, 2009). 
Yet, the use of quantifiable data on writers’ collaborative behavior as a triangulation source is valuable. 
For example, since there is lack of measurable data available about how much, and in what ways, diverse 
students collaboratively write and revise their work, how these collaborative behaviors may contribute to 
students’ writing development and learning outcomes remains unclear (Olson et al., 2017). Several 
studies have provided measurable data on students’ revision behaviors or quantity of contribution (e.g., 
Arnold et al., 2012) with manual coding of data archives in wikis or blogs; however this in-depth text 
analysis may be challenging with large-scale datasets. 
Research in L1 contexts has also underscored the need to monitor groups’ actual usage of Google Docs 
and measure writers’ collaborative behavior in order to better capture collaborative writing processes 
(Zhou, Simpson, & Domizi, 2012) or the conditions affecting writers’ perceptions (Birnholtz, Steinhardt, 
& Pavese, 2013). For example, the recent experimental study by Birnholtz et al. (2013) on L1 learners’ 
synchronous collaborative writing on Google Docs suggests that the quantity of collaboration (e.g., 
number of comments, edits) may affect writers’ perceived ownership of the document and attractiveness 
of the group task. The findings suggest that the amount of total editing positively affected participants’ 
perceptions of group ownership. However, the amount of peer edits negatively affected one’s perceived 
attraction to the task, which may indicate some perceived invasiveness of edits directly done by others. 
Next, increasingly diversifying types and capacities of collaborative technologies also presents challenges 
in collaborative writing research. For example, the use of simultaneous writing and editing features in 
cloud-based systems, such as Google Docs, often leads to new ways of collaborative writing, 
characterized by non-linear interaction. Such iterative practices often involve mixed modes of 
collaboration and coordination, therefore making it difficult to identify patterns in these practices. These 
challenges call for alternative sources of data for triangulating the qualitative evidence typically seen in 
collaborative writing research. 
Insights from Text Mining Approach 
Recent advances in text mining techniques can provide a viable methodological option to address the 
aforementioned challenges. In collaborative writing research, new text mining tools specifically designed 
to extract information on writers’ collaboration patterns can help elucidate processes of collaboration by 
quantifying or visually representing the collaborative writing patterns, particularly across large numbers 
of exemplars. Several text mining tools have been widely integrated and researched in the fields of 
computer science and engineering to improve the design and support features utilized in collaborative 
writing systems (Olson et al., 1993). For example, visualization programs have been developed to 
understand the evolution of software code (i.e., CVSscan; for more details, see Voinea, Telea, & Van 
Wijk, 2005) and collaborative revision in Wikipedia (i.e., HistoryFlow; for more details, see Viégas, 
Wattenberg, & Dave, 2004). Yet collaborative writing research that has integrated text mining systems in 
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 153 
educational contexts has only recently emerged. Below we introduce three prominent research examples 
of integrating text mining tools that are specifically designed for analyzing group documents in Google 
Docs, one of the most widely applied collaborative writing tools. 
Example 1: Quantifying the Amount of Collaboration 
An open source text mining tool called SCAPES1 (Studying Collaborative Authoring Practices in 
Educational Settings) possesses the capacity to download and analyze revision history on Google Docs up 
to 100 documents at a single run. This tool automatically produces revision history spreadsheets reporting 
the version, date and time, authors, word count, words added, and words deleted (see Figure 1). Based on 
these data, researchers can extract collaboration-related variables such as the number of contributors, 
editing sessions (i.e., how many times authors made changes to a document), and edits (i.e., how many 
times a specific document was edited), as well as the number of words individuals added, deleted, or 
moved. These variables can be utilized to examine the characteristics of writers’ collaborative behaviors 
and how their writing and revision may relate to their writing outcomes. 
 
Figure 1. SCAPES’ revision history spreadsheets report version, date and time, authors, word count, 
words added, and words deleted. 
Using these variables available in SCAPES, Zheng, Lawrence, Warschauer, and Lin (2015) analyzed 
3,537 Google documents collaboratively written by 257 sixth-grade L1 students for an academic year. As 
the first attempt to use large-scale datasets to empirically examine students’ long-term engagement with 
collaborative writing, this study revealed several key aspects of collaboration that would have been hard 
to track with qualitative data analysis or observations that typically involve small sample sizes or short-
term, experimental tasks. For example, the authors found that during an academic year, an average of 1.4 
co-authors and a maximum of six co-authors, collaborated on the document of various genres in English 
Language Arts classes. Student writers produced an average of 13.76 documents averaging 248 to 430 
words, and 67.84 edits (i.e., adding, deleting, moving) per document, working on each document for an 
average of 15 days during the school year. These extensive writing practices suggest a significant 
improvement from the typical literacy practices in middle schools, where students produce a page or less 
of text during a nine-week period (Applebee & Langer, 2011). The findings imply the potential of cloud-
based technology in supporting the continuity of writing and revision due to its accessible and interactive 
features. 
Using longitudinal growth models, Zheng et al. also examined writing growth trajectories across edit 
sessions and found that documents with multiple contributors were drafted more slowly and had fewer 
words added during each editing session than did single-authored documents. In addition to the text 
mining results on the quantity of writing and revision, the researchers manually coded the types of 
feedback using the revision histories (e.g., comment, direct edit, compliment). These data were then 
related to students’ standardized writing achievement, but there was no significant correlation. Instead of 
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 154 
using standardized test scores alone, future studies may use more robust measures of writing outcomes, 
such as individual or group essay grades with analytic rubrics. These detailed measures can reveal which 
components of writing are affected by certain collaborative behavior. 
In L2 learning contexts, the quantifiable information about collaborative writing and revision both at the 
individual and document level can help researchers empirically understand the contextual factors of 
collaboration, an important consideration in sociocultural views of second language acquisition (SLA). 
For example, the variables extracted from text mining tools can help us understand more specifically what 
factors or conditions (e.g., group size, group members’ language proficiency, task types) may facilitate or 
constrain L2 students’ collaborative writing behaviors, subsequently affecting their writing quality. 
Particularly given that text mining tools can handle large samples, integrating the tools may enhance the 
explanatory power of the suggested benefits of technology-based collaboration for L2 learners. 
Example 2: Visualizing the Collaborative Writing Patterns 
Another text mining tool that can help address the methodological challenges in collaborative writing 
research is a document visualization tool called DocuViz.2 Using information from the revision histories 
and tracking changes on Google Docs, this tool produces a visual history chart across different time 
points, indicating the authors, their portion of writing, and time (Wang, Olson, Zhang, Nguyen, & Olson, 
2015). This data enable researchers to examine how simultaneous editing and writing may affect the 
patterns of collaboration in an emerging document, and their subsequent effect on document quality 
(Wang et al., 2015). This is particularly helpful in understanding both simultaneous and developmental 
collaborative writing processes, as it provides multiple views of the emerging document (see Figure 2) 
across different time points. Because DocuViz provides usage statistics (e.g., sources, amount, and timing 
of revision), researchers can track the intensity of simultaneous editing activities at a certain phase of the 
collaborative writing process or how patterns of revision activities may change over time. 
 
Figure 2. Views of participation in co-authoring a document. Vertical bars are the slices with authors 
noted in colors; the size of their contribution is the size of the bar. (a) shows the slices in order of 
appearance; (b) shows the slices on a timeline, where one can see bursts of activity and then delays. The 
key at the bottom shows which person corresponds to which color and how many characters in the final 
document they contributed (Olson et al., 2017; author permission granted). 
The developers of DocuViz (Olson et al., 2017) analyzed collaborative writing patterns and outcomes of 
96 Google Docs written by engineering undergraduate majors. Using a combination of DocuViz and 
qualitative coding of in-text communication, they found six different patterns of collaboration (i.e., from 
scratch, outline, assignment, example, assign people, and informal discussion; see Figure 3), which 
otherwise would have been difficult to analyze due to iterative revisions and edits. What is also 
noteworthy is that DocuViz assists in extracting variables that might be hard to identify without 
visualizing or quantifying these patterns and thus enables researchers to examine the link between the 
writing patterns and the writing quality. For example, Olson et al. utilized DocuViz data to develop a 
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 155 
variable called evenness of participation, which measures the degree to which the group work is 
collaboratively distributed. The evenness of participation is also visualized in DocuViz and can be 
calculated using a researcher-developed measure (i.e., the proportion of the final document produced by 
each team member and the variance of the proportions). Using hierarchical linear regression, the 
researchers found that the evenness of participation is positively associated with the writing quality. 
 
Figure 3. Outline (a) and Example (b) pattern. In (a), the leader (in blue) wrote a short chunk in the first 
slice, an outline of the document. Then all of the co-authors (other colors) wrote separate sections of the 
document. In (b), students pasted an example text (starting document, in blue) and then shortened and 
modified it (Olson et al., 2017; author permission granted). 
The mixed-methods study by Yim, Wang, Olson, Vu, and Warschauer (in press) extended this line of 
inquiry by examining how collaboration-related behaviors (e.g., the evenness of participation, editing 
quantity) in a synchronous, collocated setting may relate to writing quality and quantity. Using multiple 
methods including document visualization (i.e., DocuViz), computational text analysis (i.e., Coh-Metrix), 
and rubric-guided quality assessment, this study examined L1 undergraduates’ in-class synchronous 
writing processes and outcomes in Google Docs. The authors found that balanced participation and 
amount of editing led to longer texts with higher quality scores for content and evidence, as well as more 
diverse use of vocabulary in group texts. Unlike previous findings on asynchronous feedback that 
supported the benefits of collaboration on organization (e.g., Arslan & Şahin-Kizil, 2010), however, Yim 
et al. (in press) found that the synchronous collaboration practices did not enhance organization. The 
results suggest that balanced pooling of ideas from multiple authors may enhance the diversity of content 
and vocabulary, but that careful attention is needed to polish the structure for improved organization, 
particularly in synchronous modes of collaboration. 
The use of visualization tools is critical to understand the emerging document development processes and 
outcomes in cloud-based platforms such as Google Docs, particularly those that evolve over extended 
periods. In L2 contexts where issues such as mutuality and equality affect group dynamics (see discussion 
in Storch, 2002, 2005), balance in contribution and participation carries even greater weight and thus 
needs a special attention and emphasis. Inspecting the collaboration process using visualization tools can 
help identify and examine such patterns, thus informing the design of instructional tasks and strategies to 
accommodate L2 writers with diverse capacities and backgrounds. 
Example 3: Stimulated Recall on the Collaborative Writing Processes 
Document visualization tools can also be effective instruments for stimulated recall, which refers to a 
subset of retrospective research methods that accesses participants’ reflections on mental processes 
(Lindgren, Sullivan, & Stevenson, 2008). Traditionally, the writing process has been examined using 
think-aloud protocol, direct observations, text analysis, stimulated recalls with both audio and video 
recording, or photography (Stapleton, 2010). More modern methods include keystroke logging software 
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 156 
(Lindgren et al., 2008), but it is often difficult to sift through the fine-grained, disconnected data 
generated by keystroke logging to interpret complex writing processes, especially with long-term projects 
involving multiple authors. 
DocuViz can be a user-friendly instrument for stimulated recall on collaborative writing behaviors or 
processes. In particular, its pop-up feature allows the users to view actual revision histories to track the 
changes when they hover their mouse over a portion of a column slice. In a stimulated recall interview 
using DocuViz, one L2 undergraduate student provided a detailed explanation on her groups’ 
collaboration process during an academic essay task (Yim & Warschauer, 2016). Looking at the 
visualization chart (Figure 4) that marks a simultaneous expansion and subsequent reduction of the size of 
different bars, she discussed how her group members practiced the divide-and-conquer strategy (e.g., each 
member writing one paragraph) and then revised the completed essay together to make it succinct and 
coherent. Another participant discussed the value of using DocuViz for reflecting upon her collaboration 
process: “I didn’t realize how much of a contribution people had on the groups. I kind of knew as we 
were typing, but just seeing it here like this helps me to understand what changes we’ve made and why.” 
 
Figure 4. Simultaneous writing and revising of paragraphs by six group members indicated by expansion 
(blue arrow: the size of each bar simultaneously expanding) and reduction (red arrow: the size of each bar 
simultaneously reducing) of bars of six different colors (Yim & Warschauer, 2016; author permission 
granted). 
Another open-source visualization tool called AuthorViz3 can also be useful for stimulated reflection on 
L2 collaborative writing. As this tool color-codes sections written by each author in the final document in 
Google Docs (Wang, 2016), it is helpful to identify writers’ different linguistic contributions. In the study 
by Yim and Warschauer (2016), an undergraduate student noticed the colorful mark-up of sentences in 
AuthorViz, and discussed how her group did not divide any roles or sections, but spontaneously began to 
write sentences together and to build off in a synchronous hands-on pattern (see Figure 5). Looking at the 
AuthorViz view of her group document, she also discussed how her group members, including an L2 
student, provided editing support for each other regardless of their writing capacities. She added that these 
direct edits did not come across as offensive because the group members had an intuitive consensus that 
they were building the sentences together. In L2 research, integration of these visualization tools can be 
particularly valuable not only for stimulated reflection, but also for tracking and analyzing writers’ 
language use (e.g., language related episodes; Swain & Lapkin, 1995) in group documents with multiple 
revisions. 
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 157 
 
Figure 5. AuthorViz view of a collaboratively written paragraph in Google Docs. Different colors denote 
writing and revision made by each contributor. One sentence written by an L2 student (noted in red) is 
edited by three other native-speaking peers (noted in green, orange, and blue) for grammar. In the 
following sentence, the L2 student edits her native-speaking peer’s text (Yim & Warschauer, 2016; author 
permission granted). 
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
Text mining provides fine-grain analysis of collaborative writing processes that were once hidden in 
research that relies mainly on traditional methods of observation, survey, or qualitative document 
analysis. For example, cloud-based text mining tools can provide important usage statistics at the 
individual and group level, such as amount of writing and revision and number of edit sessions. These 
usage statistics can also be studied over the course of time, providing rich insights about L2 students’ 
participation or writing trajectories. Access to additional sources of data on learners’ technology use not 
only feeds back into enhancing pedagogy but also contributes to SLA theories (Garrett, 1991). 
Using the additional layer of information available from text mining, future studies may better examine 
the specific mechanisms through which technology-based collaboration affects language development and 
the implications of these relationships for SLA. For example, sociocultural theories of SLA underscore 
the importance of contextual factors that influence the affordances and constraints of mediating 
technologies (Chapelle, 2009; Warschauer, 1997). Previous research suggests that factors such as 
members’ language proficiency (Wigglesworth & Storch, 2012) or task type (Aydin & Yildiz, 2014) may 
impact the degree and level of collaboration. The impacts of these factors on social interaction processes 
or outcomes, particularly with large datasets, will be better understood when in-depth qualitative analyses 
are supported by quantification and visualization of collaboration using text mining techniques. These 
investigations will help researchers identify the role of diverse socio-emotional or environmental 
characteristics (e.g., efficacy, aptitude, anxiety, strategy, technology skills, curriculum)—critical factors 
in L2 acquisition (Skehan, 1991; Ellis, 1994)—in mediating their quality and quantity of peer 
collaboration, writing, and subsequent language development. 
It should be noted, however, that text mining alone may not be sufficient to provide insights into complex 
collaborative writing behavior and development. Researchers have warned that carefully controlled 
studies of language learning driven by quantitative analysis do not align with the ecological approach of 
CALL (van Lier, 2000) which values the particularities of technology use in contextually rich and 
naturalistic environments (Warschauer, 1997). Therefore, balanced use of qualitative as well as 
quantitative evidence made available by integrating text mining tools is necessary to investigate multiple 
aspects of social interaction and language learning processes including the collaboration trajectories, such 
as changes in written participation (e.g., amount of writing, revision) across different phases of 
collaboration, and how students’ scaffolding and mediation in oral discussion may impact the amount of 
their written contribution. 
Careful triangulation of multiple sources is particularly desired in using text mining, as its current form 
provides statistics based on the amount of written interaction—only one of the dimensions of 
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 158 
collaboration. Given that one of the critical concerns in SLA is the role of linguistic input, we need to 
understand how learners explore the different processing conditions of interactions (e.g., written vs. 
spoken, synchronous vs. asynchronous), whether these conditions modify linguistic input differently, and 
to what extent they subsequently affect language development (Chapelle, 2009). Therefore, diverse 
channels of student collaboration (e.g., verbal discussion, commenting, chat) and the context-specific 
factors (e.g., participant background, curriculum context, teacher role) should be taken into account when 
examining student participation and collaboration using text mining. 
The pedagogical implications of using text mining tools in collaborative writing instruction are also 
significant. For example, text mining tools can help instructors monitor how much each author 
contributed to the final version of the writing as well as any changes made throughout the composing 
process. The multiple aspects of usage information gathered from these tools can be exercised as rich 
sources for evaluating collaborative group works. For students, incorporating these tools into reflective 
group activities can help alleviate students’ concerns about accountability, a primary concern about 
collaborative writing as revealed in previous studies (e.g., Strobl, 2014). 
Integrating text mining can also help increase students’ collaboration awareness—that is, the awareness of 
what each group member is doing or has done so they can better coordinate (see Wang et al., 2015). For 
example, the use of DocuViz during collaborative group work can help group members to identify the 
parts of the document with the most revisions for reaching consensus or restructuring ideas (Olson et al., 
2017). Research indicated that collaboration awareness helps reduce co-authors’ frustrations, which leads 
to an improvement in writing efficiency and quality (e.g., Olson & Olson, 1995). Considering that 
balanced participation tends to be associated with higher textual quality, particularly in content and 
evidence (Yim et al., in press), future tools can provide a dashboard or a summary table that helps to raise 
awareness of participation equality by visualizing each member’s amount of writing and editing in real-
time. 
Furthermore, advances in text mining can contribute to the development of instructional tools that support 
collaborative writing. A recent example is iWrite, a cloud-based academic writing tool designed for 
engineering students. Using text mining techniques, this tool provides support for assigning topic-specific 
writing tasks, as well as analyzing group revision behaviors and patterns of collaboration through 
functions such as revision maps and topic evaluation charts (Calvo, O'Rourke, Jones, Yacef, & Reimann, 
2011). In addition to promoting students’ self-and group-reflection on their collaboration, the use of these 
features provides a valuable assessment resource because student progress and quality of collaborative 
work can be tracked across time through students’ compilation of works. Future text mining tools may 
also integrate computational text analysis tools such as Text Easability Assessor, which calculates the 
textual characteristics of a given text and compares them to large corpora means. Collaborators can use 
this information to reflect on multiple aspects of their joint texts (e.g., by identifying weak areas of text) 
and plan for further revisions. 
In the 21st century, the ability to communicate through mediating technologies is an integral part of 
collaboration, as well as of communicative competence (Chapelle, 2009). L2 students engage in a variety 
of digital genres and new forms of discourse, which demands appropriate support for coping with new 
communicative processes, as well as new ways of participating in knowledge and identity construction 
(Thorne & Black, 2007). The rapid changes in L2 literacy practices in collaborative digital environments 
also require methodological innovations in research. Careful integration of advanced technology tools 
such as text mining will help us better understand these evolving L2 literacy experiences in networked 
environments and their impacts on language development. 
 
 
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 159 
APPENDIX. 
The studies with an asterisk mark had multiple research questions that were addressed using either a qualitative or quantitative method within a 
mixed-methods approach. In this review, we focus on the methodological approach employed in addressing each research question within the 
study. 
Research 
Strand  
Study  Theoretical 
Framework  
Technology 
Type  
Key Research Question  Participants  Research 
Design  
Methods   
Collaborative 
Writing 
Outcomes  
Strobl (2014)* Not specified  Google Docs  Differences in writing 
quality between 
collaborative and individual 
documents 
49 university 
students of German 
L2 learners 
Quasi-
experimental 
T-test on text quality measures 
(i.e., complexity, accuracy, 
fluency, holistic score) 
 Wichadee (2011) Not specified  Wiki Writing improvement after 
a wiki-based group work 
35 Thai ESL 
university students  
Quasi-
experimental  
T-test on single group pre- and 
post- test 
 Mak and Coniam 
(2008) 
Not specified  Wiki  Changes in writing quantity 
and quality in a wiki-based 
group document 
4 Hong Kong ESL 
secondary students 
(1 group) 
Descriptive, 
qualitative  
Descriptive report on the proxy 
measures of quantity, 
complexity, and coherence 
 Arslan and Sahin-
Kizil (2010) 
Not specified  Blog  Differences in writing 
improvement between blog 
and non-blog group  
50 Turkish EFL 
university students 
Quasi-
experimental  
T-test on experiment/control 
groups’ pre- and post-test and 
ANOVA 
 Kuteeva (2011) Not specified  Wiki Difference in metadiscourse 
features in collaborative 
versus individual corpora 
14 EFL Stockholm 
university students  
Descriptive 
text analysis  
Metadiscourse analysis based 
on coding taxonomy 
Collaborative 
Writing 
Process 
Li and Zhu 
(2013) 
Sociocultural  Wiki Patterns of group 
interaction 
9 EFL Chinese 
university students 
(3 groups) 
Qualitative  Text analysis based on coding 
taxonomy and interviews 
 Lund (2008)  Sociocultural  Wiki Types of collaborative 
activity 
31 high school EFL 
students (use of 
class wiki)  
Qualitative Content analysis of videotaped 
interactions and wiki logs 
based on coding taxonomy 
 Strobl (2014)* Socio-
constructivist 
Google Docs  Differences in writing 
process between 
collaborative and individual 
composition  
49 university 
students of German 
L2 learners 
Qualitative   Qualitative analysis using 
Google Docs revision histories 
 Kessler and 
Bikowski (2010) 
Not specified  Wiki  Collaborative writing 
process and group behavior 
in wiki 
40 non-native pre-
service EFL 
teachers 
Qualitative  Qualitative analysis using wiki 
revision history function 
        
        
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 160 
        
Research 
Strand 
Study Theoretical 
Framework 
Technology 
Type 
Key Research Question Participants Research 
Design 
Methods  
Perceptions of 
Collaborative 
Writing  
Turgut (2009) Socio-
constructivist  
Wiki  Student perceptions of wiki 
use for writing 
77 EFL college prep 
students 
Qualitative  Text analysis using wiki 
revision history function, 
interviews  
 Sun and Chang 
(2012) 
Socio-
constructivist  
Blog  The role of collaborative 
dialogues in facilitating 
academic writing skills and 
authorship 
7 international 
graduate students 
Qualitative  Content analysis of interviews, 
blog pages  
 Kessler et al. 
(2012)* 
Sociocultural  Google Docs  Student perceptions of 
collaborative writing using 
Google Docs 
38 international 
graduate students 
Descriptive, 
qualitative 
(content 
analysis) 
Survey, in-text communication 
 Lund (2008) Sociocultural  Wiki Student perceptions of 
collaboration using wiki 
31 high school EFL 
students 
Qualitative Content analysis of interviews  
 Lee (2010) Socio-
constructivist  
Wiki  Student perceptions of the 
effectiveness of wiki use 
for writing 
35 university 
students of Spanish 
L2 learners 
Descriptive, 
qualitative 
Content analysis of interviews, 
surveys, wiki pages  
 Arnold et al. 
(2012) 
Socio-
contructivist 
Wiki  Group work mode 
(collaboration vs. 
cooperation) and student 
perceptions 
53 university 
students of German 
L2 learners 
Descriptive, 
qualitative 
Content analysis of wiki text, 
revision histories, surveys 
 Strobl (2014)* Socio-
contructivist 
Google Docs  Student perceptions of 
strengths and weaknesses 
of collaborative writing 
49 university 
students of German 
L2 learners 
Descriptive, 
qualitative  
Text analysis of revision 
history, surveys 
 Wang (2014) Socio-
constructivist  
Wiki  Types of revision (peer vs. 
self-edit) 
42 EFL college 
students 
Qualitative  Content analysis of interviews, 
surveys  
 
 
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 161 
NOTES 
1. SCAPES is available here. This tool was developed by the SCAPES research team at the School of 
Education at UC Irvine. 
2. DocuViz is available here. This open-source tool is developed by Hana Research Group at the School 
of Informatics at UC Irvine. It is also available as a Chrome application. 
3. AuthorViz is available here. This open-source tool was developed by Hana Research Group at the 
School of Informatics at UC Irvine. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to thank the LLT editors and anonymous reviewers for their suggestions and 
comments on improving this article. We would also like to thank Dr. Judith Olson and Dr. Dakuo Wang 
for their feedback on an earlier draft of this article. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Soobin Yim is a doctoral student in the School of Education at the University of California, Irvine 
specializing in language, literacy, and technology. Her research interests include technology-based 
collaboration, digital literacy development, and second language writing. 
E-mail: soobiny@uci.edu 
Mark Warschauer is a Professor of Education and Informatics, and Director of the Digital Learning Lab 
and the Teaching and Learning Research Center at the University of California, Irvine. His research 
focuses on digital media and literacy development. 
E-mail: markw@uci.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Applebee, A., & Langer, J. (2011). The national study of writing instruction: Methods and procedures. 
Albany, NY: Center on English Learning & Achievement. 
Arnold, N., Ducate, L., & Kost, C. (2012). Collaboration or cooperation? Analyzing group dynamics and 
revision processes in wikis. CALICO Journal, 29(3), 431–448. 
Arslan, R. Ş., & Şahin-Kizil, A. (2010). How can the use of blog software facilitate the writing process of 
English language learners? Computer Assisted Language Learning, 23(3), 183–197. 
Aydin, Z., & Yildiz, S. (2014). Using Wikis to promote collaborative EFL writing. Language Learning & 
Technology, 18(1), 160–180. Retireved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/aydinyildiz.pdf 
Birnholtz, J., Steinhardt, S. B., & Pavese, A. (2013). Write here, write now! An experimental study of 
group maintenance in collaborative writing. Paper presented at the CHI 2013, New York, NY. 
Bloch, J. (2007). Abdullah’s blogging: A generation 1.5 student enters the blogosphere. Language 
Learning & Technology, 11(2), 128–141. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num2/pdf/bloch.pdf 
Brodahl, C., Hadjerrouit, S., & Hansen, N. K. (2011). Collaborative writing with web 2.0 technologies: 
education students' perceptions. Journal of Information Technology Education, 10, 73–103. 
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 162 
Bunch, G. C., Kibler, A., & Pimentel, S. (2012). Realizing opportunities for English learners in the 
common core English language arts and disciplinary literacy standards. Stanford, CA: Understanding 
Language Initiative. 
Calvo, R., O'Rourke, S. T., Jones, J., Yacef, K., & Reimann, P. (2011). Collaborative writing support 
tools on the cloud. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 4(1), 88–97. 
Chapelle, C. (1997). CALL in the year 2000: Still in search of research paradigms? Language Learning & 
Technology, 1(1), 19–43. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/chapelle/default.html 
Chapelle, C. (2009). The relationship between second language acquisition theory and computer‐ assisted 
language learning. Modern Language Journal, 93(S1), 741–753. 
Dillenbourg, P. (2002). Over-scripting CSCL: The risks of blending collaborative learning with 
instructional design. In P. A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of CSCL. Can we support CSCL? (pp. 61–
91). Heerlen, Netherlands: Open Universiteit Nederland. 
Dobson, T., & Willinsky, J. (2009). Digital literacy. In D. R. Olson & N. Torrance (Eds.), The Cambridge 
handbook of literacy (pp. 286–312). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Donato, R. (1994). Collective scaffolding in second language learning. In J. P. Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.), 
Vygotskian approaches to second language research (pp. 33–56). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Ede, L. S., & Lunsford, A. A. (1990). Singular texts/plural authors: Perspectives on collaborative 
writing. Carbondale, IL: SIU Press. 
Ellis, R. (1994). The study of second language acquisition. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Elola, I., & Oskoz, A. (2010). Collaborative writing: Fostering foreign language and writing conventions 
development. Language Learning & Technology, 14(3), 51–71. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2010/elolaoskoz.pdf 
Feldman, R., & Sanger, J. (2006). The text mining handbook. New York, NY: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Garrett, N. (1991). Technology in the service of language learning: Trends and issues. Modern Language 
Journal, 75(1), 74–101. 
Hayes, J. R., & Flower, L. S. (1980). Identifying the organization of writing processes. In L. W. Gregg & 
E. R. Steinberg (Eds.), Cognitive processes in writing (pp. 3–30). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Hew, K. F., & Brush, T. (2007). Integrating technology into K–12 teaching and learning: Current 
knowledge gaps and recommendations for future research. Educational Technology Research and 
Development, 55(3), 223–252. 
Jones, R. W. (2007). Learning and teaching in small groups: Characteristics, benefits, problems, and 
approaches. Anaesthesia and intensive care, 35(4), 587. 
Kessler, G., & Bikowski, D. (2010). Developing collaborative autonomous learning abilities in computer 
mediated language learning: Attention to meaning among students in wiki space. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 23(1), 41–58. 
Kessler, G., Bikowski, D., & Boggs, J. (2012). Collaborative writing among second language learners in 
academic web-based projects. Language Learning & Technology, 16(1), 91–109. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/kesslerbikowskiboggs.pdf 
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 163 
Koehler, C., Bloom, M. A., & Milner, A. R. (2015). The STEM Road Map for Grades K–2. In C. C. 
Johnson, E. E. Peters-Burton, & T. J. Moore (Eds.), STEM road map: A framework for integrated STEM 
education (pp. 41–59). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Kost, C. (2011). Investigating writing strategies and revision behavior in collaborative wiki projects. 
CALICO Journal, 28(3), 606–620. 
Kuteeva, M. (2011). Wikis and academic writing: Changing the writer–reader relationship. English for 
Specific Purposes, 30(1), 44–57. 
Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (2007). Sampling “the new” in new literacies. A New Literacies Sampler, 
29, 1–24. 
Lee, L. (2010). Exploring wiki-media collaborative writing: A case study in an elementary Spanish 
course. CALICO Journal, 27(2), 260–276. 
Li, M., & Zhu, W. (2013). Patterns of computer-mediated interaction in small writing groups using wikis. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 26(1), 61–82. 
Lindgren, E., Sullivan, K. P. H., & Stevenson, M. (2008). Supporting the reflective language learner with 
computer keystroke logging. In F. Zhang & B. Barber (Eds.), Handbook of research on computer 
enhanced language acquisition and learning (pp. 189–204). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
Lund, A. (2008). Wikis: A collective approach to language production. ReCALL, 20(1), 35–54. 
Mak, B., & Coniam, D. (2008). Using wikis to enhance and develop writing skills among secondary 
school students in Hong Kong. System, 36(3), 437–455. 
Noël, S., & Robert, J. M. (2004). Empirical study on collaborative writing: What do co-authors do, use, 
and like? Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), 13(1), 63–89. 
Olson, G. M., & Olson, J. S. (1995). The effectiveness of simple shared electronic workspaces. In S. 
Greenberg, S. Hayne, & R. Rada (Eds.), Real time group drawing and writing tools (pp. 105–126). 
London, UK: McGraw Hill. 
Olson, J. S., Olson, G. M., Storrøsten, M., & Carter, M. (1993). Groupwork close up: A comparison of 
the group design process with and without a simple group editor. ACM Transactions on Information 
Systems (TOIS), 11(4), 321–348. 
Olson, J. S., Wang, D., Zhang, J., & Olson, G. M. (2017). How people write together now: Beginning the 
investigation with advanced undergraduates in a project course. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human 
Interaction (TOCHI), 24(1). 
Onrubia, J., & Engel, A. (2009). Strategies for collaborative writing and phases of knowledge 
construction in CSCL environments. Computers & Education, 53(4), 1256–1265. 
Posner, I. R., & Baecker, R. M. (1993). How people write together. In Proceedings of the 25th Hawai‘i 
International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 127–138). Washington DC: IEEE Computer Sciences. 
Saddler, B., Moran, S., Graham, S., & Harris, K. R. (2004). Preventing writing difficulties: The effects of 
planning strategy instruction on the writing performance of struggling writers. Exceptionality, 12(1), 
3–17. 
Skehan, P. (1991). Individual differences in second language learning. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 13(2), 275–298. 
Smith, B., & Lafford, B. A. (2009). The evaluation of scholarly activity in computer‐ assisted language 
learning. Modern Language Journal, 93(S1), 868–883. 
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 164 
Srivastava, A., & Sahami. M. (2009). Text mining: Classification, clustering, and applications. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press. 
Stapleton, P. (2010). Writing in an electronic age: A case study of L2 composing processes. Journal of 
English for Academic Purposes, 9(4), 295–307. 
Storch, N. (2002). Relationships formed in dyadic interaction and opportunity for learning. International 
Journal of Educational Research, 37(3), 305–322. 
Storch, N. (2005). Collaborative writing: Product, process, and students’ reflections. Journal of Second 
Language Writing, 14(3), 153–173. 
Strobl, C. (2014). Affordances of web 2.0 technologies for collaborative advanced writing in a foreign 
language. CALICO Journal, 31(1), 1–18. 
Sun, Y. C., & Chang, Y. J. (2012). Blogging to learn: Becoming EFL academic writers through 
collaborative dialogues. Language Learning & Technology, 16(1), 43-61. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/sunchang.pdf 
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond: Mediating acquisition through collaborative 
dialogue. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 97–114). Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1995). Problems in output and the cognitive processes they generate: A step 
towards second language learning. Applied linguistics, 16(3), 371–391. 
Thorne, S.L. (2003). Artifacts and Cultures-of-use in Intercultural Communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38–67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/pdf/thorne.pdf 
Thorne, S. L., & Black, R. W. (2007). Language and literacy development in computer-mediated contexts 
and communities. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 27, 133–160. 
Turgut, Y. (2009). EFL learners’ experience of online writing by PBWiki. In G. Siemens & C. Fulford 
(Eds.), ED-MEDIA 2009–World conference on educational multimedia, hypermedia, & 
telecommunications (pp. 3838–3847). Waynesville, NC: AACE. 
van Lier, L. (2000). From input to affordance: Social-interactive learning from an ecological perspective. 
In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 245–259). Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press. 
Voinea, L., Telea, A., & Van Wijk, J. J. (2005). CVSscan: Visualization of code evolution. In T. Naps & 
W. De Pauw (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2005 ACM symposium on software visualization (pp. 47–56). 
New York, NY: ACM. 
Viégas, F. B., Wattenberg, M., & Dave, K. (2004). Studying cooperation and conflict between authors 
with history flow visualizations. In E. Dykstra-Erickson & M. Tscheligi (Eds.), Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 575–582). New York, NY: ACM. 
Wang, D. (2016). Exploring and Supporting Today's Collaborative Writing. In J. Kaye, A. Druin, C. 
Lampe, D. Morris, & J. P. Hourcade (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2016 CHI conference extended abstracts 
on human factors in computing systems (pp. 255–259). New York, NY: ACM. 
Wang, D., Olson, J.S., Zhang, J., Nguyen, T., Olson, G.M. (2015). How students collaboratively write 
using Google Docs. Paper presented at iConference 2015, Newport Beach, CA. 
Wang, S., & Vasquez, C. (2012). Web 2.0 and second language learning: What does the research tell us? 
CALICO Journal, 29(3), 412–430. 
Soobin Yim and Mark Warschauer  Collaborative Writing and Text Mining 
 
Language Learning & Technology 165 
Wang, Y. C. (2014). Using wikis to facilitate interaction and collaboration among EFL learners: A social 
constructivist approach to language teaching. System, 42, 383–390. 
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer-mediated collaborative learning: Theory and practice. Modern 
Language Journal, 81(4), 470–481. 
Wichadee, S. (2011). Using wikis to develop summary writing abilities of students in an EFL class. 
Journal of College Teaching & Learning, 7(12), 5–10. 
Wigglesworth, G., & Storch, N. (2012). What role for collaboration in writing and writing feedback. 
Journal of Second Language Writing, 21(4), 364–374. 
Yang, L. (2014). Examining the mediational means in collaborative writing: Case studies of 
undergraduate ESL students in business courses. Journal of Second Language Writing, 23, 74–89. 
Yim, S., & Warschauer, M. (2016). Challenges or opportunities? A case study of L2 undergraduates’ 
synchronous collaborative writing. Unpublished manuscript. 
Yim, S., Wang, D., Olson, J., Vu, V., & Warschauer, M (in press). Synchronous writing in the classroom: 
Undergraduates’ collaboration practices and their impact on text quality, quantity, and style. In 
Proceedings of the 20th ACM conference on computer-supported cooperative work and social computing. 
Zheng, B., Lawrence, J. F., Warschauer, M., & Lin, C.-H. (2015). Middle school students’ writing and 
feedback in a cloud-based classroom environment. Technology, Knowledge, and Learning, 20, 201–229. 
Zhou, W., Simpson, E., & Domizi, D. P. (2012). Google Docs in an out-of-class collaborative writing 
activity. International Journal of Teaching and Learning in Higher Education, 24(3), 359–375. 
