Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
June 2017, Volume 21, Issue 1 
pp. 22–26 
BOOK REVIEW  
 
 
Copyright © 2017 Kristen Michelson 
 
 
Review of Second-language discourse in the digital 
world: Linguistic and social practices in and beyond 
the networked classroom 
Kristen Michelson, The University of Oklahoma 
 
Second-language discourse in the digital world: Linguistic 
and social practices in and beyond the networked classroom 
Vandergriff, I. 
2016 
ISBN: 978-9027213358 
US $ 54.00 
284 pp. 
John Benjamins 
Amsterdam, Netherlands 
 
Review 
Second-language discourse in the digital world presents a comprehensive account of what multilingual 
users and L2 learners do with language and other semiotic resources in computer mediated discourse 
(CMD) through detailed analysis of data from a wide range of languages and virtual spaces including 
language learning websites, social networking sites, and networked classrooms. Following an introductory 
chapter outlining the scope of CMD, the book contains four distinct sections that, together, define web 2.0 
and CMD (Section I), illuminate digital practices (Section II), describe linguistic and semiotic resources 
and their role in identity formation and relationship maintenance (Section III), and discuss social practices 
in digital spaces (Section IV) through a view of language and discourse that accounts for broad social 
contexts. 
In Chapter 1, Computer-mediated discourse, Vandergriff positions her agenda through terminological 
definitions, and introduces features of CMD, a concept distinct from computer-mediated communication 
(CMC). The former highlights the discourse produced in digital spaces, while the latter focuses on processes 
of communication. The chapter features an overview of contemporary social practices unique to the 
Internet, and discusses theoretical issues related to tools and genres. Tools have affordances and constraints, 
which result in adaptive practices by users in service of communicative needs that depend on relationships, 
purposes, and contexts. The intentional use of the terms multilingual and bilingual is explained—the former 
focus on sociolinguistic and contextual factors, while L2 speaker emphasizes an individual’s ability to 
acquire and use additional languages. 
Section I builds on this conceptual overview with two additional chapters: The social web and the social 
turn (Chapter 2) and Analyzing computer-mediated discourse (Chapter 3). In Chapter 2, Vandergriff situates 
her work within socio-constructivist and situated learning paradigms interested in holistic contexts of 
discourse. She describes the web as a participatory social space that facilitates broad authorship of digital, 
multimodal texts connecting users with one another, and highlights the alignment between web 2.0 practices 
Kristen Michelson 23 
 
and the social turn in SLA—where learning occurs through collaboration, cognition is distributed, and 
knowledge is co-constructed in interactions. After discussion of traditional and contemporary uses of 
technology in language teaching, Vandergriff argues that CMD offers greater autonomy over conversations 
and greater agency in textual productions as learners control, publish, and share knowledge compared to 
typical teacher-controlled, classroom-based discourse sequences. 
Chapter 3 synthesizes three decades of CMC research from structural CALL (human–computer 
interactions) to communicative CALL (human—human interactions within digitally mediated spaces), 
including research on negotiation of meaning within text-chat environments, and telecollaboration. 
Vandergriff describes her agenda in adopting Herring’s (2007) model of computer-mediated discourse 
analysis which accounts for medium (technological) and situation (social) factors. Digital spaces afford a 
range of new multilingual and semiotic practices, including the selective use of resources like graphics, 
images, like buttons, and hashtags to perform identities. She notes that multilingual practices (e.g., 
heteroglossia, codeswitching, and translanguaging) in CMD have made code switching more acceptable in 
L2 use in contrast with traditionally monolingual FL classrooms. 
Section II, Digital practices and language learning, contains three chapters that demonstrate L2 use in 
particular digital discourse communities, including dedicated language learning websites and open web 2.0 
spaces such as blogs, wikis, and fanfiction sites. Chapter 4, Networked communities, takes up various 
conceptions of community, including Wenger’s (1998) communities of practice (CoP) and Gee’s (2005) 
affinity spaces, and describes how users orient to online communities through representational practices. In 
the CoP framework, membership is negotiated as learners move from periphery to full membership through 
processes of socialization as they develop shared repertoires and align with group norms. By contrast, 
affinity spaces are fluid, assumed power differentials between novices and experts are absent, and linguistic 
diversity is encouraged. All communities involve shared interest (e.g., the L2 itself in language learning 
websites or photography on Flickr) whereby membership is legitimated as users successfully navigate 
community norms. Because of global flows of data and information, virtual communities are characterized 
by multilingualism and multimodality, which can expand semiotic resources and compensate for 
shortcomings in linguistic resources. Social media sites like Reddit, Facebook, Livemocha, and Deutsch 
lernen are discussed, with their respective norms of interaction and ways in which collective community 
identities are established. Finally, Herring’s (2004) notion of online communities is presented as an apt 
framework for analyzing social interactions and groups in CMD. 
Chapter 5, Digital genres, combines a conceptual overview of genre with descriptions of gaming, online 
news reviews, YouTube videos, and language learning websites. Digital genres have communicative 
purpose, moves, and rhetorical strategies (Swales, 1990) and are dynamic texts that can be linked and 
unlinked with other texts, resulting in complex intertextual practices. Particular genres and their affordances 
include wikis (collaborative writing), blogs (connective writing through links to other web content and with 
others through comments), fanfiction (creative and playful writing), social network sites (self-presentation 
and community participation), mobile-assisted language learning (mobility), chat (argumentation, dissent, 
criticism, etc.), and virtual worlds (multimodal and embodied interaction). Together, these tools promote 
agency, identity development, and multiliteracies through creative use of non-linguistic semiotic resources. 
Chapter 6, Language learner agency, demonstrates how digital practices and genres encourage more choice 
and control over discursive spaces than do traditional L2 classrooms. It outlines theoretical work on agency 
and identity: for example, Norton’s (2000) concept of investment; van Lier’s (2008) notions of initiative, 
control, autonomy, and motivation; and the notion of language learning as self-translation (Pavlenko & 
Lantolf, 2000). It distinguishes between expressing agency (e.g., comparing the actual L2 learning self with 
an idealized L2 self) and exercising agency (e.g., choosing particular tools, seeking out partners, modifying 
learning activities). Agency can be exercised by using humor, using the L1 to build rapport, adopting a 
teacher stance in informal learning spaces, and using the community for metalinguistic questions. 
Vandergriff aptly notes, however, that some digital tools limit agency in their positioning of users through 
text, layout, and visuals. 
24 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Section III, Linguistic and other semiotic resources of networked L2 use, addresses semiotic choices 
involved in development of messages (content) and meta-messages (how content is expressed). It also 
focuses on the role of semiotic choices in indexing speaker identity, developing social presence, and 
maintaining relationships. Chapter 7, Indexing the L2 self, illustrates how L2 voice is developed in CMD. 
Multiple aspects of identities can be indexed overtly through labels, by expressing an opinion, or through 
forms of discourse associated with particular groups, content clues, or images. Mitigating face threats are 
important to indexing the L2 self and can occur through linguistic practices such as apologizing for errors 
or overtly promoting one’s expertise. Data presented include a Facebook user’s presentation of three 
adjacent selfies to represent her Japanese, Korean, and English selves; a female Mandarin L1, English L2 
learner’s exclamation, I’m a man, to indicate her choice of a stereotypically male-dominated major; and L2 
German learners in the Flickr group, “We speak German,” who demonstrate affinities with Germany 
through their photo content. 
Chapter 8, Positioning the L2 self, highlights genre and community norms that develop around particular 
tools, and the consequences for relationships of performing unconventional practices. Communities 
develop out of accumulations of stances, which can also include shifting the specific object of a stance to a 
more general topic to avoid a face threat (e.g., from discussing the Iraq War to speaking about war in 
general). Other signs and symbols used in relationship building include emoticons or “lexical surrogates” 
(e.g., *blushing*, p. 134) to display affect, stretching words (e.g., Hellooooo!, p. 135) to imply intonation, 
or using multiple punctuation marks or ellipses to emphasize disagreement. Signs are recruited for their 
efficiency, and not all signs carry universally unique meanings, since emoticons vary across cultures. 
Chapter 9, Deploying multilingual resources, demonstrates a range of multilingual practices, including side-
by-side translations of same content (e.g., in a dual language travel blog), different content for different 
audiences, or intra-sentential code-switching where isolated lexical items are inserted into the matrix 
language that establishes morphosyntactic structure. Multilingual choices (e.g., multilingual hashtags or 
code-switching) may be determined by audience factors (e.g., choices made for symbolic effect or for 
indexing in-group identity) or by medium factors, (e.g., when multilingual Chinese and English users 
choose English for its compatibility with ASCII keyboards). While L2 classrooms typically discourage use 
of code-switching, CMD contexts afford and enhance this practice, which is a more intentional process than 
in face-to-face (FTF) communication. In some online language learning sites like Reddit, code-switching 
may involve reverting to the L1 to compensate for lower L2 proficiency. 
The final section, Social practices of networked L2 use, discusses social practices of learners interacting in 
digital spaces. Chapter 10, Negotiating for a supportive space, demonstrates how users orient to language 
and to each other. Some sites prescribe netiquette rules such as by banning all caps and multiple punctuation 
marks (Deutsche Welle) or by specifying the code (e.g., Deutsch für Dich insisting that users write in 
German). On other sites (Deutsch lernen), users themselves might prescribe topic norms. Typical 
negotiation practices include seeking corrections or making self-deprecating remarks about one’s linguistic 
proficiency. Contrary to Reddit or other CMD sites, telecollaborations and online language learning 
communities (e.g., Livemocha) are more tolerant of user errors than non-learning-oriented web spaces, 
where learners might be prompted by NS participants to switch to their L1 for greater mutual understanding. 
Thus, even in online spaces, learners do not always control the discourse space. 
Chapter 11, Grounding for intersubjectivity, explores how medium and situation factors can affect 
grounding, or establishing “positive or negative evidence of understanding of each utterance produced” (p. 
180). While the number of grounding strategies used in CMD does not differ from FTF communication, 
medium factors can affect particular strategies. For example, multiparty chat participants may employ more 
address terms than they would in FTF communication, where interlocutors are clearer. Grounding may be 
less efficient in multiparty chats where turns overlap, but facilitated in asynchronous discussion posts where 
threads clearly mark response pairs. Intersubjectivity can be established through stancetaking, but 
compromised through linguistic repair. Shared understanding also entails knowing and participating in 
conventions of joint action in CMD spaces, such as stancetaking in a language learning context. 
Kristen Michelson 25 
 
Chapter 12, Playing, joking, and amusing yourself and others, presents forms of language play involved in 
performing the self, such as pragmatic play, re-mix, fanfiction, and hashtagging. Play can destabilize norms, 
foster language development through creative constructions, index social identity, facilitate rapport 
building, and define shared group identities. Play can involve the adoption of different accents, sociolects, 
or multilingual codes, the creative use of emoticons, the transformation of familiar online acronyms, or the 
display of emotion through multiple punctuation marks. Humor as play can be challenging, since 
understanding humor often relies on shared cultural meanings, and misunderstandings can be face-
threatening. 
Chapter 13, Talking about language learning, discusses three different ways learners manage the learning 
process: structuring learning, managing emotions, and attending to interactional strategies. L2 learners may 
rely on a community through reflective language learning blogs, by asking the community for advice in the 
process of learning, or by sharing resources with it. CMD spaces enable learners to form solidarity around 
difficult aspects of the L2, to ask questions about the L2, and to share affective reactions to particular words. 
Learners typically solicit each other’s correction preferences and express feelings of imposing on L1 
speakers. 
The final brief chapter, L2 CMD and language learning, summarizes L2 users’ primary activities in CMD 
spaces: talking about learning (e.g., emotions, processes, and strategies), using the L2, and talking about 
the L2 (forms and meanings). CMD spaces expand discourse worlds for L2 learners, foster agency, expand 
semiotic potentials through multilingual practice and multimodal resources, and afford connections and 
solidarity with other learners and speakers through metadiscourse about language. Although CMD opens 
up possibilities for learners to engage in authentic discourse practices of L2 communities, many learners 
use these spaces to talk about language instead. Native speakers tend to adopt the role of expert teacher, 
correcting language forms. Such practices perpetuate folk beliefs about language learning that accurate use 
of forms must be solidified prior to successful L2 communication. 
By documenting and analyzing the way identity and relationships are constructed through intentional 
recruitment of signs and symbols that align with cultures-of-use of particular digital genres, Vandergriff 
efficiently supports her overarching arguments: (a) that online spaces can foster development of an agentive 
and autonomous L2 self in a way that traditional classrooms constrain, (b) that L2 and multilingual users 
have access to new semiotic resources in CMD spaces, and (c) that digital worlds afford opportunities for 
L2 users to connect with authentic discourse communities. The richness of Vandergriff’s work lies in the 
ensemble of themes and perspectives on CMD, although chapters can also be appreciated individually. 
Readers interested in how web 2.0 practices both mirror and differ from FTF communication will find in 
this book a rich range of data drawn from a wide variety of languages and online discourse contexts. 
Practitioners interested in networking learners in CMD spaces will appreciate the accounts of L2 learner 
practices to inform expectations about learners’ interactions within CMD. Overall, themes presented 
throughout the book wholly capture predominant areas of interest within applied linguistic perspectives on 
foreign language learning and are skillfully interwoven with clearly articulated, compelling analyses of 
CMD data. Students, teachers, and researchers of language use and learning in digital contexts will find in 
this book a rich collection of resources on which to draw. 
References 
Gee, J. P. (2005). Semiotic social spaces and affinity spaces. In D. Barton & K. Tusting (Eds.), Beyond 
communities of practice: Language power and social context (pp. 214–232). Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Herring, S. C. (2004). Computer-mediated discourse analysis: An approach to researching online 
behavior. In S. A. Barab, R. Kling, & J. H. Gray (Eds.), Designing for virtual communities in the 
service of learning (pp. 338–376). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
26 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Herring, S. C. (2007). A faceted classification scheme for computer-mediated discourse. 
Language@Internet, 4, Article 1. 
Norton, B. (2000). Identity and language learning: Genre, ethnicity, and educational change. Harlow, 
UK: Pearson Education. 
Pavlenko. A, & Lantolf, J. P. (2000). Second language learning as participation and the (re)construction 
of selves. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 155–177). 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
van Lier, L. (2008). Agency in the classroom. In J. P. Lantolf & M. E. Poehner (Eds.), Sociocultural 
theory and the teaching of second languages (pp. 163–186). London, UK: Equinox. 
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning and identity. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
About the Author 
Kristen Michelson is Assistant Professor (French, Applied Linguistics) and incoming French basic 
language program director at Texas Tech University. Her research focuses on learner-centered 
multiliteracies-oriented pedagogies in teaching and learning foreign languages, including global simulation 
and digital social reading, the professional development of novice teachers, and the role of discourse in 
shaping learner beliefs. 
E-mail: kristen.e.michelson@gmail.com 
