Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
June 2017, Volume 21, Issue 2 
pp. 1–2 
TRIBUTE  
 
 
Copyright © 2017 LLT Staff 
 
 
A tribute to Richard (Dick) Schmidt 
With aloha and appreciation 
LLT Staff  
 
It is with great sadness that we announce that Dr. Richard (Dick) Schmidt 
passed away on Wednesday, March 15, 2017. In addition to being an 
internationally-renowned applied linguist, Dick was a central figure in the 
founding and success of Language Learning & Technology. He worked 
collaboratively to make LLT what it is today. 
Dick’s career spanned three fields: international service, linguistics, and 
second language acquisition. After receiving his BA in Social Relations at 
Harvard University in 1963, he worked as a US Foreign Service officer and 
director of the J. F. Kennedy Cultural Center & Library in Beirut from 1965 
to 1969. He then returned to Brown University where he received MA (1971) and PhD (1974) degrees in 
linguistics, focusing on the sociolinguistics of Arabic. In 1976, he took a faculty position in the Department 
of English as a Second Language (since renamed Second Language Studies) at the University of Hawai‘i 
at Mānoa, where he remained until 2011. 
Dick made seminal contributions to scholarship on the cognitive and affective factors in adult second and 
foreign language learning. He was especially well known for his contribution of the noticing hypothesis 
(1990), which stated that learners’ noticing of features in their linguistic input is crucial to their acquiring 
them. His 1990 article on the topic in Applied Linguistics, “The Role of Consciousness in Second Language 
Learning,” has been cited nearly 5000 times. He later turned his attention to the topic of motivation in 
second language learning, co-editing an important volume on the topic as well as an influential article in 
Language Learning. He had voluminous knowledge of the field of applied linguistics as reflected in his 
most recent book, the widely-read Longman dictionary of language teaching and applied linguistics (2010). 
Dick played a critical role in the growth and development of the field of applied linguistics. He served as 
chair of the University of Hawai‘i ESL Department from 1985 to 1990, years in which it gained national 
prominence and helped set an example of rigorous research in second language learning. During his 
chairship, the Department started its PhD program in Second Language Acquisition, which soon rose to 
prominence as the top program of its kind in the world. He served as Director of the UH National Foreign 
Language Resource Center (NFLRC) from 1995 to 2011, a period of time when the NFLRC also played a 
leading national role, especially on topics related to less commonly taught languages and technology-
mediated learning. Under his leadership, the NFLRC hosted national symposia on the Internet and language 
learning in 1995 and 1996, critical early events in this new area of teaching and inquiry. He was chair of 
the Language Resource Center Council of Directors for two years, President of the American Association 
for Applied Linguistics (AAAL) from 2003 to 2004, and was the 2009 recipient of the AAAL Distinguished 
Service and Scholarship Award. In 2013, the NFLRC published a festschrift in his honor: Noticing and 
second language acquisition: Studies in honor of Richard Schmidt, where an international array of 
researchers spoke of the impact of his noticing hypothesis on their research over the years and into the 
future. 
True to his early days in the Foreign Service, Dick also remained an internationalist and global scholar 
throughout his life. He spent much of his career engaged in the training of second- and foreign-language 
teachers, including teacher-training projects in Japan, Thailand, Spain, Egypt, and Brazil—the latter in a 
year as a Fulbright scholar in Rio de Janeiro in 1983. 
2 Language Learning & Technology 
 
In 1996, Dick and his colleague, Susan Gass of Michigan State University, as part of their renewal grants 
for their Language Resource Centers—the NFLRC at UH and the Center for Language Education and 
Research (CLEAR) at MSU—included a proposal for a new journal, Language Learning & Technology. 
The grants were awarded, and the NFLRC and CLEAR have supported LLT ever since. Both Dick and 
Susan provided invaluable guidance to the journal as it grew to become one of the leading journals in the 
world in linguistics, education, and computer-assisted learning, and a model for high-quality peer reviewed 
open access publishing. On the occasion of the 20th anniversary of LLT, Dick and Susan were interviewed, 
and the videos of their interviews can be found here. All of the editors of the journal, past and present, can 
attest to Dick’s unwavering support for the journal and its staff, and for the inspiration to retain its open 
access status, despite interest from different commercial publishers. Dick, Susan, and founding editor Mark 
Warschauer proved prescient in demonstrating how wide reaching an open access journal can be. 
Those of us who had the good fortune of having worked with Dick will always remember him fondly as a 
mentor, a colleague, and a warm and caring human being. He devoted great attention to his teaching and 
mentorship, bringing both expertise and steady guidance. His hard work, visionary thinking, open-
mindedness, and powerful sense of humanity made him an invaluable leader in all the organizations he 
served. The annual get-togethers he hosted in his home in Hawai‘i Kai helped build camaraderie and 
friendship among the Second Language Studies students and faculty, the vast majority of whom were from 
other places. 
Dick will be sorely missed. We join with thousands around the world in remembering his kindness and 
indelible contributions. 
References 
Bergsleithner, J. M., Frota, S. N., & Yoshioka, J. K. (Eds.). (2013). Noticing and second language 
acquisition: Studies in honor of Richard Schmidt. Honolulu, HI: National Foreign Language Resource 
Center. 
Richards, J. C., & Schmidt, R. W. (2013). Longman dictionary of language teaching and applied 
linguistics. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Schmidt, R. W. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied linguistics, 11(2), 
129–158. 
