Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
June 2017, Volume 21, Issue 2 
p. 227 
CALL FOR PAPERS  
 
 
Copyright © 2017 
 
 
Call for papers for the 
Language Teaching & Technology Forum 
About This Forum 
Editor: Greg Kessler 
The proliferation of new technologies—tools, platforms, applications, and social media sites—has inspired 
language educators to leverage these new technologies in creative ways across the wide range of teaching 
contexts that characterize the field of language education. Sharing effective pedagogical practices has long 
been a hallmark of collegiality among educators, and the growth in new technologies has amplified the 
ability for language teachers to exchange their innovative pedagogical approaches. The Language Teaching 
& Technology Forum provides a space for language researchers and educators to reflect on their current 
pedagogical practices in greater depth than is typically possible in a standard research article. This forum 
invites manuscripts that provide in-depth engagement with the intersection of technology and language 
teaching pedagogy. 
We encourage interested authors to consider the following guidelines for formatting their manuscripts: 
1. Establish the empirical or conceptual framework for using the targeted technologies. 
2. Describe the instructional context, pedagogical objectives, and technological tools. 
3. Provide details of how the technology was integrated: which tools or approaches were used, how 
procedures were implemented, and how assessment or feedback was utilized. 
4. Comment on the challenges encountered and on the suggestions for additional integration. 
Criteria for Submission 
• Make a clear contribution to language and culture teaching and learning goals 
• Create relevant connections to a clearly defined empirical or conceptual framework 
• Provide a thorough description of the technologies used, and when possible, include suggestions 
for similar technologies 
• Offer clear and elaborated implications for second and/or foreign language teaching in formal, 
informal, or hybrid teaching contexts 
Guidelines for Authors 
Articles should be no longer than 5,000 words (including references but not appendices). For specific 
guidelines, please refer to the LLT submission guidelines. 
For Further Information 
Please contact the column editor at kessler@ohio.edu 
