Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/hung.pdf 
February 2017, Volume 21, Number 1 
pp. 16–27 
 
Copyright © 2017, ISSN 1094-3501 16 
LANGUAGE TEACHING AND TECHNOLOGY FORUM 
THE INTEGRATION OF A STUDENT RESPONSE SYSTEM IN FLIPPED 
CLASSROOMS 
Hsiu-Ting Hung, National Kaohsiung First University of Science and Technology 
The present study incorporates a student response system (SRS) as a means to engage 
students in a flipped classroom and promote active learning. While the effectiveness of such 
systems with regard to student learning has been well documented in disciplines that are 
dominated by lecture-based instruction, no studies have compared the effectiveness of SRS-
integrated flipped classrooms in English language teaching contexts, as supported by the 
two different techniques of just-in-time teaching (JiTT) and peer instruction (PI). This study 
thus aims to fill this gap in the literature by examining the effects of SRS-integrated flipped 
classrooms on English language learners’ speaking skills, willingness to communicate, and 
satisfaction with the flipped learning experiences. Using a quasi-experimental design, the 
overall results indicate that SRS-integrated flipped classrooms are capable of providing 
interactive learning opportunities that enhance learners’ willingness to communicate, aiding 
their development of speaking skills and increasing their satisfaction with such learning 
experiences. The findings further suggest that the proposed approach has an additional 
advantage for motivating learners with low willingness to communicate to interact with the 
teacher and their peers in class activities, especially when facilitated by the PI technique. 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English 
Keywords: Blended Learning and Teaching, Collaborative Learning, Speaking 
APA Citation: Hung, H.-T. (2017). The integration of a student response system in flipped 
classrooms. Language Learning & Technology, 21(1), 16–27. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/hung.pdf 
Received: May 14, 2016; Accepted: August 8, 2016; Published: February 1, 2017 
Copyright: © Hsiu-Ting Hung 
INTRODUCTION 
A recent review shows that the concept of flipped classrooms, which emerged from K–12 education, has 
spread to higher education, with most studies conducted in the United States (O’Flaherty & Phillips, 2015). 
The Horizon Report for Higher Education in 2015 confirms this trend and details the continually growing 
application of flipped classrooms as “part of a larger pedagogical movement that overlaps with blended 
learning” (Johnson, Adams Becker, Estrada, & Freeman, 2015, p. 38). Consistent with these educational 
efforts, the present study represents an early attempt to examine university students’ flipped learning 
experiences in the context of English language teaching. 
Understanding the Flipped Classroom Approach 
By its very nature, the flipped classroom approach redefines the instructional procedure by (1) having 
students self-study lecture or learning materials out of class in order to preview and acquire new knowledge 
and then (2) guiding students to complete homework or follow-up assignments in class in order to help 
them review and put the newly learned knowledge into practice (Bergmann & Sams, 2012). Briefly, this 
approach highlights the spirit of student-centered pedagogies, encouraging students to take on a more active 
learning role in the flipped classroom, as compared to the traditional lecture-based approach. 
Such reversed instruction has been implemented in various disciplines, with research showing promising 
Hsiu-Ting Hung The Integration of a Student Response System in Flipped Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 17 
results (O’Flaherty & Phillips, 2015). In the field of language education, however, empirical evidence on 
the effectiveness of flipped classrooms is relatively scarce, largely due to the fact that most contemporary 
language courses are not taught using teacher-centered approaches (Kostka & Brinks Lockwood, 2015). 
Many proponents have claimed numerous advantages for the flipped classroom approach when applied in 
language teaching contexts, and one major benefit of flipping a language classroom is that teachers can 
reduce class time spent on input-oriented tasks (e.g., explaining vocabulary to enhance students’ video 
comprehension) and increase that spent on output-oriented tasks (e.g., having students work in small groups 
for video-based discussion). 
The body of literature on flipped language classrooms, while still limited, has started to grow in recent 
years. Within these pioneering studies, various technological tools are employed to facilitate the teaching of 
different aspects of language. For example, Huang and Hong (2016) conducted a mixed-methods study to 
investigate high school students’ development of reading ability, in which digital videos and web-based 
technologies were employed for the design of the flipped English classroom. It was found that the students 
made significant improvements in English reading comprehension during the intervention. Hung (2015) 
adopted the flipped classroom approach to construct a technology-enhanced language learning environment, 
featuring online lessons in the format of WebQuests, as a means to facilitate university students’ learning in 
an English communication course. The results suggested that, when structured and done well, flipped 
language classrooms could enhance students’ academic performance, participation levels, and learning 
attitudes in comparison to those seen in their counterparts in a control group. Arguably, technology plays an 
integral role in flipped language classrooms, with its potential to increase opportunities for learners to use 
the second language (L2) during the language learning process, both in and out of class. It is thus 
reasonable to envision that further advances in technology can contribute to the proliferation of the flipped 
classroom approach, both in language courses and in content courses more generally. 
Integrating Student Response Systems in Classrooms 
Student response systems (SRSs), also known as clickers, are an integrated technology solution that has 
been used to create interactive classrooms in higher education over the past decades. In its simplest form, a 
SRS is a polling system through which a teacher poses questions and then collects students’ responses in 
the classroom, with the results instantly shown to the whole class. In terms of availability, SRSs have 
evolved into web-based applications that allow students to use any computing devices with Internet 
connection capabilities to do the clicking required to take part in the activities. Alongside the ease of use 
and widespread availability of this evolving technology, SRS-integrated or clicker-integrated instruction is 
now widely acclaimed, with several literature reviews noting its benefits and positive effects on student 
learning, such as providing immediate feedback, increasing participation in class, and improving retention 
of the focal material (e.g., Chien, Chang, & Chang, 2016; Hunsu, Adesope, & Bayly, 2016). 
The effectiveness of SRSs in fostering the active learning of students has been well documented in 
disciplines that are dominated by lecture-based instruction, such as physics. In comparison, SRSs are less 
commonly implemented in language classrooms, where class sizes are relatively small and classroom 
interactions are generally enacted by approaches to communicative language teaching (Cardoso, 2011). 
Still, there is some evidence showing the positive effects on language education that can arise with the use 
of SRSs. For example, Agbatogun (2014) carried out a quasi-experimental study to examine the effects of a 
SRS on L2 learners’ communicative competence development under three different conditions: 
communicative language teaching in combination with clicker use (the clicker group), communicative 
language teaching (the communicative group), and language teaching via the lecture method (the control 
group). The results revealed that the clicker group outperformed their counterparts in listening and speaking 
tests, suggesting the superior effects of SRS-integrated instruction compared to conventional approaches to 
English language teaching. Cardoso (2011) investigated the perceived effects of a SRS used in a 
communicative learning environment, based on the views of 30 English language learners in Brazil. 
Drawing on the survey and interview results, enhanced learning motivation and increased participation in 
Hsiu-Ting Hung The Integration of a Student Response System in Flipped Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 18 
class were found to be the major strengths of using SRSs in the language classroom. 
Pedagogically, a typical use of SRSs is supported by a just-in-time teaching (JiTT) technique, through 
which the teacher assesses the students’ prior knowledge based on the aggregated student responses, and 
then adjusts the instruction or feedback to meet the students’ needs (Novak, Patterson, Gavrin, & Christian, 
1999). Although research has shown enhanced classroom interaction resulting from the use of SRSs and the 
JiTT technique, the interactivity that occurs under such conditions still reflects the three-part structure of 
conventional classroom discourse, characterized as initiation-response-evaluation (IRE) or initiation-
response-feedback (IRF). That is, the teacher asks questions, elicits the learners’ responses, and then 
evaluates the answers or provides follow-up feedback if needed (Cazden, 2001). From a constructivist view 
of learning, the IRE and IRF structure can be criticized for making the classroom teacher-centered, leaving 
few opportunities for authentic interaction and knowledge construction. Mazur (1997) thus advocated for a 
peer instruction (PI) technique to create student-centered active learning environments with the use of SRSs 
in classrooms, in which students are given opportunities to discuss things with their classmates and provide 
peer feedback as they respond to the questions that are asked. This approach is widely used in science 
disciplines, and has been proven to make classrooms more interactive, thereby improving student learning 
(Crouch & Mazur, 2001). In the case of flipped language classrooms, the use of SRSs with the PI technique 
is arguably even more conducive to learning, given that it generates more opportunities for students to 
produce L2 output and interact with others in the structured questioning process. Nevertheless, this claim 
warrants further investigation, because few studies have integrated SRSs in flipped classrooms, and even 
fewer in flipped language classrooms. Moreover, no studies have compared the effectiveness of SRS-
integrated flipped classrooms, as supported by the two different techniques of JiTT and PI. Empirical 
evidence is needed to determine the optimal uses of SRSs for creating an effective flipped learning 
environment, and the present study aims to fill this gap in the literature. 
Purpose of the Study 
The literature reviewed above indicates that flipping the language classroom and clicking to participate in 
class are both potential avenues to design interactive learning environments. Based on the underlying 
assumption that enhancing classroom interaction can benefit students’ language learning and development, 
the present study incorporated a SRS (supported by either the JiTT or PI technique) as a means to engage 
students in the flipped classroom and promote active learning. Furthermore, an investigation was 
undertaken to examine the effectiveness of SRS-integrated flipped classrooms, addressing the following 
questions: (1) How did the flipped classroom intervention influence the students’ development of speaking 
skills? (2) How did the students’ willingness to communicate (WTC) vary due to the flipped classroom 
intervention? (3) How did the flipped classroom intervention affect the students’ satisfaction? 
METHODOLOGY 
Participants 
This study adopted a quasi-experimental research design involving two experimental groups, and each 
cohort consisted of 20 voluntary participants, drawn from two intact classes of the same English language 
course. All the participants had homogeneous backgrounds in terms of their L1 and L2; that is, they were 
Taiwanese university students learning English as a foreign language (EFL) in Taiwan, with 10 to 14 years 
of L2 study. No significant differences were found between the two groups’ English proficiency levels (per 
self-reported scores on the Test of English as International Communication, ranging from 580 to 855). 
Although none of the participants had any flipped learning experiences, many of them had blended learning 
experiences prior to the study and they regarded themselves as experienced computer users. 
Of particular interest to this study is whether a flipped classroom creates a less intimidating and more 
engaging environment for learners with low WTC. Consequently, the 10 students (five from each 
experimental group) who received the lowest scores in a baseline survey on WTC in English in classroom 
Hsiu-Ting Hung The Integration of a Student Response System in Flipped Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 19 
settings were selected to be the focal participants in this study. These represented those individuals who 
were generally considered as shy learners or less-motivated students in the traditional classroom. It was 
anticipated that a close examination of such learners’ communication behaviors in class would provide vital 
insights for language educators. 
Target Technology 
The SRS incorporated in this research is Kahoot!, a cloud-based application that can be freely accessed and 
operated by any device with a web browser. As a SRS, Kahoot! can be used to create interactive classroom 
activities through question-and-answer exchanges, with real-time histogram results of student responses. 
While this tool affords various types of response activities, the present study focuses on the use of Kahoot! 
quizzes for enhancing classroom interactions. 
Kahoot! is defined as a game-based SRS by its developer team (Wang, 2015). For teachers, the creation of 
Kahoot! quizzes is user-friendly and takes only three major steps: (1) entering a set of multiple-choice 
questions with two to four answer options; (2) setting a time limit for answering each question, in the range 
of 5 to 120 seconds; and (3) saving and launching the quiz with a system-generated personal identification 
number (PIN) of the game so that students can join the question-and-answer activity. To start playing the 
game, the students need to visit the front page of Kahoot! using their devices, such as laptops or 
smartphones, and then enter the game PIN. In other words, users do not need to create a Kahoot! account 
when joining the game as a player; all they need is the related game PIN to take part in a game. The game 
then proceeds at a centralized pace, typically led by the teacher, with one question at a time displayed on a 
large screen to elicit student responses. After the completion of each question, instant tallies of the 
submitted responses in combination with the correct answer are shown on the screen, allowing the students 
to monitor their own comprehension and enabling the teacher to provide immediate feedback when needed. 
Meanwhile, the students earn points for the game by answering the questions correctly and speedily, with 
leaderboards of the top five scorers shown between questions and at the end of the whole game. 
The Flipped Classroom Intervention 
To maintain comparable experimental conditions, the same instructor taught the two groups, adopting 
identical materials, lessons plans, and interactive technology. For the purpose of this study, how the 
interactive technology (as exemplified by Kahoot!) was employed to support the students’ flipped learning 
experiences was used as the independent variable. This study thus compared the two groups’ learning 
outcomes due to the different flipped classroom conditions, in terms of the students’ development of 
speaking skills (research question 1), WTC and communication behavior (research question 2), and learner 
satisfaction (research question 3). These were applied as the dependent variables. 
The target technology, Kahoot!, was implemented in both groups, but with different techniques to create 
varying dynamics of classroom interactions. In one condition (labeled as the JiTT group), the teacher 
adopted the JiTT technique to conduct the Kahoot!-mediated question-and-answer activity, which was 
organized into the following steps: (1) the teacher posed a question; (2) the students responded to the 
question individually using Kahoot!; and (3) the teacher revealed the correct answer, commented on the 
performance of the whole class, and then proceeded to the next question. In the other condition (labeled as 
the PI group), the teacher employed the PI technique, with a slight variation on the activity procedure, as 
follows: (1) the teacher posed a question; (2) the students shared their initial responses with their peers 
before voting individually; (3) the students made their own votes using Kahoot!; (4) the teacher revealed the 
correct answer and the results of student votes; (5) the students discussed the question again and provided 
explanations for the correct answer in small groups; and (6) the teacher provided supplementary guidance 
and proceeded to the next question. 
A total of six 50-minute lessons were created for this flipped classroom intervention, using a course 
management system for content delivery. Six educational videos from TED-Ed were selected as the primary 
Hsiu-Ting Hung The Integration of a Student Response System in Flipped Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 20 
content materials for the lessons, and each video was approximately five minutes in length. A sample video 
included in this curriculum is entitled Why are people left-handed? The source for selection of flipped 
learning videos, TED-Ed, was chosen because it offers authentic and animated videos along with adaptable 
learning guides that are specifically tailored for flipped classrooms. As shown in Figure 1, each lesson was 
conducted in a cycle of four phases that entailed a series of focused learning activities, outlined with 
estimated time allocations below. 
1. Self-paced learning activity: Varied individually 
Before attending the class, the students were asked to watch a weekly assigned video and complete 
a lesson worksheet in order to prepare for in-class participation. The worksheet (see Appendix), 
inspired by a well-established graphic organizer known as a KWL chart (Ogle, 1986), with 
discussion questions added, was designed to scaffold the students’ self-paced learning process out 
of class. 
2. Formative assessment: 20 minutes 
At the beginning of each face-to-face class meeting, the students took part in the warm-up activity 
using the SRS, and answered a set of comprehension questions on the basis of the video content. 
This served as formative assessment, allowing the students to receive formative feedback from the 
teacher and peers. 
3. Guided learning activity: 20 minutes 
The students conducted a peer review on the worksheet that they completed prior to the class, 
followed by a small group discussion that encouraged them to share their opinions in the target 
language. Meanwhile, the teacher played a facilitative role in circulating around each group, 
offering assistance when required to meet the students’ individual needs. 
4. Summative assessment: 10 minutes 
Each lesson concluded with a paper-based quiz covering paraphrased question items that were 
already addressed in the warm-up activity. The quiz served as summative assessment for the 
teacher to monitor student mastery of the content material and thus provide additional help or 
remedial instruction if needed. 
 
 
Figure 1. The major learning phases of the flipped classroom intervention 
Hsiu-Ting Hung The Integration of a Student Response System in Flipped Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 21 
From a macro perspective of instructional design, the flipped classroom intervention was carefully 
developed to enact the so-called F-L-I-P principles first put forth by Hamdan, McKnight, McKnight, and 
Arfstrom (2013) and later appropriated for language education by Hung (in press). Table 1 illustrates the 
instructional design framework of this research. It is also worth noting that the effectiveness of the 
established flipped learning environments for both groups was evaluated using a post-intervention 
satisfaction survey, with items closely corresponding to the four design principles. 
Table 1. The Instructional Design Framework 
The F-L-I-P Principles Learning Support in this Study 
The F principle: 
Flexible language learning 
environment 
Students watch online videos delivered via a learning management 
system anytime, anywhere, and at their own pace. 
The L principle: 
Language learning culture 
The teacher and students interact actively using a SRS to enhance 
L2 use and foster deeper learning. 
The I principle: 
Intentional linguistic content 
Students complete pre-class assignments associated with each 
lesson to preview and prepare for class. They also complete a 
summative assessment at the end of each lesson in class to review 
the learning content and reveal the level of mastery that has been 
obtained. 
The P principle: 
Professional language educator 
The teacher adopts varying active learning techniques (JiTT or PI) 
to support the SRS integration in the flipped classroom. 
INSTRUMENTS 
Speaking Test 
All the participants were required to take oral tests twice, once before and once after the instruction, to 
measure their development of L2 speaking abilities throughout the research. The speaking tests were 
conducted individually in English in a face-to-face setting. The same questions were used in the pre- and 
post-tests. The test questions were different from the ones covered in the flipped classroom curriculum, but 
they shared similar difficulty levels as they were pilot tested with 15 students who were at the same 
proficiency level as the participants before the intervention. For the speaking test, each test-taker was asked 
three open-ended opinion questions in five minutes. All the test-takers’ spoken responses were audio 
recorded for grading purposes. Two raters evaluated the individual students’ speaking performance on the 
basis of content and organization, fluency of speech, and accuracy of language use. The raters 
independently gave a score (with a maximum of 100) after listening to each student’s responses, and their 
raw scores were then averaged for data analysis.  
Willingness to Communicate Survey 
A WTC survey was adapted from Hung (in press) to measure L2 learners’ predisposition to interact with 
different members of the learning community in the flipped classroom. This survey includes four items on a 
5-point Likert scale (1 = very unwilling; 5 = very willing). The first two items are about the subscale of 
student–teacher interaction (I ask the teacher questions or feel comfortable initiating dialogues with the 
teacher in the target language [Item 1] and I answer questions from the teacher or feel comfortable 
responding to the teacher’s comments in the target language [Item 2]). The last two items relate to the 
subscale of student–student interaction (I ask my classmates questions or feel comfortable initiating 
dialogues with my classmates in the target language [Item 3] and I answer questions from my classmates or 
feel comfortable responding to my classmates’ comments in the target language [Item 4]). McCroskey 
(1992) first developed the WTC construct to explain L1 communicative behaviors, and it was then 
Hsiu-Ting Hung The Integration of a Student Response System in Flipped Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 22 
appropriated for use in L2 settings by MacIntyre, Dörnyei, Clément, and Noels (1998), who defined WTC 
as “a readiness to enter into discourse at a particular time with a specific person or persons, using a L2” (p. 
547). Because WTC is intertwined with L2 oral proficiency (Peng & Woodrow, 2010), the participants 
were asked to self-assess their WTC before and after this research to determine their developmental 
changes due to the flipped classroom intervention. 
Classroom Observation 
Classroom observations were conducted by the principal investigator with the assistance of two graduate 
students, who worked as a team for data collection and analysis in this study. Field notes were taken by the 
research team to gather information on the 10 target students’ behaviors regarding their WTC during the 
guided learning activities in class. In each of the flipped classroom conditions, the class was divided into 
five collaborative learning groups of four to five students. The focal participants were randomly distributed 
and assigned to one of the five different small groups for class participation. Their interactions with the 
teacher and peers were recorded for data analysis, using digital voice recorders. Six weekly sets of audio-
recorded classroom observations along with field notes (corresponding to the six weekly lessons) were 
analyzed with a coding scheme developed by the research team. For the data coding and analysis, the focal 
participants’ communication behaviors were first categorized into student–teacher interaction and student–
student interaction, and then tallied for the frequency of interaction patterns, in terms of initiation (I), 
response (R), and follow-up feedback (F). 
Satisfaction Survey 
The satisfaction survey was designed based on Hung (in press), which guided the instructional design of 
this research. The 5-item survey was administered to both groups one week after the flipped classroom 
intervention was over, and ratings were recorded on a 5-point Likert scale (1 = strongly disagree; 5 = 
strongly agree). The first four items corresponded to each of the instructional design principles in this 
research (The flipped classroom provides a flexible learning environment that caters to my learning 
preferences and language proficiency [Item 1], The learning culture in the flipped classroom engages me to 
participate in class activities and interact with others using the target language [Item 2], The learning 
mechanism in the flipped classroom is well designed and implemented to facilitate my mastery of content 
learning and language skills [Item 3], and The teacher provides the support needed to facilitate my 
language learning process and performance in the flipped classroom [Item 4]) The last item was an open-
ended question that asked the respondents to express their reasons for satisfaction and dissatisfaction (Why 
are you satisfied or dissatisfied with the flipped classroom intervention? [Item 5]). 
PROCEDURE 
This research was undertaken over a period of 10 weeks, using the following procedure. In Week 1, all the 
participants took an oral test to assess their baseline proficiency regarding English speaking skills. In 
addition, they completed a pre-survey on WTC to indicate their intention to speak in class under traditional 
classroom conditions before this intervention. In Week 2, both groups were introduced to the objectives and 
participation requirements in the flipped classroom and given a demonstration of how to use the target 
interactive technology (Kahoot!) for taking part in the question-and-answer activities. The instructional 
intervention took place during Weeks 3–8, in which both groups completed six lessons along with their 
associated pre-class worksheets and in-class assessments, under the different flipped classroom conditions. 
In Week 9, all the participants took the same speaking test and WTC survey again to determine any 
improvements they made. Lastly, this research elicited all the participants’ perceptions of learning in the 
flipped classroom using a satisfaction survey in Week 10. 
 
 
Hsiu-Ting Hung The Integration of a Student Response System in Flipped Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 23 
RESULTS 
The Effect on Speaking Skills 
The descriptive statistics and group comparison results for the participants’ speaking test performance are 
shown in Table 2. The independent samples t-test results indicated a significant difference in the post-test 
scores between the two groups (t = 2.709, p = .010), with a large effect size (Cohen’s d = .857), while both 
groups did not differ in the pre-test. This suggests that engaging EFL learners in the flipped classroom, 
integrated with a PI technique for SRS use, exerts a statistically significant effect on enhancing students’ L2 
speaking skills. 
Table 2. Results of Speaking Performance for Both Groups 
Speaking Test 
JiTT group 
(N = 20) 
PI group 
(N = 20) 
t p 
M SD M SD   
Pre-test 73.90 6.97 74.25 6.41 0.165 .870 
Post-test 81.10 6.58 86.15 5.11 2.709 .010* 
The Effect on Willingness to Communicate 
Table 3 presents the descriptive statistics and the independent samples t-test results for both groups’ WTC. 
Although the group comparison results showed no significant differences before (t = -.245, p = .809) and 
after (t = 1.300, p = .202) the flipped classroom intervention, both groups demonstrated significant 
improvements in their WTC over the period (JiTT group [t = -6.380, p < .000] and PI group [t = -7.066, p 
< .000]). This suggests that after participating in the SRS-integrated flipped classroom, the EFL learners’ 
WTC in class increased regardless of the teaching techniques used. 
Table 3. WTC Survey Responses for Both Groups 
WTC Survey 
JiTT group 
(N = 20) 
PI group 
(N = 20) 
t p 
M SD M SD   
Pre-survey 3.35 0.96 3.28 0.98 -0.245 .809 
Post-survey 4.68 0.24 4.78 0.24 1.300 .202 
With regard to the focal participants’ communication behaviors in class, the total amounts of student–
teacher and student–student interactions are summarized by group in Figure 2. The focal participants were 
found to be more likely to interact with the teacher and their peers with the guidance of the PI technique, as 
compared to that of the JiTT technique. This suggests that the proposed approach has an additional 
advantage for motivating learners with low WTC to participate in the SRS-integrated flipped classroom, 
especially when facilitated by the PI technique. 
Hsiu-Ting Hung The Integration of a Student Response System in Flipped Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 24 
 
 
Figure 2. The focal participants’ total amounts of frequency of student–teacher (ST-TR) and student–
student (ST-ST) interactions during the guided learning activities in class. 
The Effect on Learner Satisfaction 
The participants’ responses to the post-intervention survey on learner satisfaction are summarized in Table 
4. The results of the independent samples t-tests showed that both groups were highly satisfied with the 
flipped classroom intervention as a whole, and the PI group’s satisfaction with the language learning culture 
was significantly higher than that of the JiTT group (t = 2.707, p = .010), with a large effect size (Cohen’s d 
= .859). This suggests that flipping the classroom using a SRS, in combination with either JiTT or PI 
techniques, can be a satisfactory alternative to traditional instruction, particularly with regard to creating a 
learning culture where language learners are motivated to communicate in L2. 
Table 4. Satisfaction Survey Responses for Both Groups 
Survey Items 
JiTT group 
(N = 20) 
PI group 
(N = 20) 
t p 
M SD M SD   
Flexible language learning environment 4.85 0.37 4.80 0.41 -0.406 .687 
Language learning culture 4.35 0.49 4.75 0.44 2.707 .010* 
Intentional linguistic content 4.60 0.60 4.85 0.37 1.594 .119 
Professional language educator 4.50 0.51 4.55 0.51 0.309 .759 
CONCLUSION 
This research began with the recognition that simply flipping the lecture-and-homework procedure does not 
guarantee the desired learning outcomes. In light of the pedagogical potential of SRSs for engaging students 
in active learning, this research aimed to explore whether and how SRS-integrated flipped classrooms affect 
EFL learning. The positive findings of this study regarding subject matter learning and learner satisfaction 
echo the relevant literature on flipped language classrooms (e.g., Huang & Hong, 2016; Hung, 2015), 
suggesting the applicability of this promising approach in English language teaching contexts. Furthermore, 
Hsiu-Ting Hung The Integration of a Student Response System in Flipped Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
since integrating SRSs in the classroom to boost active learning is well established in former research (e.g., 
Agbatogun, 2014; Cardoso, 2011), this study contributes to the literature by extending its application to the 
flipped classroom, while also finding further evidence for the superior effects of the PI technique. Briefly, 
this study has demonstrated that SRS-integrated flipped classrooms are capable of providing interactive 
learning opportunities that enhance EFL learners’ WTC, aiding in their development of speaking skills and 
increasing their satisfaction with such learning experiences. Language educators are thus encouraged to 
adapt the proposed instructional design to suit their local contexts, as a supplement to communicative 
language teaching approaches or traditional instruction. As always, the success of a flipped classroom will 
depend not only on the technological tools that are selected, but also—and to a greater extent—on how well 
these are implemented. 
 
APPENDIX. Flipped Learning Worksheet 
Name: 
Lesson: 
Time spent completing this lesson: 
☐ < 30 min.   ☐ 30 min. ~ 60 min.   ☐ 60 min. ~ 90 min.   ☐ 90 min. ~ 120 min.   ☐ > 120 min. 
What I  
Know 
What I  
Want to know 
What I  
Learned  
 Summarize the video content in 
your own words. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 List any concepts or language use 
in the video that you do not 
understand or want to know more 
about. 
 
 Jot down any newly learned 
knowledge and vocabulary that you 
think are useful in other contexts. 
 
 
 What are your views on the following discussion questions?  Think of them and be ready to share your opinions 
with others in class.  
 
• Sample Discussion Question 1:  
Do you think a left-handed person can be trained to be right-handed, and vice versa?  
 
• Sample Discussion Question 2:   
Do you think there are more advantages than disadvantages to being left-handed in a right-
handed world?  
 
Hsiu-Ting Hung The Integration of a Student Response System in Flipped Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research was sponsored by the Ministry of Science and Technology in Taiwan under the contract 
number MOST-105-2511-S-327-002-MY2. 
 
REFERENCES 
Agbatogun, A. O. (2014). Developing learners’ second language communicative competence through active 
learning: Clickers or communicative approach? Educational Technology & Society, 17(2), 257–269. 
Bergmann, J., & Sams, A. (2012). Flip your classroom: Reach every student in every class every day. 
Eugene, OR: ISTE. 
Cardoso, W. (2011). Learning a foreign language with a learner response system: The students’ perspective. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 24(5), 393–417. 
Cazden, C. B. (2001). Classroom discourse: The language of teaching and learning (2nd ed.). Portsmouth, 
NH: Heinemann. 
Chien, Y. T., Chang, Y. H., & Chang, C. Y. (2016). Do we click in the right way? A meta-analytic review 
of clicker-integrated instruction. Educational Research Review, 17, 1–18. 
Crouch, C. H., & Mazur, E. (2001). Peer instruction: Ten years of experience and results. American Journal 
of Physics, 69(9), 970–977. 
Hamdan, N., McKnight, P., McKnight, K., & Arfstrom, K. (2013). The flipped learning model: A white 
paper based on the literature review. Retrieved from http://flippedlearning.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/07/WhitePaper_FlippedLearning.pdf 
Huang, Y. N., & Hong, Z. R. (2016). The effects of a flipped English classroom intervention on students’ 
information and communication technology and English reading comprehension. Educational Technology 
Research and Development, 64(2), 175–193. 
Hung, H. T. (in press). Design-based research: Redesign of an English language course using a flipped 
classroom approach. TESOL Quarterly. 
Hung, H. T. (2015). Flipping the classroom for English language learners to foster active learning. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 28(1), 81–96. 
Hunsu, N. J., Adesope, O., & Bayly, D. J. (2016). A meta-analysis of the effects of audience response 
systems (clicker-based technologies) on cognition and affect. Computers & Education, 94, 102–119. 
Johnson, L., Adams Becker, S., Estrada, V., & Freeman, A. (2015). NMC horizon report: 2015 higher 
education edition. Austin, TX: The New Media Consortium. 
Kostka, I., & Brinks Lockwood, R. (2015). What’s on the Internet for flipping English language 
instruction? The Electronic Journal for English as a Second Language, 19(2), 1–12. 
MacIntyre, P. D., Dörnyei, Z., Clément, R., & Noels, K. A. (1998). Conceptualizing willingness to 
communicate in a L2: A situational model of L2 confidence and affiliation. Modern Language Journal, 
82(4), 545–562. 
McCroskey, J. C. (1992). Reliability and validity of the willingness to communicate scale. Communication 
Quarterly, 40(1), 16–25. 
Mazur, E. (1997). Peer instruction: A user’s manual. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Hsiu-Ting Hung The Integration of a Student Response System in Flipped Classrooms 
 
Language Learning & Technology 27 
Novak, G, Patterson, E. T., Gavrin, A. D., & Christian, W. (1999). Just-in-time teaching: Blending active 
learning with web technology. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
O’Flaherty, J., & Phillips, C. (2015). The use of flipped classrooms in higher education: A scoping review. 
The Internet and Higher Education, 25, 85–95. 
Ogle, D. (1986). K-W-L: A teaching model that develops active reading of expository text. The Reading 
Teacher, 39(6), 564–570. 
Peng, J. E., & Woodrow, L. (2010). Willingness to communicate in English: A model in the Chinese EFL 
classroom context. Language Learning, 60(4), 834–876. 
Wang, A. I. (2015). The wear out effect of a game-based student response system. Computers & Education, 
82, 217–227. 
