Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2017, Volume 21, Issue 3 
p. 242–244 
CALL FOR PAPERS  
 
 
Copyright © 2017 
 
 
Call for papers for a special issue on 
New Developments in Telecollaborative Learning in 
Second Language Education 
About This Special Issue 
Guest Editors: Robert O’Dowd and Breffni O’Rourke 
Telecollaboration, also commonly referred to as online intercultural exchange or virtual exchange, refers to 
the use of online communication tools to bring together classes of language learners in geographically 
distant locations with the aim of developing their foreign language skills and intercultural competence 
through collaborative tasks and project work (O’Dowd & Lewis, 2016). 
Telecollaboration has been employed in foreign language education for more than 20 years (Cummins & 
Sayers, 1995; Eck, Legenhausen, & Wolff, 1995; Warschauer, 1995), and during this period, 
telecollaborative learning has played an increasingly important role in computer assisted language learning 
(CALL) practice and research. This is clear from the significant number of articles related to the subject 
which have appeared over the past decade in research journals such as Language Learning & Technology, 
ReCALL, and CALL Journal. There have been several book publications exclusively on the theme (i.e., 
Belz & Thorne, 2006; Dooly, 2008; Guth & Helm, 2010; O’Dowd, 2006 , 2007; O’Dowd & Lewis, 2016; 
Warschauer, 1995) as well as two special issues of this journal Language Learning & Technology (Vol. 7, 
Num. 2 and Vol. 15, Num. 1). 
Recent years have also witnessed a gradual growth in awareness of telecollaboration in mainstream foreign 
language education, particularly at the university level. This can be seen in the presence of chapters on 
telecollaboration in many of the recent overviews of foreign language methodology including the Routledge 
Handbook of Language and Intercultural Communication (Jackson, 2013). It is also demonstrated by 
reflections on telecollaboration in volumes related to intercultural foreign language education (i.e., Corbett, 
2010; Liddicoat & Scarino, 2013) and bilingual education (i.e., Mehisto, Frigols, & Marsh, 2008). 
However, in telecollaboration even more than in other areas of CALL, the interplay of technological and 
cultural developments make for an ever-changing landscape for teachers, researchers, and, not least, 
students. Therefore, 20 years on, it is still important for telecollaborative researchers and practitioners to 
continue to innovate in their research and practice, exploring new ways of improving the learning 
experience of virtual exchange and providing fresh research that provides critical insights into how 
telecollaboration can contribute to language, digital, and intercultural learning goals in different learning 
contexts. With this in mind, we seek proposals that present theoretically grounded and methodologically 
rigorous empirical studies in various areas which include, but are not limited to, the following: 
• Telecollaborative language and intercultural learning outcomes among younger learners 
• Telecollaboration and its role in bilingual or Content and Language Integrated Learning (CLIL) 
contexts 
• Longitudinal and large-scale telecollaborative initiatives where findings are not limited to one 
class, one semester contexts 
• Telecollaboration and its role in the development of digital literacies 
• Technological interfaces and multimodality in telecollaborative exchanges 
• Telecollaborative studies involving learners from non-western contexts and the developing world 
• Telecollaboration and its role in the development of global citizenship 
• Telecollaboration and its role in foreign language teacher education 
Call for Papers 243 
 
• Telecollaboration as a mediator of interpersonal relationships 
• Language issues in telecollaborative initiatives in non-language disciplines 
• Telecollaboration, discourse, and pragmatics 
• Reviews of research in telecollaboration: critique and innovation 
Studies that advance our understanding of aspects of foreign language and culture learning in 
telecollaborative contexts are also welcome but authors should make clear how these new studies expand 
on previous publications. 
On a methodological level, we would welcome studies that use quantitative and qualitative or mixed 
research methodologies. Studies that problematize issues of method and that employ innovative but 
rigorous methodologies will be particularly welcome. We will not be able to accept studies that provide 
only descriptive reports of telecollaborative exchanges or uncritical presentations of student feedback. 
Guidelines for Authors 
Articles should be no longer than 8,500 words (including references but not appendices). For specific 
guidelines, please refer to the LLT submission guidelines. 
To be considered for this special issue, send a title and a 300-word abstract in a Word document by February 
1, 2018 to llt@hawaii.edu. 
Publication Schedule 
February 1, 2018: Submission deadline for abstracts 
February 15, 2018: Invitation for authors to submit a manuscript 
July 1, 2018: Submission deadline for first draft of manuscripts 
April 1, 2019: Submission deadline for revised manuscripts 
June 23, 2019: Submission deadline for final draft of manuscript 
October 1, 2019: Publication of special issue 
For Further Information 
Please contact the Managing Editor at llt@hawaii.edu. 
References 
Belz, J., & Thorne, S. (Eds.). (2006). Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language education. Boston, 
MA: Heinle & Heinle. 
Corbett, J. (2010). Intercultural language activities. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Cummins, J., & Sayers, D. (1995). Brave new schools: Challenging cultural literacy through global 
learning networks. New York, NY: St. Martin’s Press. 
Dooly. M. (Ed.). (2008). Telecollaborative language learning: A guidebook to moderating intercultural 
collaboration online. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Eck, A., Legenhausen, L., & Wolff, D. (1995). Telekommunikation und Fremdsprachenunterricht: 
Informationen, Projekte, Ergebnisse. Bochum, Germany: AKS-Verlag. 
Guth, S., & Helm, F. (Eds.). (2010). Telecollaboration 2.0: Language, literacies, and intercultural learning 
in the 21st Century. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
244 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Jackson, J. (Ed.). (2013). The Routledge handbook of language and intercultural communication. New 
York, NY: Routledge. 
Liddicoat, A., & Scarino, A. (2013). Intercultural language teaching and learning. West Sussex, UK: 
Wiley-Blackwell. 
Mehisto, P., Frigols, M. J., & Marsh, D. (2008). Uncovering CLIL: Content and Language Integrated 
Learning in Bilingual and Multilingual Education. London, UK: MacMillan. 
O’Dowd, R. (2006). Telecollaboration and the development of intercultural communicative competence. 
Berlin, Germany: Langenscheidt. 
O’Dowd, R. (Ed.). (2007). Online intercultural exchange: An introduction for foreign language teachers. 
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
O’Dowd, R., & Lewis, T. (Eds). (2016). Online intercultural exchange: Policy, pedagogy, practice. New 
York, NY: Routledge. 
Warschauer, M. (Ed.) (1995). Virtual connections: Online activities and projects for networking language 
learners. Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai‘i Second Language Teaching and Curriculum Center. 
