Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/commentary.pdf 
February 2017, Volume 21, Number 1 
pp. 1–3 
 
Copyright © 2017, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
COMMENTARY 
METHODOLOGICAL INNOVATION IN CALL RESEARCH 
AND ITS ROLE IN SLA 
Bryan Smith, Arizona State University 
APA Citation: Smith, B. (2017). Methodological innovation in CALL research and its 
role in SLA. Language Learning & Technology, 21(1), 1–3. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/commentary.pdf 
Copyright: © Bryan Smith 
As the field of CALL matures, teacher-scholars are employing many new and exciting applications of 
digital technologies for second and foreign language learning, including mobile technologies, gaming, 
and social media to name just a few. Likewise, new applications for student–computer and student–
student interaction continue to improve and expand. Such developments, while exciting, present a host of 
methodological challenges for researchers. That is to say, as we attempt to harness many of these 
technologies for language learning and study their effectiveness, we often find that familiar 
methodologies for collecting and analyzing data are limited if not fully inadequate. The articles in this 
special issue on methodological innovation in CALL highlight how specific innovative methodological 
choices allow researchers to capture and analyze aspects of learner–computer or learner–learner 
interaction in ways that help illuminate the relationship between CALL and second language 
development. 
In this issue, Guichon proposes a methodological approach to creating a shareable multimodal corpus of 
synchronous online pedagogical interactions. In an effort to move the examination of L2 virtual 
exchanges beyond the simple comparative quantitative realm, Guichon proposes focusing on the 
multimodal aspects of what he terms the teachers’ semio-pedagogical activity. Semio-pedagogical activity 
pertains to instructors’ use of the various semiotic and technical resources at their disposal and to the 
degree of professional competence they display in order to facilitate L2 learning. The article outlines steps 
taken in the creation of a multimodal and shareable corpus based on a telecollaboration project for French 
in a practical and structured way. This corpus includes artifacts that reflect what occurred and those that 
relate to the interaction and tasks, as well as participants’ views of the interaction. These include lesson 
plans, videos, transcripts of group debriefing sessions, field notes, photographs, and interviews with 
teachers and students touching on a variety of relevant topics. Provided that a corpus has been made 
accessible and has undergone proper annotation, structuration, and contextualization, SLA researchers 
engaged in telecollaboration may tap into what others have documented and reuse these data in exploring 
new questions from a variety of epistemological stances. 
In Methodological innovation for the study of request production in telecollaboration, Cunningham, in a 
mixed methods study, builds on the modest amount of research on requesting behavior in SCMC contexts 
as he investigates learner–expert interaction. English native speakers communicated synchronously with 
L1 German speaker professionals during a series of web conferences as part of a German for professional 
purposes course. Specifically, he explored the nature of request directness and internal and external 
modifications in the two groups of speakers. Quantitative data from a generalized linear mixed model 
showed that L2 German speakers produced a lower frequency of internal modifiers than did experts. 
Findings also showed that, though not statistically significant, L2 German learners used proportionally 
more direct expressions than did expert speakers. Subsequent qualitative analysis showed they likely did 
so in order to maintain the flow of conversation and to consistently engage their interlocutors. Thus, 
Cunningham employs an innovative analysis in drilling down into one of the statistically non-significant 
findings. Also, this study is innovative in that it shows how telecollaboration can provide a context for 
Bryan Smith Methodological Innovation in CALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 2 
more naturalistic request production and evaluation. As most studies of L1–L2 requesting behavior tend 
to explore in-person, or in some cases ACMC, interaction, this study is quite timely and relevant given 
the recent explosion of online-only courses. This study moves the field beyond its reliance on discourse 
completion tasks, which have limited applicability to naturalistic settings. 
In Digital-gaming trajectories and second language development, Scholz and Schulze illustrate a much 
needed move away from research that relies on learner reflections and beliefs about L2 gameplay and 
toward a focus on the gaming process and L2 development. They argue that as most authentic gameplay 
occurs extramurally, attempting to make direct observations of learners’ activities is quite challenging. 
With this in mind, they make a case for approaching digital game-based language learning through 
complex adaptive systems research (Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008a, 2008b) and Dörnyei’s (2014) 
retrodictive modeling. Their article reports on an extramural study of learners of German playing World 
of Warcraft over four months where the main focus was to understand how a language learner’s trajectory 
of gameplay interacted with his or her trajectory of L2 development. In addition to the gameplay, learners 
met in small groups to discuss their gameplay experiences in German. Learners also participated in a 
concluding interview where they reflected on the gameplay experience and impressions of their L2 
development. In order to determine L2 development, they looked for examples of near transfer of 
linguistic constructions between gaming and non-gaming contexts. All game activity was logged and in-
group conversations about gaming experiences were video-recorded and transcribed. Their results suggest 
that the language observed during gaming contexts is transferrable to non-gaming contexts. They argue 
that because of the wide variety of potential ways learners interact with games, it is necessary to take an 
approach such as retrodictive qualitative modeling to understand digital gaming for L2 development 
purposes as a complex adaptive system. 
In one of the very few CALL studies to employ Skill Acquisition Theory (Dekeyser, 2007), Cornillie, 
Van den Noortgate, Van den Branden, and Desmet report on a semester-long study of high school Dutch-
speaking learners of English that implements features of laboratory-based L2 research in both classroom 
and extracurricular contexts. Learners played two versions of mini games, first with a tutorial version 
during class in which one of two types of immediate feedback was provided. Later, learners had 
opportunities for voluntary practice with these games at home or at school. The goal was to examine the 
effects of focused practice on automatization of grammatical knowledge and explore how practice was 
affected by metalinguistic information provided in feedback and also by rule complexity. Findings 
suggest some evidence that focused practice helped learners develop automaticity in the ecologically 
valid context of the learners’ homes. Findings also suggest that practice and metalinguistic feedback are 
more beneficial for grammar constructions with lower cognitive complexity. Especially innovative in this 
study is the application of what the authors refer to as in vitro experimental research techniques in in vivo, 
or naturalistic, L2 learning contexts and the use of statistical mixed effects models to account for the 
complexity of real-life tracking data. 
Yim and Warschauer discuss how new text mining tools can enhance research into collaborative L2 
writing by providing a fine-grain analysis of elusive collaborative writing processes. Establishing that 
most studies into L2 collaborative writing involve small sample sizes and rely almost entirely on 
qualitative methods, they argue that such an approach is quite limiting. The article first synthesizes 
current research strands and methodological approaches to investigating collaborative writing, which 
include exploring processes, outcomes, and perceptions of collaborative writing. It then introduces 
examples from the literature that illustrate the potential of using text mining to enhance our understanding 
of each of these strands. Studies that employ specific text mining tools for analyzing group documents in 
Google Docs are also discussed. These tools are especially useful with large data sets and may be used for 
quantifying the amount of collaboration, visualizing the collaborative writing process, and facilitating 
stimulated recall in explorations of collaborative writing processes. 
In a case study exploring identity in interaction, Helm and Dooly discuss some of the challenges faced 
Bryan Smith Methodological Innovation in CALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 3 
when transcribing multimodal data. They use data from the Soliya Connect Program, whose main aim is 
to use English as a vehicular language in bridging the gap between western societies and predominantly 
Muslim societies. This online environment afforded communication across a range of modes, including 
oral, visual, and textual. The platform is especially complex in that up to twelve participants at a time may 
be engaged simultaneously. The researchers discuss how they prioritized the oral mode, due to the 
amount of interaction present in this mode, and then incorporated the textual and visual data as made 
relevant by the oral interaction. While acknowledging the subjectivity of such an endeavor, the challenges 
in sculpting a coherent and user-friendly transcript that adequately incorporated all modes of interaction 
are discussed and a proposal for creating a working multimodal transcript is offered. 
Taken together, these six articles present a wealth of information that will guide CALL researchers as 
they apply new ways of theorizing, framing, capturing, examining, organizing, and analyzing CALL data. 
Enjoy! 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I wish to thank all of those who submitted manuscripts for consideration for inclusion in this special 
issue. I also wish to thank the many reviewers whose insightful comments and suggestions greatly 
strengthened this issue.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Bryan Smith is Associate Professor of English at Arizona State University, where he co-directs the 
graduate certificate in Computer-Assisted Language Learning. He is also the co-editor of the CALICO 
Journal. Dr. Smith is a graduate of the interdisciplinary program in Second Language Acquisition and 
Teaching at the University of Arizona.  
E-mail: bryansmith@asu.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
DeKeyser, R. M. (2007). Skill acquisition theory. In B. VanPatten & J. Williams (Eds.), Theories in 
second language acquisition (pp. 97–114). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Dörnyei, Z. (2014). Researching complex dynamic systems: “Retrodictive qualitative modeling” in the 
language classroom. Language Teaching, 47(1), 80–91. 
Larsen-Freeman, D., & Cameron, L. (2008a). Complex systems and applied linguistics. Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press. 
Larsen-Freeman, D., & Cameron, L. (2008b). Research methodology on language development from a 
complex systems perspective. Modern Language Journal, 92(2), 200–213. 
