Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2017/call.pdf 
February 2017, Volume 21, Number 1 
p. 186
Copyright © 2017, ISSN 1094-3501 186
Call for Papers for CALL in the Digital Wilds Special Issue
Special Issue Editors: Shannon Sauro and Katerina Zourou 
This special issue of Language Learning & Technology will explore CALL in the digital wilds, which 
encompasses informal language learning that takes places in digital spaces, communities, and networks 
that are independent of formal instructional contexts. Digital technologies, such as mobile devices, and 
fast connectivity coupled with social networking facilities offer possibilities for unprecedented user-
driven, self- and group- initiated practices that redraw models of production, distribution, and reuse of 
knowledge. This can be seen, for instance, in crowdsourcing, digital activism, citizenship science, and the 
creative practices of online fan communities, all of which invite us to reimagine the nature of informal 
language learning that can occur in digital spaces. While digitally enhanced, instructed language learning 
and classroom language learning research are well established fields of study, there remain fewer 
empirical studies of informal or beyond-the-class digital language learning. 
For this special issue, we seek proposals that explore and deepen our understanding of CALL practices in 
the digital wilds, including, but not limited to, their manifestations, processes, and outcomes (linguistic, 
sociocultural, cognitive, or didactic). Particularly welcome are studies which help explore the nature of 
self-directed learning, agency, and autonomy, as well as the tools and frameworks for understanding and 
analyzing the complexity of learning in the digital wilds. We especially encourage submissions about the 
learning of less commonly taught languages. 
In order to be considered for this special issue, proposals must present in-depth empirical data and report 
on language learning outcomes and practices in informal digital contexts. Please note that proposals 
which conceptually explore digital spaces, tools, or communities without placing language learning 
practices as the main focus of the study fall outside the scope of this special issue. 
In preparation, please consult the LLT website for general guidelines on submissions and research. 
To be considered for this special issue, send a title and 300-word abstract in a Word document by June 1, 
2017 to llt@hawaii.edu. 
Publication Schedule: 
June 1, 2017: Submission deadline for abstracts 
June 15, 2017: Invitation for authors to submit a manuscript 
November 1, 2017: Submission deadline for first draft of manuscripts 
October 23, 2018: Submission deadline for final draft of manuscripts 
February 1, 2019: Publication of special issue 
For Further Information: 
If you have any questions, please contact the Managing Editor of LLT at llt@hawaii.edu. 
