Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2017, Volume 21, Issue 3 
pp. 28–43 
LANGUAGE TEACHING AND TECHNOLOGY FORUM  
 
 
Copyright © 2017 Melissa Baralt & José Morcillo Gómez 
 
 
Task-based language teaching online: 
A guide for teachers 
Melissa Baralt, Florida International University 
José Morcillo Gómez, Florida International University and Qingdao University 
Abstract 
Technology-mediated task-based language teaching is the merger between technology and task-based 
language teaching (TBLT; González-Lloret & Ortega, 2014) and is arguably now an imperative for 
language education. As language classrooms are being redefined, training for how to set learners up to 
successfully do tasks online must be part of teachers’ professional development. However, while multiple 
resources have been written on tasks, technology, and task-based language courses online (e.g., Chapelle, 
2014; Doughty & Long, 2003; González-Lloret, 2016; Nielson, González-Lloret, & Pinckney, 2009; 
Thomas & Reinders, 2012), teacher training for this purpose has largely been ignored. To date, no 
methodological guide for how to do TBLT via online video interactive tutorials has been published for 
teachers. In this article, we address this need by proposing a methodology framework for doing TBLT 
online. We begin with a brief review of TBLT fundamentals and demonstrate how to adapt the Willis (1996, 
2012) task-based methodology framework for synchronous, online video-based interaction. We describe 
the framework and show examples of how to apply it while fostering socialization and community building 
(Hampel & Stickler, 2005). We also discuss unique challenges that teachers face when doing TBLT online, 
and propose solutions for how these can be overcome to maximize language learning. 
Keywords: Task-Based Learning and Teaching, Teacher Education, Distance Learning and Teaching, 
Computer-Mediated Communication 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: Spanish 
APA Citation: Baralt, M., & Morcillo Gómez, J. (2017). Task-based language teaching online: A guide for 
teachers. Language Learning & Technology, 21(3), 28–43. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2017/baraltmorcillogomez.pdf 
Introduction 
Implementing task-based methodology during real-time, video-based interaction is fundamentally different 
from traditional, face-to-face interaction. Teachers have to manage both interaction and learner attention in 
an electronic platform that disperses learners’ attention more easily than traditional classrooms (e.g., 
Stickler & Shi, 2015). Socialization and community building—fundamental to engagement with a language 
and language learning—are not accomplished in the same way as they are in traditional classrooms, so 
teachers must foster these components differently (see Baralt, Gurzynski-Weiss, & Kim, 2016; Hampel & 
Stickler, 2005). Resultantly, online language teaching can be much more cognitively demanding on teachers 
than face-to-face teaching (Godev, 2014; Tomei, 2006; Worley & Tesdell, 2009). 
This article is a guide for teachers on how to do task-based language teaching (TBLT) online. To begin, we 
provide a brief review of TBLT fundamentals for teachers. We then explain how we have adapted the Willis 
(1996, 2012) task-based methodology framework to train teachers how to teach via synchronous, video-
based interaction and how to promote socialization online. Examples from real online sessions are provided. 
Melissa Baralt and José Morcillo Gómez 29 
 
A Review of TBLT Fundamentals 
TBLT 
TBLT is a pedagogical framework for the theory and teaching of second or foreign languages (IATBLT, 
n.d.). TBLT means teaching with, learning with, and assessing with tasks—not isolated grammar forms—
in order to promote functionality in the language. As described in detail by Long (2015), a fully task-based 
course must first begin with a needs analysis in order to identify learners’ authentic needs with the language. 
From this needs analysis, target tasks are identified and classified into target task types. Pedagogical tasks 
are then designed. The next step is to sequence the pedagogic tasks from cognitively simple to cognitively 
complex in a syllabus. Materials (such as building block tasks) are designed, and the teacher plans the 
methodology for implementing tasks. Task-based assessment that is performance-based and criterion-
referenced, with the assessment exit tasks also stemming from the original needs analysis, is also 
fundamental to TBLT. The final step of a full task-based course should also involve evaluation on a 
program-wide scale (for details and examples, see González-Lloret, 2016; González-Lloret & Nielson, 
2015; Long, 2005, 2015; McDonough & Chaitmongkol, 2007; Nielson, Masters, Rhoades, & Freynik, 
2009; Serafini & Torres, 2015). 
Tasks 
According to Ellis (2009b), a language-teaching activity must meet four criteria in order to count as a task. 
The task must 
• have a primary focus on meaning, 
• have a gap (e.g., the learner has to do something in order to complete the task), 
• require that learners rely on their own resources (linguistic and non-linguistic), and 
• have an outcome (e.g., something to show for having successfully performed the task, not just a 
display of language; see Ellis, 2009b, p. 223). 
Let us consider an example. The activity in Figure 1 is a task because it is focused on meaning. Learners 
have to read an excerpt from a real interview and derive their own meaning from it to be able to answer the 
comprehension questions. There is a gap in that learners must read the interview excerpt in order to do the 
task. Learners also have to rely on their own linguistic resources to do the task (they are not regurgitating 
what the teacher says). Finally, there is a clear outcome: learners’ written out answers to the two questions 
that serve as proof for having done the task and that they can show their teacher and classmates. 
30 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 1. Sample task titled Spain’s economic recovery. 
Task-Based Methodology 
Just as important as tasks, task-based methodology is the way in which teachers implement tasks, set 
learners up to perform the tasks successfully, and manage learners’ attention to form–meaning connections 
(Samuda, 2001). There are three models for task-based methodology (i.e., Ellis, 2003; Nunan, 2004; Willis, 
1996, 2012).1 While somewhat different in scope, these models are similar in the way they encourage 
teachers to reflect on different methodological options around and during tasks in order to maximize 
learners’ task performance and learning. In this article, we adopt the Willis (1996, 2012) task-based 
framework, seen below in Figure 2. 
Melissa Baralt and José Morcillo Gómez 31 
 
 
Figure 2. The task-based learning framework (modified from Willis, 1996, 2012). Reprinted with 
permission from Jane Willis. Please see Willis’ online e-book. For task-based learning resources and free 
task-based lesson plans, see Willis-ELT. 
Willis (1996, 2012) proposes three phases for teachers to plan for around a task: the pre-task phase, the task 
cycle, and the language focus. In the pre-task phase, the teacher introduces the topic and does activities to 
help learners activate prior knowledge or learn new useful words and phrases. The teacher ensures that 
learners understand the instructions and what they will have to show as their task outcome in the report 
stage. Next, the teacher transitions to the task cycle. The task cycle is comprised of three components: the 
task itself, planning time, and the report. During the task, learners perform the task individually, in pairs, 
or in groups, while the teacher acts as a monitor and provides support. During planning time, the teacher 
optionally gives learners time to prepare for the report. She or he also acts as a language advisor (Willis, 
1996).2 during the report, learners demonstrate their task outcome. The teacher acts as chairperson, for 
example, calling on who will go next and gives feedback on content and form. Finally, the teacher 
transitions to the language focus, comprised of the analysis and practice. In the analysis, the teacher does a 
post-task explicit focus on form by bringing words, phrases, and forms to learners’ attention. During the 
practice, the teacher leads students in practicing forms reviewed during the analysis (e.g., memory 
challenges, dictations, drills). The teacher can also have students repeat the task as a form of practice. 
As the reader can see, task-based methodology is not just doing a single task. Task-based methodology 
32 Language Learning & Technology 
 
encompasses all of the psycholinguistically-supported activities (be they discussions on learners’ prior 
experiences, building block tasks, analyses, practices, etc.) that the teacher does around a task to maximize 
learners’ performance of that task. 
Let us now consider an example of how this methodological framework is planned for and applied to the 
task presented in Figure 1. In Figure 3, we see a teacher’s methodological plan using the Willis (1996, 
2012) task-based framework for the implementation of the task. 
 
Melissa Baralt and José Morcillo Gómez 33 
 
 
Figure 3. Sample task-based methodology plan. 
Following the Willis (1996, 2012) model, this methodological plan has a pre-task phase, a task cycle (with 
the task, planning time, and report components), and a language focus (with the analysis and the practice 
components). In the pre-task phase, the teacher opens up the task topic semantically. In the task cycle, the 
learners do the task, are given planning time, and then report what their answers are to the class. In the 
language focus, the teacher does an explicit focus on form by discussing phrases about economic growth, 
as well as an explicit explanation of noun phrases (the analysis). For the practice, the teacher has the students 
do a memory challenge, followed by a modified repetition of the task and then a reflection. 
TBLT Methodological Principles 
Teachers should know that TBLT is grounded in theory, education philosophy, and psycholinguistics 
research (Long, 2015); yet, it is not one-size-fits-all. There are various interpretations of TBLT across the 
globe. To account for suggestions based on theory and research, as well as the infinite ways to realize these 
suggestions in the classroom in accordance with teachers’ own contexts, Doughty and Long (Doughty & 
Long, 2003; Long, 2015) propose thinking about how we teach in terms of methodological principles (MPs) 
and pedagogic procedures. MPs are the what—that is, what we should do to maximize language learning. 
They are the design features—based on theory and research—that inform our course, materials, and 
methodological decisions. 
Pedagogic procedures are the how—that is, how we implement MPs. Options for pedagogic procedures are 
infinite and are entirely up to the person who knows his or her learners best: the teacher. For example, MP6, 
focus on form, might be realized as a recast or as an explicit correction, depending on the teacher’s choice, 
the task, what the teacher knows about the learner to whom the feedback is directed, and so forth. Teachers 
should familiarize themselves with the MPs of Doughty and Long (2003), in order to guide the pedagogic 
procedures they choose, and know that these apply to both traditional and online language classes. Thinking 
 
Look at these last two. These are very common noun phrases that are composed of two 
nouns.  
 
2. Discussion on specialist / topic lexis: structure of noun phrases 
Ask students what these phrases have in common structurally: 
inflation rate, job market, real estate industry, trade deficit, money supply 
(They are all made up of two or more nouns) 
 
Practice  
1. Expressions with numbers: memory challenge game 
Tell students to turn their handouts over and put down their pens. Write these numbers on 
the board:  
3, 3.3, 600,000, “3 to 4” 
Can they remember the whole phrases that they were in?  
Give them one minute to read the text again (no pens and no writing!). After one minute, 
turn text over. THEN -- ask students to pick up their pens and write down the phrases 
from memory (should be fun). 
Have students check with their partner to see if she/he has the same as them.  
Ask volunteers to read the chunks of language that they remembered out loud to the class. 
As a class, compare how close students’ attempt were to the actual text. Discuss what is 
missing.  
 
2. Task Repetition 
In pairs but with a different partner, ask the class to once again report to each other the 
same question you began with: What do you think of the current economic situation in 
Spain? (Tell them that you will call on two volunteers at random to come up in front of 
the class and report! This should be lively and fun).  
Call on a few volunteers at random to tell the class what they know about the Spanish 
economy at present.  
 
3. Reflect 
As a class, reflect on (1) how their ability to report on Spain’s economic situation has 
improved, and (2) new language that they learned.  
	
34 Language Learning & Technology 
 
about teaching in terms of MPs and pedagogic procedures is a helpful and consistent way for teachers to 
design tasks, create lesson plans, and reflect on their pedagogy. The 10 MPs by Doughty and Long, as well 
as examples of pedagogic principles for them, are summarized below in Table 1. 
Table 1. The 10 MPs by Doughty and Long with Pedagogic Procedure Examples 
MP Description and Examples 
MP1 Use tasks. (Remember the four task characteristics of Ellis, 2003: be meaning-focused, have a 
gap, require learners to use their own resources, and have a tangible outcome.) 
MP2 Promote learning by doing. (Learners must do the task themselves. Teachers facilitate the 
process, set them up for task performance, and help learners to notice.) 
MP3 Elaborate input, don’t simplify! (For excellent examples, see Long, 2015, pp. 250–255.) 
MP4 Provide rich input. (Bring in rich, real examples of language. For example, you can invite a 
guest speaker to class, show videos from the Internet, or share a section of a text in class.) 
MP5 Encourage inductive chunk learning. (Chunks are groups of words that go together such as 
fixed collocations, lexical phrases, idioms, and certain structures. Examples are You know what 
I mean? in English or No hay de qué in Spanish.) 
MP6 Focus on form. (This means we as teachers help learners to notice. This can be done implicitly, 
explicitly (e.g., stopping to teach grammar), and even through the design of a task.) 
MP7 Provide negative feedback. (Correct learners’ errors! For a review, see Ellis, 2009a.) 
MP8 Respect learner-internal syllabuses and developmental processes. (For example, it is alright if 
your learner still makes a grammatical gender error five weeks after learning about the form. 
Emerging interlanguage deviations are normal. Reflect on the pedagogic principles for MP6 
and MP7. For another example, see research on the order of acquisition of certain forms, such 
as English question formation. This research informs how we should sequence tasks in a 
syllabus.) 
MP9 Promote cooperative or collaborative learning. (Get learners to work together! Have variety in 
your interactant set-up, e.g., pair-work or group-work.) 
MP10 Individualize instruction. (Tasks and teaching should be catered to our learners’ abilities, 
affective differences, needs, and interests.) 
Note. Summarized and modified from Doughty and Long (2003, p. 52) as well as from Long (2015). 
TBLT Online 
A challenge for teachers is that tasks and task-based methodology do not work in the same way online that 
they do in traditional, face-to-face classrooms. As argued by Nielson, et al. (2009), language courses cannot 
just be a “translation of an equivalent face-to-face course” (p. 5). While not much research has been done 
on video-based interaction and TBLT, what we do know is the following: (a) tasks that work well in person 
do not always work well online (Baralt, 2013, 2014); (b) a significant amount of learners’ attention is 
devoted to social and technical features when interacting online, and this can cause mismatches between 
teachers’ and learners’ expectations (Stickler & Shi, 2013; 2015); (c) socializing and the formation of trust 
and friendship is essential for language learning, and these can be more challenging for the teacher to 
promote online (Baralt et al., 2016; Compton, 2009; Gleason, 2013; Hampel & Stickler, 2005; Stickler & 
Shi, 2015); (d) learners may feel more self-conscious in video-based interaction (Coverdale-Jones, 2000); 
and (e) teachers have to employ additional tools online in order to successfully scaffold learners’ 
interaction, attention, and knowledge construction, which can require extra cognitive effort on behalf of the 
teacher (Gleason, 2013). Incipient research also shows that learners prioritize avoiding loss of face over 
task completion in video-based interaction, which can negatively affect successful negotiation of meaning 
Melissa Baralt and José Morcillo Gómez 35 
 
(Van der Zwaard & Bannink, 2014). 
These challenges aside, offering online classes is a good thing. Online classes give language learning 
opportunities to people that otherwise would not be able to study a language, such as those with geographic 
limitations. Plus, technology-delivered tasks can help students develop technology skills outside of the 
language classroom, thereby promoting essential web literacy skills (Chapelle, 2014; Chapelle & 
Hegelheimer, 2004; González-Lloret & Ortega, 2014). In fact, some features of online language teaching 
platforms may even enhance the language learning process, such as more noticing of corrective feedback 
(e.g., Baralt, 2013; Gleason, 2013; Gurzynski-Weiss & Baralt, 2015; Sykes, 2005; Thomas & Reinders, 
2012; Thorne, 2008; see also Loewen & Wolff, 2016). 
How to Do TBLT via Online Interactive Tutorials 
Now that we have reviewed key fundamentals of TBLT, we demonstrate how to adapt Willis’s (1996, 2012) 
original framework for doing TBLT online via video-based interaction. To apply it online, the report stage 
of the task cycle as well as the analysis stage of the language focus are both done in a video-based online 
meeting; all of the other components are done individually by the learner at home. Our proposed 
methodological framework for how to do TBLT via video-based interaction is seen below in Figure 4, with 
an explanation to follow. 
36 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 4. A framework for doing TBLT via online video tutorials (adapted from Willis, 1996, 2012). 
The Pre-Task Phase 
Essential to doing TBLT via online video interactive tutorials is preparation prior to the online meeting. 
This is done in the pre-task phase. Two actions that will help the teacher significantly in preparing learners 
in this phase is to send a video and detailed task instructions. Sending learners a video is an ideal way to 
provide learners with a model before meeting with them online. Not only is this psycholinguistically 
justified (the teacher models the task), it is a key step in initiating relationship building because the teacher 
also models sharing about his or her own life. In addition, a video is a means by which the teacher can 
encourage and motivate learners. Videos are simple to make with cell phones and can be uploaded to 
YouTube. To serve as an example, here is a video that we have made for our learners for this purpose. 
Melissa Baralt and José Morcillo Gómez 37 
 
Fundamental as well for the pre-task phase are detailed task instructions. The instructions should also 
include information about the technical aspects of the online meeting platform. The teacher lets the learners 
know what task they are to do and what their task outcome is to show for having successfully done it. The 
teacher also lets learners know what the goals are, what they can do to prepare, and provides language focus 
information. In Figure 5, we provide an example of task instructions that the teacher can email learners 
before meeting online, to include logistics and connectivity information. 
 
	
	
	
2nd ORAL SESSION: SPANISH 1130  
 
GOALS 
Describe our family  
Listen to others describe their families, and be able to summarize what we heard 
Practice our speaking skills in Spanish 
Review new vocabulary from Chapter 2  
Get to know our classmates better 
Lose our fear of talking in another language  
 
TASKS: Describe our family and report on our classmates’ descriptions of their families 
In our small groups online, each student will do the following during the task:     
 
Activity 1. (2 minutes) 
a) Think about a member of your family or about a friend (friends can count as family too!). 
b) Describe this person.  
c) Show a picture of this person after your description.  
 
Assignment (what you need to do before our online meeting): Write a brief paragraph describing 
this person. Some ‘chunks’ of language to help you are:  
- Mi ( hermano, hermana, padre, madre, novio, novia, primo, prima, compañero o compañera de 
cuarto,  etc…) es………….  (pag. 71 y 73) 
- Tiene … (años) 
- No le gusta……… (pag. 76-77) 
- Le gusta………..(pag.76-77) 
- Have a photo ready to share 
           
You can re-watch my video to see an example of how I describe my family. Here is another  
example in writing for you: 
      
Mis hijos tienen 16 y 14 años. Pablo es alto, moreno, simpático, estudioso y deportista.  Le gusta 
escuchar música, tocar el oboe y jugar a balonmano. Su hermano, Javier, es moreno, sus ojos son 
marrones, es divertido, simpático estudioso y alegre. Le gusta la música electrónica y juega a 
balonmano. Ellos viven en España.  
 
Activity 2. (2 minutes) 
a) Listen to your classmate as he or she describes their family member or friend. 
b) Take notes about the descriptions that you hear.  
c) Be prepared to tell the group what you just heard (and be ready -- I will call on you at any 
time to report back on what you heard!). You can use the notes you took to help you.    
               
Here is an example:  
 
Sus hijos tienen 16 y 14 años, viven en España. A sus hijos les gusta escuchar música, jugar a 
balonmano. Su hijo Pablo es alto, moreno y simpático. Su hijo Javier es divertido, alegre y 
estudioso.  
         
Be prepared to answer questions that I will ask you, and also to ask your classmates questions. 
(Don’t worry- I will help you).  
 
Language Focus:  
New language to notice, think and talk about:  
Use of ser 
Use of possessive adjectives 
Use of gustar and no gustar 
Gender agreement between adjectives and nouns in Spanish 
38 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 5. Sample task instructions before online meeting. 
The Task Cycle 
As the reader knows, the three components of the task cycle are the task, planning, and report. To adapt the 
Willis (1996, 2012) model for online video-based interactive tutorials, the task and planning are done by 
the learner first at home (e.g., describe your family via a written paragraph, review vocabulary, prepare to 
share this information, etc.). Only the report is done in the online meeting. Online meetings for the report 
stage work best with one to four learners (no more than six), plus the teacher. This number is based on 
teacher feedback in our local context at Florida International University, as well as the platform space 
needed for the teacher to maximize its features (e.g., in the Adobe® Connect™ platform, there is video and 
chat space, among other features). As indicated in the framework, the teacher should always begin online 
video sessions with greetings and a warm-up. The teacher welcomes the class, introduce himself or herself, 
and then asks learners to do the same. The teacher can also remind learners about the goals of the online 
meeting, how it will be organized, and what tasks they will accomplish. Next, the teacher begins by 
modeling the task (e.g., reporting to learners what his or her own family is like). He or she then calls on 
learners to do the same. During this time, the teacher is the chairperson. This means that he or she models, 
guides, encourages, scaffolds, and leads the learners in turn-taking. He or she asks questions about learners’ 
lives and provides feedback and praise. 
When errors are made, it is recommended that the teacher provide corrective feedback dually; that is, he or 
she says it aloud in the video and also writes it down via the chat or writing spaces available in the video-
meeting platform. Not only does this provide learners with dual coding (Paivio, 1986), it accounts for the 
delay that can be experienced in video-based online interaction. 
Let us now see an example with this video (a screen shot from which is provided in Figure 6 below). Figure 
6 shows the Adobe® Connect™ platform in which the teacher guides two students in performing the task. 
	
	
	
 
PLEASE, DON’T FORGET:  
We will be using a great communication tool to meet, talk, and do our task together 
online: Adobe Connect. You can connect from wherever you want; however, there are 
some technical recommendations to be followed in order to ensure smooth 
communication.  
 
1. You MUST have a headset (headphones and mic). Earphones will not work. Even if 
your computer has a built-in mic, you will need to buy a headset, no exceptions. 
 
2. Students cannot use Google Chrome. Please use Explorer or Firefox.  
 
3. If possible, try to connect by landline. Wifi is not stable and can lead to technical 
problems.  
 
4. Before you attend the sessions, please run the Adobe Connect test located on 
Blackboard. 
 
5. Come prepared to the sessions by studying the material to be covered. (Preliminar 
and Chapter 1). I will let you know a week prior to our online meeting what you need 
to focus on. We only have 30 minutes, so we need to get the most out of it. 
 
IMPORTANT: Students will get 10 points for every oral session if they are on time, 
come technically prepared, and have studied the material by preparing the activities 
assigned by me. Grammar errors will not be penalized. This is about you being 
able to do a real task in the Spanish language so that you can take these new skills 
out to the real world here in Miami. Remember, I will facilitate the process! I am 
here to help you and look forward to seeing all of the tasks that you will 
accomplish in class. 
 
Melissa Baralt and José Morcillo Gómez 39 
 
In the video, the teacher has shared about his family, and both learners, Bronte and Peter, have done so as 
well. The teacher asks Peter to summarize what his classmate Bronte shared about her family. Peter 
produces an error: *no le gusta conversadora. The teacher does a focus on form by orally providing the 
learner with a correction and he types it out as well. Peter incorporates the correct form into his modified 
output. (Note that there is a slight time lag during this episode, which is why dual focus on form is 
necessary.) The teacher praises the learner, and then asks Bronte if Peter’s summary was accurate, thereby 
including her at the same time. 
 
Figure 6. Example of an online platform for synchronous, video-based interaction. 
Concluding the Report 
After the report and any follow-up activities, the teacher should give time for meaning-making questions. 
This is an important opportunity to continue to get to know one another and to ask questions. In this video, 
we show how a teacher does this. The teacher has invited Peter to ask questions with no prior planning. The 
timing of meaning-making questions after the report is psycholinguistically ideal because learners have just 
completed a task. It is their opportunity to make their own meaning in the language (e.g., produce output, 
test hypotheses about how the language works, see what they know) in a way that is more spontaneous. 
This is a good way to stretch their interlanguage and challenge them. 
The Language Focus 
The final component of the framework is the language focus, comprised of the analysis and the practice. In 
video-based interaction, the analysis is done during the online meeting right after the report, while the 
practice is done by learners afterwards and on their own time. The analysis is the time to explicitly bring 
learners’ attention to forms that arise from their own production during the report. The teacher should 
review new words, chunks of language, and any grammar that comes up during the online meeting. The 
analysis does not have to be long, and can be as simple as saying the following: 
“Great job guys, you now can do [task] in Spanish! I want to go over a few chunks of language, as well 
as grammar, that came up during our meeting together today … We also learned how to say someone’s 
age in Spanish. Which verb do we use again? Peter, can you tell us the age of your cousins?” 
If timing permits, the teacher can also use this analysis time and space to review pronunciation and cultural 
or dialectal norms. Just as with any corrective feedback during the report, the teacher should say and type 
the forms to which he or she gives attention in the analysis. Finally, the teacher concludes the online meeting 
by summarizing what the learners have accomplished, reviewing what their post-task practice is, and 
40 Language Learning & Technology 
 
mentioning house-keeping items such as upcoming homework and logistics for the next meeting. 
The practice component of the language focus is done at home and is a follow up to the task. It should serve 
to highlight further any forms that came up during the online meeting. The teacher can ask learners to repeat 
the task (either the same task or a slightly more complex task). Learners can do so monologically or go out 
and interview someone in their community, record it, and transcribe the interview. The teacher can also 
give learners more grammar-focused exercises to proceduralize their new, declarative knowledge 
(DeKeyser, 1998). 
Final Considerations for Online Video-Based Interaction 
There are some unique challenges that teachers face when doing TBLT methodology online in video-based 
interaction. These include fatigue, connectivity problems, use of the L1, nonstudents unexpectedly 
attending the online meeting, and how to foster a sense of community online. Based on our experience, our 
advice can be summarized in four key points. First, teachers should know that online teaching often involves 
doing many things all at the same time (e.g., guiding a conversation between learners while simultaneously 
typing privately to another learner to solve a technical problem). It is normal to feel worn out afterwards. 
Teachers should plan ahead and include breaks in between sessions. Second, teachers should make sure 
they have a good Internet connection (we suggest hardwire whenever possible). This will facilitate their job 
significantly. Third, teachers should try to stay in the target language as much as they can. While the L1 
can serve as a mediation tool and a resource to scaffold second language production (Ellis & Shintani, 
2014), it is vital that learners receive maximum input and output production opportunities in the target 
language. Last, language learning online must be seen as building a sense of community and as a safe space 
for learners to share about themselves in the target language. The teacher can foster socialization via task 
design, the way he or she scaffolds turn-taking, and the embracing of the unexpected. Real tasks, based off 
of a needs analysis in order to gauge learners’ authentic needs with the language, are a critical starting point 
to do this. Learners’ having to do real tasks that are pertinent to their lives and local contexts, and then 
listening and sharing about each other’s perspectives, facilitates a sense of community. For example, in our 
context, teachers can ask learners to do tasks such as Describe your favorite places in Miami, rather than 
Describe the favorite places of the character in your textbook on page X. Learners also begin to reciprocate 
the teacher’s praise with each other after they attempt to retell or compare other classmates’ family reports. 
An example of how a teacher can do this is provided in this video. Here, the teacher has asked Bronte to 
report on what Peter just said about his own family. Observe how the teacher scaffolds and guides the 
interaction, so that eventually, the interaction ends up being between Bronte and Peter. Peter is just as vested 
as Bronte while she is reporting, because the topic is about his own family! 
We reiterate that having a real task to do, based off of learners’ authentic needs and lives, gives them the 
capacity to feel a sense of community. It also helps to use humor and embrace the unexpected in the online 
meetings. For example, a learner in our context once had to care for his baby at the same time as the online 
meeting. The teacher asked him to introduce the baby to the group (all in the target language). The learner 
did so, and the baby “attended” the meeting as well. Every online meeting after that, the class asked him 
about his daughter. Community building online such as this sets the necessary stage for successful and 
purposeful language learning. 
Conclusion 
Our goal with this article is to contribute to training materials for teachers to teach languages online. In this 
manuscript, we have reviewed fundamentals of TBLT, to include a description of tasks, task-based 
methodology, and MPs, as well as pedagogic procedures for teaching. We demonstrate how teachers can 
adapt Willis’s (1996, 2012) TBLT methodology framework for teaching online with the pre-task, task cycle, 
and language focus, and how they can be the chairperson and facilitator. Imperative to online language 
learning is socialization and community building, and we have given examples of how we have done so. 
Melissa Baralt and José Morcillo Gómez 41 
 
Doing TBLT via video-based interaction does have unique challenges, but these can be overcome in order 
to foster language learning in this mode. We call for more work on methodology training materials and, 
specifically, for real examples to support teachers in carrying out technology-mediated TBLT. 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank all of our online students who inspire us daily. They are the source of inspiration 
for our brainstorming (and experimenting) of tasks as well as pedagogic procedures that work best in the 
online mode. A special thanks too goes to our students Bronte and Peter, who gave us permission to share 
these videos with the language teaching and learning community. 
Notes 
1. The Ellis (2003) model is the simplest and most adaptable for teachers, and involves three optional 
phases: the pre-task phase, the during-task phase, and the post-task phase. The Willis (1996, 2012) 
task-based framework is similar in scope, but it is more detailed and has deliberately-included 
components that both theory and research argue support second language acquisition: the pre-task 
phase, the task cycle (with task, planning time, and report), and the language focus (which is comprised 
of an analysis and then a practice). In the Willis model, explicit grammar teaching can only take place 
in the analysis component of the language focus (i.e., after the task). While Ellis (2003) also suggests 
that grammar teaching is best reserved for the post-task phase, in his model, grammar teaching as a 
means of focus on form can take place in any of the phases. Finally, the Nunan (2004) task-based 
framework involves six steps for teachers to follow in a deliberate attempt to simulate receptive to 
productive processing. These are (1) schema building, (2) controlled practice, (3) authentic listening, 
(4) focus on linguistic elements, (5) providing freer practice, and (6) doing a fully communicative task. 
Of these three models, Willis’ (1996, 2012) task-based framework is the strongest version of TBLT. 
2. While Willis (1996, 2012) deliberately proposes a planning time before learners formally report, note 
that in her framework, planning time may also occur before the task itself. 
References 
Baralt, M. (2013). The impact of cognitive complexity on feedback efficacy during online versus face-to-
face interactive tasks. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 35, 689–725. 
Baralt, M. (2014). Task sequencing and task complexity in traditional versus online classes. In M. Baralt, 
R. Gilabert, & P. Robinson (Eds.), Task sequencing and instructed second language learning (pp. 95–
122). London, UK: Bloomsbury. 
Baralt, M., Gurzynski-Weiss, L., & Kim, Y. (2016). Engagement with the language: How examining 
learners’ affective and social engagement explains successful learner-generated attention to form. In 
M. Sato & S. Ballinger (Eds.), Peer interaction and L2 learning (pp. 209–239). Amsterdam, 
Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Chapelle, C. A. (2014). Technology-mediated TBLT and the evolving role of the innovator. In M. 
González-Lloret & L. Ortega (Eds.), Technology and tasks: Exploring technology-mediated TBLT 
(pp. 232–334). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Chapelle, C. A., & Hegelheimer, V. (2004). The language teacher in the 21st century. In S. Fotos & C. M. 
Browne (Eds.), New perspectives on CALL for second language classrooms (pp. 299–316). Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Compton, L. K. (2009). Preparing language teachers to teach language online: A look at skills, roles, and 
responsibilities. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 22, 73–99. 
42 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Coverdale-Jones, T. (2000). The use of video-conferencing as a communication tool for language 
learning: Issues and considerations. IALL Journal of Language Learning Technologies, 32, 27–40. 
DeKeyser, R. (1998). Beyond focus on form: Cognitive perspectives on learning and practicing second 
language grammar. In C. Doughty & J. Williams, (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second 
language acquisition (pp. 42–63). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Doughty, C. J., & Long, M. H. (2003). Optimal psycholinguistic environments for distance foreign 
language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 50–80. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/pdf/doughty.pdf 
Ellis, R. (2003). Task-based language teaching and learning. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Ellis, R. (2009a). Corrective feedback and teacher development. L2 Journal, 1, 3–18. 
Ellis, R. (2009b). Task-based language teaching: Sorting out the misunderstandings. International 
Journal of Applied Linguistics, 19, 221–246. 
Ellis, R., & Shintani, N. (2014). Using the L1 in the L2 classroom. In R. Ellis & N. Shintani (Eds.), 
Exploring language pedagogy through second language acquisition (pp. 225–248). New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Gleason, J. (2013). Dilemmas of blended language learning: Learner and teacher experiences. CALICO 
Journal, 30, 323–341. 
Godev, C. B. (2014). First-year hybrid Spanish courses: How instructors manage their time. Hispania, 97, 
21–31. 
González-Lloret, M. (2016). A practical guide to integrating technology into task-based language 
teaching. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. 
González-Lloret, M., & Nielson, K. (2015). Evaluating TBLT: The case of a task-based Spanish program. 
Language Teaching Research, 19, 525–549. 
González-Lloret, M., & Ortega, L. (2014). Technology and tasks: Exploring technology-mediated TBLT. 
Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Gurzynski-Weiss, L., & Baralt, M. (2015). Does type of modified output correspond to learner noticing of 
feedback? A closer look in face-to-face and computer-mediated task-based interaction. Applied 
Psycholinguistics, 36, 1393–1420. 
Hampel, R., & Stickler, U. (2005). New skills for new classrooms: Training tutors to teach languages 
online. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 18, 311–326. 
IATBLT. (n.d.). Task-based language teaching. Retrieved from www.tblt.org 
Loewen, S., & Wolff, D. (2016). Peer interaction in F2F and CMC contexts. In M. Sato & S. Ballinger 
(Eds.), Peer interaction and second language learning: Pedagogical potential and research agenda 
(pp. 163–184). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Long, M. H. (2005). Second language needs analysis. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Long, M. H. (2015). Second language acquisition and task-based language teaching. West Sussex, UK: 
Wiley Blackwell. 
McDonough, K., & Chaitmongkol, W. (2007). Teachers’ and learners’ reactions to a task-based EFL 
course in Thailand. TESOL Quarterly, 41, 107–132. 
Nielson, K. B., González-Lloret, M., & Pinckney, K. (2009). Learning foreign languages at a distance: 
Characteristics of effective online courses. College Park, MD: University of Maryland Center for 
Advanced Study of Language. 
Melissa Baralt and José Morcillo Gómez 43 
 
Nielson, K. B., Masters, M. C., Rhoades, E., & Freynik, S. (2009). Prototype implementation of an online 
Chinese course: An analysis of course implementation and learner performance. College Park, 
Maryland: University of Maryland Center for Advanced Study of Language. 
Nunan, D. (2004). Task-based language teaching. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representation: A dual-coding approach. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Samuda, V. (2001). Guiding relationships between form and meaning during task performance: The role 
of the teacher. In M. Bygate, P. Skehan, & M. Swain (Eds.), Researching pedagogic tasks: Second 
language learning, teaching, and testing (pp. 119–140). Harlow, UK: Pearson Education. 
Serafini, E., & Torres, J. (2015). The utility of needs analysis for nondomain expert instructors in 
designing task-based Spanish for the professions curricula. Foreign Language Annals, 48, 447–472. 
Sykes, J. (2005). Synchronous CMC and Pragmatic Development: Effects of Oral and Written Chat. 
CALICO Journal, 22, 399–431. 
Stickler, U. & Shi, L. (2013). Supporting Chinese speaking skills online. System, 41, 50–69. 
Stickler, U. & Shi, L. (2015). Eye movements of online Chinese learners. CALICO Journal, 32, 52–81. 
Thomas, M., & Reinders, H. (2012). Task-based language learning and teaching with technology. 
London, UK: Bloomsbury. 
Thorne, S. L. (2008). Mediating technologies and second language learning. In D. Leu, J. Coiro, C. 
Lankshear, & M. Knobel (Eds.), Handbook of research on new literacies (pp. 417–449). Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Tomei, L. A. (2006). The impact of online teaching on faculty load: Computing the ideal class size for 
online courses. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 14, 531–541. 
Van der Zwaard, R., & Bannink, A. (2014). Video call or chat? Negotiation of meaning and issues of face 
in telecollaboration. System, 44, 137–148. 
Willis, J. (1996). A framework for task-based learning. Essex, UK: Longman. 
Willis, J. (2012). A framework for task-based learning. Intrinsic Books E-books. 
Worley, W., & Tesdell, L. (2009). Instructor time and effort in online and face-to-face teaching: Lessons 
learned. IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication, 52, 138–151. 
About the Authors 
Dr. Melissa Baralt (PhD, Georgetown University) is an Associate Professor of Spanish Applied Linguistics 
at Florida International University (Miami, USA). She does research on child language development, 
bilingualism, psycholinguistics, second language learning and teaching, tasks for classroom versus online 
language learning, and teacher education. 
E-mail: mbaralt@fiu.edu 
José Morcillo Gómez (MA, Florida International University) is a PhD candidate and instructor of Spanish 
at Florida International University (Miami, USA) and at Qingdao University (Qingdao, China). His research 
areas encompass technology and second language learning and teaching, social community building online, 
and the intersection of race, gender, language, and identity. 
E-mail: jmorc001@fiu.edu 
