Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2017, Volume 21, Issue 3 
pp. 217–241 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2017 Agnieszka Leńko-Szymańska 
 
 
Training teachers in data-driven learning: 
Tackling the challenge 
Agnieszka Leńko-Szymańska, University of Warsaw 
Abstract 
The aim of this article is to assess the effectiveness of a semester-long pre-service teacher-training course 
on the use of corpora in language learning and teaching. This is achieved by an analysis of 53 corpus-
based projects prepared by the participants. First, the aims and the design of the course are briefly 
presented. The main section of the article examines the trainees’ projects, which involved compiling small 
English for specific purposes corpora, analysing them and preparing corpus-based lessons. Specifically, 
the topics of the projects, the corpora that the participants built, the types of the analyses conducted, and 
the corpus-informed and corpus-based activities created by the trainees are examined both quantitatively 
and qualitatively. The projects’ outcomes reveal that the competencies developed by the pre-service 
teachers during the course were not sufficient. The participants seemed to have mastered only the basic 
technical skills of manipulating corpora, and they lacked autonomy in corpus-linguistic skills and 
pedagogical skills which were necessary for successful exploitations of corpora in language education. 
This observation—supported by earlier research—calls for the development and empirical validation of a 
model of effective teacher training in corpus-informed and corpus-based instruction. 
Keywords: Data-Driven Learning, Teacher Training, English for Specific Purposes, Student Project 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English 
APA Citation: Leńko-Szymańska, A. (2017). Training teachers in data-driven learning: Tackling the 
challenge. Language Learning & Technology, 21(3), 217–241. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2017/lenko-szymanska.pdf 
Introduction 
Language teachers’ reluctance to use corpora in their instruction—frequently acknowledged in literature 
and attested in several surveys (e.g., Mukherjee, 2004; Römer, 2009; Tribble, 2015)—can be partially 
explained by high demands on hardware and computing skills as well as the scarcity of easily available, 
inexpensive, reliable, relevant, and user-friendly resources. However, the main reason is probably teachers’ 
lack of knowledge about the different ways in which corpora can be exploited in the classroom and the 
necessary skills for the application of this knowledge. The implementation of data-driven teaching requires 
at least three kinds of competencies (Callies, 2016; Mukherjee, 2006). First, teachers need to have good 
technical skills, which means that they have to be fairly competent corpus users who are acquainted with 
available resources and tools and can handle them proficiently. Next, teachers also need to be versed in 
corpus linguistics, which means they should know what kind of information they can search for in a corpus, 
how to search for it, and how to interpret the results of these searches. Finally, teachers should also possess 
pedagogical skills allowing them to implement corpus data in the teaching process by designing and 
creating suitable and pedagogically-sound materials that are both corpus-informed (i.e., based on 
information retrieved from corpora) and corpus-based (i.e., using corpus data), combining them well with 
other teaching techniques and incorporating them in the instructional context. It can be argued that pre-
service and in-service teachers need to be trained in order to develop these three sets of skills. The 
development of a model of effective teacher training in data-driven learning is a challenge that has not been 
adequately tackled in the literature to date. 
218 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Review of the Literature 
There are a range of books devoted to the applications of corpora in language teaching (e.g., Anderson & 
Corbett, 2009; Bennett, 2010; Flowerdew, 2012; O’Keeffe, McCarthy, & Carter, 2007; Reppen, 2010). 
They are good introductions to corpus linguistics, and all offer a fairly comprehensive overview of various 
possible applications of corpora in language instruction. Another source of inspiration can come from 
numerous articles describing corpus-based teaching projects (for recent collections of articles, see Boulton, 
Carter-Thomas, & Rowley-Jolivet, 2012; Frankenberg-Garcia, Flowerdew, & Aston, 2011; Kübler, 2011; 
or Leńko-Szymańska & Boulton, 2015; however, there are more articles published in academic journals). 
These articles report on projects around the world where teachers and learners have access to various types 
of corpora and utilize them to improve learners’ control of language systems and skills or their professional 
expertise as translators. They showcase how corpora can be exploited in and outside the classroom. 
However, there are several problems with the relevance of these descriptions for many language teachers 
working in a variety of educational settings. One of the problems is the profile of the learners targeted in 
these courses. They are frequently university students in language-related programmes, who are therefore 
more advanced and more interested in how language works in comparison with other types of learners. 
Thus, the ideas used in these classes often cannot be copied directly to other instructional settings. 
Moreover, these courses are usually heavily based on corpora, whereas many teachers may want to use 
data-driven materials and tasks as a supplement to other materials and techniques rather than the principal 
teaching aid. Finally, the resources exploited in these projects are often available only for in-house use. 
The problems in direct transfer or adaptation of other instructors’ experience with DDL points to the need 
for institutionalized teacher-training courses for pre-service and in-service teachers. Such courses should 
enable participants to carry out their own analyses of linguistic features relevant for their students and to 
design their own corpus-informed and corpus-based teaching materials suitable for their classrooms. This 
need has already been voiced by several researchers (e.g., Mukherjee, 2004; Römer, 2010). Descriptions of 
such projects have started to appear in the literature, adopting different approaches to the role and place of 
corpora in teacher training. In some courses, trainees exploit corpora in their foreign language or language 
awareness classes (Amador Moreno, O’Riordan, & Chambers, 2006; Callies, 2016; Coniam, 1998; Farr, 
2008; Heather & Helt, 2012; Zareva, 2016); thus, they use corpora as language learners rather than as 
teachers. However, as Breyer (2009) notes, “recognising that there is a significant difference between 
learning and teaching with corpora, as well as providing student teachers with the required skills, is of great 
importance” (p. 156). Some other projects (e.g., Breyer, 2009, 2011; Hüttner, Smit, & Mehlmauer-Larcher, 
2009; Leńko-Szymańska, 2014, 2015) go beyond training pre-service teachers in the use of corpora as 
language learners and introduce teacher-training elements directly addressing various uses of corpora in the 
classroom. These courses include discussions of advantages and disadvantages of particular materials and 
DDL activities in language instruction in general or in a particular teaching situation and coach trainees in 
preparation of corpus-informed and corpus-based materials and tasks. 
Since the accounts of both models of teacher training in direct uses of corpora are still scarce, it is impossible 
to establish with certainty the extent to which such courses are effective and bring about a real change in 
participants’ attitudes, skills, and behaviours for both language learners and instructors. In particular, 
research has not yet addressed the questions of which sets of skills discussed above (i.e., technical, corpus-
linguistics, and pedagogical) are particularly hard to master, and of what is a suitable teacher training model 
to facilitate their successful development. 
The effectiveness of teacher-training courses focusing on or featuring corpora has so far been evaluated 
mainly through questionnaires (Breyer, 2009, 2011; Farr, 2008; Leńko-Szymańska, 2014, 2015; Zareva, 
2016) or reflective essays (Breyer, 2009, 2011; Heather & Helt, 2012; Lin & Lee, 2015). These methods 
are useful in revealing future teachers’ attitudes towards corpora and their place in language education, as 
well as their perceptions of their strengths and limitations in this area. However, the results they produce 
say little about the actual skills that the trainees have acquired. A more suitable method in this respect might 
Agnieszka Leńko-Szymańska 219 
 
be scrutiny of activities and materials prepared by the participants during or at the end of the course. A 
rigorous and systematic analysis of students’ projects has proven to be a useful method of evaluating their 
acquired knowledge and skills, which has been demonstrated by several researchers in the context of 
courses on English as a second language or corpus linguistics (e.g., Boulton, 2011; Charles, 2015; Lee & 
Swales, 2006). Such an attempt in the area of teacher education was made by Hüttner et al. (2009), but they 
presented an analysis of only a single project developed by one successful participant, more as an 
exemplification of the potential of corpus-based analyses rather than an evaluation of the effectiveness of 
teacher training. Breyer (2011) and Heather and Helt (2012) used the case-study methodology to analyse 
projects prepared by pre-service teachers in a teacher-training course featuring corpus use. Their accounts 
are very informative as they give an insight into trainees’ real skills in applying corpus-informed and 
corpus-based materials, rather than their perceptions of these skills. However, they are understandably 
based on a small number of subjects: three and six, respectively. 
The study reported in this article is a contribution to the discussion on the effectiveness of teacher-training 
courses promoting the use of corpora in language education. Applying the methodology proposed by 
Boulton (2011), Breyer (2011), Charles (2015), and Heather and Helt (2012), it presents an analysis of 
projects completed by pre-service teachers at the end of five editions of a course on corpora in language 
teaching. The project required the participants to demonstrate the acquired skills in practice. In particular, 
the study examines if and to what extent the trainees mastered the three sets of skills (i.e., technical, corpus 
linguistics, and pedagogical) necessary for independent use of corpora in language learning and instruction. 
The article first presents the course itself: its objectives and design as well as the end-of-the-course project 
used for the evaluation of its participants. This is followed by a thorough examination of the participants’ 
projects. The discussion of the results leads to more general conclusions about the model of teacher training 
in respect to corpus-informed teaching and data-driven learning. 
The Course 
The course on Corpora in Foreign Language Teaching is offered annually in the winter semester, as an 
option for graduate students at the Institute of Applied Linguistics, University of Warsaw. In addition to 
linguistics and translation subjects, the MA programme includes teacher-training classes focusing on 
adolescent and adult learners in a range of educational contexts. To date, the course has been run six times 
and completed by the total of 98 students. It is taught in English, which the participants speak at advanced 
level. The trainees have a good knowledge of linguistics and language teaching methodology, but no prior 
experience in corpus linguistics. 
The aim of the course is twofold: (a) to introduce participants to the concept of a corpus and its analysis 
and (b) to acquaint them with various applications of corpora in language education. In particular, trainees 
are expected to learn how they can exploit corpora for the development of courses, teaching materials, and 
class activities in English for specific purposes (ESP). Since the participants are exposed to comprehensive 
teacher training in other classes, the focus of this course is solely on the presentation of various corpora, 
corpus-based resources, tools and techniques, and their potential in language education. However, DDL 
activities presented in the course are usually accompanied by other types of tasks such as reading texts or 
discussions in pairs to demonstrate that corpus-based instruction must be integrated with other teaching 
techniques and not become an end in itself. 
The design of the course followed several criteria, the most important being the presentation of a range of 
corpora, corpus-based materials, and tools. The resources used had to be free, easily available, and stable, 
as well as relatively simple and user-friendly. Different functions of the chosen software were introduced, 
which at the same time could exemplify various types of corpus analyses (e.g., studying genre differences, 
extracting collocations, etc.). The examples of possible corpus explorations were always set in the context 
of language learning activities, rather than pure linguistic analysis. During the classes, participants were 
asked to complete a variety of language learning tasks at their level. On several occasions, trainees were 
also assigned the task of creating their own teaching materials or activities using corpora. Finally, class 
220 Language Learning & Technology 
 
discussions were held focusing on the pedagogical value of the resources and tools presented. 
The course covered thirteen to fifteen 90-minute classes.1 It consisted of three thematic modules, each 
encompassing three or more meetings. The first module featured an introduction to corpora and types of 
corpus analyses along with an overview of their applications in language education. The second 
concentrated on the exploration of large general corpora for teaching language systems (i.e., vocabulary, 
phraseology, grammar, discourse) and skills (i.e., writing and reading, with some ideas for listening and 
speaking). The third was devoted to designing and compiling small ESP corpora and to exploring their uses 
in syllabus design and the development of language teaching materials and activities. 
Classes were taught by the author in a computer lab with 20 computers connected to the internet, and were 
run from the Moodle platform. Except for four classes featuring the instructor’s presentations, the meetings 
had a workshop format. Moodle tasks guided the trainees in studying selected language points and included 
detailed step-by-step instructions on how to manipulate software. Participants could work individually or 
in pairs to complete all the tasks and submit them through Moodle. The last 10–15 minutes of each session 
were devoted to class discussions of the activities with a focus on their pedagogical benefits.2 
Project 
At the end of the course, participants prepared a project which formed the main part of the assessment. The 
project consisted of three parts: (a) a compilation of a small corpus of specialized language (ca. 30,000 
words), (b) its linguistic analysis, and (c) the preparation of one ESP lesson including corpus-based 
materials or activities. The focus on ESP was deemed most suitable for the project for two reasons. First, it 
linked well with other teacher-training and translation classes the participants took. Second, it offered the 
best opportunity for the trainees to demonstrate their autonomy in corpus analysis and corpus-based 
language teaching and for the instructor to check and evaluate the widest range of technical, corpus-
linguistic, and pedagogical skills acquired by the participants during the course. 
Trainees were encouraged to select their own topics for the project. No specific recommendations were 
provided, but some examples are discussed. Participants were also instructed to select a target learner or a 
group of learners for their projects. These could be either real learners that they were teaching, had taught, 
or would teach, or hypothetical learners. Trainees were given guidelines regarding the format of their 
corpora (clean .TXT files); the analysis of their corpora, which had to include the list of key terminology 
characteristic of the selected area (using the wordlist or keyword function in a concordancer); a list of 
interesting collocations (also retrieved with corpus tools); and a discussion of at least one characteristic 
feature found in the corpus and that they found interesting and relevant for teaching purposes. Some ideas 
for individual explorations of self-compiled corpora were provided. Finally, trainees were required to 
prepare a state-of-the-art language lesson for their target learner(s) and include a worksheet with materials 
and tasks based on their corpus. Figure 1 below presents the instructions for participants posted on the 
Moodle platform. 
The project was assigned at the end of Class 8, which completed the 3-week course module devoted to 
using corpora for teaching ESP. This class was a workshop in which participants were taken step by step 
through the first two stages of the project. During the class they had a chance to build a mini-corpus of 
weather forecasts using detailed instructions and analyse it using AntConc (Anthony, 2014).3 
Participants could work on the tasks individually or in pairs and were given four weeks to complete the 
projects. The last classes were devoted to their presentations and class discussions of the projects. If they 
wished, they could revise their assignments according to the comments received from the instructor and in-
class discussions. 
Agnieszka Leńko-Szymańska 221 
 
 
Figure 1. Project instructions 
Course Modifications 
As could be expected in the case of a course placed in an authentic educational context and repeated several 
times over an extended period, some modifications were implemented to the syllabus along the way. This 
was done in response to the results of two questionnaires, administered after the third and fourth course 
editions ending in 2013 and 2014, respectively (Leńko-Szymańska, 2014, 2015). The outcome of the initial 
scrutiny of 32 projects conducted in 2014 was also taken into consideration. In the next two editions of the 
course, ending in 2015 and 2016, the DDL activities presented in the course and featuring grammar and 
discourse were slightly altered to give participants more experience with searching and analysing 
grammatical patterns and discourse features in corpora. In addition, the importance of the project’s section 
on special features was emphasized and more time was spent discussing it when assigning the project. 
Furthermore, in the last edition of the course (ending in January 2016), the projects were rejected if they 
did not contain this part of the analysis and had to be resubmitted. Table 1 summarizes the modifications 
introduced to the original syllabus. 
Table 1. Modifications to the Original Syllabus of the Course 
Course Edition Syllabus Course Content Project 
2011, 2012, 
2013, 2014 
Original   
2015 Modification 1 Activities featuring grammar and 
discourse altered and extended 
Emphasis on the analysis of special 
features when assigning the project 
2016 Modification 2 Activities featuring grammar and 
discourse altered and extended 
The analysis of special features in 
the project made obligatory 
Project 
At the end of the course you will be required to submit a project which can be completed in 
pairs. It will consist of the following tasks. 
1. Compilation of a small ESP corpus (ca. 30 thousand words) on a chosen topic. 
2. Basic analyses of the corpus: a list of terminology and frequent collocations, other 
characteristic features 
3. Preparation of one lesson plan including activities based on the compiled corpus 
(corpus-informed and corpus-based materials and/or classroom concordancing) 
Format of the project 
• Clear title page 
• List of corpus sources 
• List of terminology 
• List of collocations 
• List/description of other characteristic features 
• State-of-art lesson plan 
• Teaching materials (exercises, texts used for the class) 
• The corpus on a CD 
Please be environment-friendly and save paper. Your project has to be submitted in the 
traditional paper form (except for the corpus itself) but when preparing your word lists, print 
them in several columns on one page. 
222 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Analysis of the End-of-Semester Projects 
The effectiveness of the classes and the participants’ attitudes toward the application of corpora in language 
teaching were first assessed through two questionnaires conducted after two editions of the course (Leńko-
Szymańska, 2014, 2015). The surveys engaged the trainees in self-evaluation of their technical, corpus 
linguistics, and pedagogical skills acquired during the course. However, a more objective assessment of 
their competences could be achieved through an analysis of their end-of-semester projects, which gave 
them an opportunity to demonstrate the whole range of their skills in practice. The exploration of the 
projects was guided by the following research questions pertaining to the three sets of skills: 
1. Do the trainees acquire sufficient technical skills to perform their autonomous explorations of 
specialized language with the use of corpora and to exploit corpus resources for teaching? 
Specifically, can the trainees build their own corpora and operate software for their analyses, such 
as all-purpose concordancers, including their various functions such as extracting collocations? 
2. Do the trainees develop corpus-linguistic skills necessary for independent linguistic research which 
can inform their teaching of ESP? Specifically, can the trainees do the following: 
• build ESP corpora which include a balanced selection of representative texts; 
• identify language points which are interesting for analysis and relevant for teaching, and can 
they explore them using corpus data and methodology; and 
• demonstrate equal competence and confidence in the analysis of all language systems (lexis, 
phraseology, grammar, discourse)? 
3. Do the trainees master pedagogical skills which would enable them to exploit corpora in their own 
teaching successfully? Specifically, can the trainees do the following: 
• relate their corpus-based projects to the demands of real-life ESP instructional settings; 
• prepare methodologically sound and varied language teaching materials, and are they well 
motivated by lesson aims and well integrated with other non-corpus activities; 
• create corpus-based materials and tasks that target all language systems (lexis, phraseology, 
grammar, discourse) and skills (writing, reading, speaking, listening); and 
• use corpora for the development of both traditional teaching materials (corpus-informed 
activities) and DDL tasks (corpus-based activities), and which corpora (general or ESP) do they 
use for these two purposes? 
In order to answer the research questions, four elements of the participants’ projects were examined: the 
topics, the ESP corpora, the analyses, and the lessons. The methodology applied in this study involved a 
detailed scrutiny of each project and coding the contents with several categories of relevant information 
addressing the research questions. The codes included (a) the format of the corpus, (b) the kinds of analysis 
conducted (i.e., how the lists of terms and collocations were compiled and what other analyses were 
performed), and (c) the type of activities proposed in the lesson plan (vocabulary, phraseology, grammar, 
or discourse; reading, listening, writing, or speaking; corpus-informed or corpus-based tasks; full texts or 
concordance lines; etc.). The coded information was recorded in a spreadsheet for quantitative analysis. 
The projects were also scrutinized qualitatively to see if, for example, the proposed lessons were varied and 
pedagogically sound. 
In most analyses, the projects were treated as a coherent collection, irrespective of the year in which they 
were created. However, in places where the modifications of the syllabus were expected to produce a 
(positive) influence on the quality of the projects, the examination was performed chronologically, to 
account for a possible effect of the syllabus alterations. The chronological analyses pertained to the trainees’ 
scrutiny of special features found in the corpus as well as to the elements of their corpus-based lessons 
related to grammatical patterns or discourse features. 
Agnieszka Leńko-Szymańska 223 
 
Data 
Altogether, 53 projects were gathered from five editions of the course offered in five consecutive academic 
years, with the last collection in January 2016.4 The projects consisted of three main parts: the corpus, its 
analysis, and a lesson plan accompanied by teaching materials. Unfortunately, for our research purposes, 
sometimes not all the components were made available by the participants. Table 2 presents the data 
available for scrutiny. 
Table 2. Data Analysed in the Study 
 Original syllabus  Mod. 1 Mod. 2  
Type of Data 2012 2013 2014  2015 2016 Total 
All Projects 11 14 7  10 11 53 
Corpora 7 13 7  10 11 48 
Corpus Analysis 9 8 5  10 11 43 
Lesson Plans Plus Teaching Materials 10 12 7  10 11 50 
Complete Projects 6 7 5  10 11 39 
Topics 
First, the topics of all 53 projects were analysed with an attempt to find common themes. This was done in 
order to establish to what extent these pre-service teachers could relate the content of their projects to real-
life demands. Table 3 summarizes the results of this analysis. It indicated that the topics chosen by the 
trainees were quite varied. The projects differed in their focus—some topics were very broad (e.g., Medical 
English or Economics) and some very specific (e.g., Resuscitation or Gothic Architecture). In the majority 
of cases, the choice of topics was not motivated by particular instructional settings that the participants were 
experiencing or had experienced as ESP teachers or learners or of which they were aware as existing in 
various institution and companies or among different vocational and professional groups. Only two trainees 
reported having selected their topics in view of their private tutoring classes: In one case, a beautician 
wanted to improve her ability to speak to her foreign clients and to recommend and discuss the details of 
different treatments (Beauty). In the other case, a psychologist and psychotherapist was involved in 
academic work at a university (Psychology and Psychotherapy). In two cases, the projects were inspired by 
the participants’ background: one who was also studying engineering prepared a corpus on civil 
engineering, and a former medical student created a corpus of medical English. The most popular theme 
among the participants was cooking and recipes. Its attractiveness could be linked to a relative ease with 
which it can be delineated both as a topic and as a specific genre, coupled with availability of suitable texts 
and relatively small demands on background knowledge and familiarity with technical jargon. However, 
other popular themes (Environment, Medicine, and Sport) were more challenging in these respects, and yet 
the trainees selected them willingly. This analysis demonstrates that, although the participants may have 
had suitable theoretical knowledge on teaching specialized language from their other courses, they had no 
experience in this area, which could have had an effect on their projects, in particular on the choice of 
relevant topics and language points for analysis and instruction.  
224 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Table 3. Common Themes and Project Topics 
Common Theme N Project Topics 
Cooking 7 Cooking (4), Recipes, Cuisine, British Cuisine 
Environment 5 Environment (2), Weather (2), Environment and Natural Disasters 
Medicine 5 Medical English, Neurology, Cardiology, Cardiovascular System, 
Resuscitation 
Sport 5 Fitness (2), Football (2), Extreme Sports 
Art/Architecture 3 History of Art, Gothic Architecture, Modern Architecture 
Economics 3 Economics, Economy, Stock Exchange 
Healthy Lifestyle 3 Healthy Eating, Healthy Lifestyle, Dietetics 
Law 3 Tax Law, Code of Commercial Companies (in German), Crime and the Legal 
System 
Shopping 3 E-Commerce, Kids’ Clothes, Furniture 
Beauty 2 Makeup, Beauty 
Computers 2 League of Legends, Windows 8 
Drugs 2 Drugs, Cannabis 
Politics 2 International Relations, Political Speeches 
Miscellaneous 8 Astronomy, Flamenco, Easter, Civil Engineering, Human Resources, 
Photography, Psychology and Psychotherapy, Volunteering 
Corpora 
The first part of the project involved the compilation of an ESP corpus of around 30,000 words and 
supplying it with appropriate documentation, consisting of a list of sources of texts selected for inclusion 
in the database. The basic guidelines for corpus compilation presented in the course included selecting 
representative texts, storing the texts in .TXT format, and cleaning them of irrelevant material such as 
figures, tables, references, bibliographical lists, dates, and so forth. The trainees were also made aware of 
the advantages of saving texts in separate files. The analysis of the corpora made it possible to verify to 
what extent the participants had acquired these technical and linguistic aspects of building a corpus. 
Less than half (42%) of the 48 corpora analysed in the study stayed within the limits set up for the project, 
which was 30,000 words ± 10%. Over one third (38%) of the projects exceeded the requirement by 10–
30%. Only one participant prepared a much smaller corpus: Crime and the Legal System (19,838 tokens). 
Four groups compiled corpora which were above 60,000 tokens: Weather_1 (60,285 tokens), Football_2 
(65,556 tokens), Economics (71,411 tokens), and Code of Commercial Companies (in German; 98,081 
tokens). Figure 2 presents the variation in corpus sizes. 
 
Figure 2. Corpus sizes 
2
20
16
6
4
0
5
10
15
20
25
below 27K 27K-33K 33K-39K 39K-60K above 60K
Agnieszka Leńko-Szymańska 225 
 
The documentation submitted by the participants showed that all the texts included in the corpora were 
retrieved from a variety of Internet sources: newspaper and magazine sites (e.g., Environment, Crime and 
the Legal System), academic journals (e.g., Neurology), specialized sites (e.g., Cooking, Weather), 
promotional materials (e.g., Beauty), product descriptions (e.g., Windows 8, Drugs), or official institutional 
sites (e.g., Political Speeches, which contained transcripts of EU parliament debates). On the whole, the 
texts were fairly representative of the genres selected by the trainees for the analysis and teaching. 
17 corpora consisted of several files (from 2 to 60). However, in most corpora, all texts were stored in a 
single file. Seven collections were submitted as .DOC files, two of which were not cleaned at all and still 
contained pictures and irrelevant material. All the other corpora were submitted in .TXT format. Eight of 
these collections had undergone a very low level of cleaning and contained, for example, figure captions or 
authors’ names. Yet the analysis revealed that 38 corpora (79%) were fairly clean. The information about 
the formats of the corpora is summarised in Table 4. 
Table 4. Corpus Formats 
Information N 
Total Corpora Collected 48 (100%) 
Number of Files  
Several Files (2 to 60) 17 (35%) 
One File 31 (65%) 
File Format  
.TXT File 41 (85%) 
.DOC File 7 (15%) 
Cleaned of Irrelevant Content  
Yes 38 (79%) 
No 10 (21%) 
The analysis of the ESP corpora shows that, in most cases, the trainees met the criteria of corpus compilation 
presented during the course. It can be thus concluded that, on the whole, they mastered the technical and 
corpus linguistic skills related to the compilation of a corpus and understood how to select and prepare texts 
for inclusion in a database. 
Analyses 
The instructions for the project required participants to submit a list of terminology and interesting 
collocations extracted from their ESP corpora. During the course, the trainees were taught how to generate 
a basic wordlist from a corpus and were shown the advantages of using more advanced corpus tools for this 
purpose (i.e., tagged corpora and keyword analysis). The participants also learned how to use the clusters 
and collocates functions in AntConc. Another project requirement was a systematic exploration of at least 
one other characteristic feature of the language which the trainees had identified by themselves and found 
relevant for teaching purposes. This was meant to verify whether they had developed an awareness of 
various lexical, grammatical, and discourse characteristics of specialised language, which can be explored 
in a corpus, and whether they had learned to perform a corpus-based analysis of these features including 
basic statistical analyses, retrieving recurrent patterns, and detecting contextual restrictions. These data 
were available for 43 projects. 
As far as terminology was concerned, the lists varied in size from around 60 items to several pages of words 
in columns. As mentioned above, the trainees were encouraged to use the keyword function in AntConc for 
the extraction of the list, and were provided with a reference wordlist retrieved from Section B of the 
226 Language Learning & Technology 
 
F-LOB corpus.5 However, in only six cases was it clear from the keyness statistics (British Cuisine, Fitness, 
Medical English, Modern Architecture) or the description of the procedure (History of Art, Economics) that 
this was what the trainees had done. While the size of the lists indicates that they could not have been 
compiled manually, the fact that they did not include more general items with unusual frequencies in the 
analysed ESP genre implied that the participants preferred producing a wordlist in AntConc and then sorting 
it manually, deleting topic-irrelevant items. Only one group of participants (Cooking_4) divided their list 
of terminology into nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs, and then further into ingredients, appliances, 
quantities, and so forth. But again, all the sorting was done manually, as reported during their presentation. 
In order to prepare the list of collocations, the trainees generally selected 5–10 items from the list of 
terminology and then looked for clusters with these words using the AntConc clusters function; some 
retrieved the most frequent 2- to 4-word clusters. Only two groups (Cardiovascular System, Football_2) 
produced a list of collocations using the more sophisticated collocates function. An example of its result 
can be seen in Figure 3 below. 
 
Figure 3. An example of collocations retrieved using the Collocate function (Football_2) 
This indicates that the participants had developed basic technical skills which enabled them to operate 
standard software for corpus analysis, but that they were reluctant to use more advanced tools, such as 
keyword analysis or tagging, which were included in the syllabus. Alternatively, the trainees may not have 
developed sufficient corpus-linguistic skills which would have allowed them to appreciate the relevance of 
the linguistic information arising from these advanced instruments. 
An examination of the sections of the projects containing the trainees’ analyses of corpus special features 
was conducted in two steps, due to the changes that were introduced in the content of the course in its fifth 
and sixth editions and the influence these were expected to have on the content and the quality of the 
projects. The quantitative results are presented in Table 5, along with a discussion of the qualitative aspects 
below. The criteria for evaluating the standard of trainees’ analyses as low, medium, or high were fairly 
flexible. Claims supported by any corpus evidence including individual citations were already counted as 
medium. Analyses classified as high were based on more exhaustive scrutiny of corpus data such as multiple 
citations, statistical information, and so forth. 
The examination of the projects collected between 2012 and 2014 revealed that the trainees had attempted 
to describe self-selected characteristic features of their corpora in only eight cases. Unfortunately, the 
majority of these analyses (62%) were very disappointing as they consisted of very general statements 
unsupported by any evidence that clearly came from a systematic examination of the corpus using corpus 
linguistics methods (e.g., statistical analysis, automatic searching for patterns, sorting of concordance lines, 
etc.). In one case (Medical English), the trainees provided statistical facts about the corpus (i.e., the number 
of texts, paragraphs, sentences), but failed to comment on the relevance of this information. In two projects 
(Resuscitation, Windows 8), the participants made a comment about a large number of acronyms in the 
texts, but did not provide a list. One project attempted to address a grammatical feature (Cooking_2), and 
three commented on discourse characteristics: text purpose (Beauty), text structure (Cooking_2), and 
linking expressions (Windows 2008). Figure 4 presents an example of an analysis of the special features 
extracted from the Beauty corpus. As can be seen, the description is impressionistic and is not backed up 
by any evidence. 
Agnieszka Leńko-Szymańska 227 
 
Table 5. Quantitative Analysis of the Section on Corpus Characteristic Features 
 Original Syllabus Mod. 1 Mod. 2 Total 
Number of analyses collected 22 (100%) 10 (100%) 11 (100%) 43 (100%) 
Analysis of self-selected features 8 (36%) 5 (50%) 11 (100 %) 24 (59%) 
Analysed features  
Vocabulary 8 (100%) 4 (80%) 5 (45%) 17 (71%) 
Grammar 1 (13%) 5 (100%) 7 (64%) 13 (54%) 
Discourse 3 (38%) 0 (0%) 1 (9%) 4 (17%) 
Quality of analysis (evidence of corpus-based analysis) 
High 0 (0%) 2 (40%) 4 (36%) 6 (25%) 
Medium 3 (38%) 2 (40%) 3 (27%) 8 (33%) 
Low 5 (62%) 1 (20%) 4 (36%) 10 (42%) 
 
Figure 4. An example of the trainees’ analysis of special features in their corpus (Beauty) 
A particularly thought-provoking observation was made when analysing the corpus on Medical English. Its 
list of collocations contained clusters generated for the word body, which included the items body’s and of 
the body. These clusters in fact point to a more general grammatical problem of noun modification which 
could be potentially interesting for a further corpus-based exploration and instruction. However, the trainees 
did not pick up this thread in the section on special features. 
In the next two editions of the course (2015, 2016), following two modifications to its content, 21 analyses 
were collected and only five of them (submitted in 2015) did not contain a section on special features. 
However, only six projects contained a thorough and detailed corpus-based analysis of a selected feature 
or features (for an example, see Figure 5). At the same time, five projects contained a discussion of 
discourse features that again were not based on a systematic scrutiny of the corpus, as evidenced by the 
lack of examples or statistical information drawn from the data. 
228 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 5. An example of a corpus-based analysis of a selected feature (British Cuisine) 
Out of 24 analyses of special corpus features collected over five years, the majority (N = 17) contained 
comments on vocabulary—often unsupported by corpus-based data—such as the use of terminology, vivid 
emotional vocabulary, verbs referring to actions, and acronyms. Grammar was tackled less frequently (N = 
12) and the analyses covered such points as modals (Cardiovascular System, British Cuisine), the present 
perfect (Cooking_3), imperatives (Cooking_2, Cooking_3, Cooking_4, Fitness), past participle forms 
(Fitness), and emphatic structures (Beauty, British Cuisine). Three projects contained comments of noun 
phrase modification (Neurology, Human Resources, Drugs) and two offered an observation on binomial 
structures (League of Legends, Tax Law). Except for four rather general observations (e.g., “Connectors 
such as: firstly, then, after etc. are common” [Cooking_3] or “The common feature of the articles is that 
they are advertising beauty treatments and trying to convince the reader that they are indispensable” 
[Beauty]), no discourse or genre-related features were observed. 
On the whole, the results of the examination of the part of the projects devoted to the analysis of ESP 
corpora demonstrate that the participants had mastered basic skills in corpus-based linguistic analysis. Yet, 
they lacked intuition about what could be analysed with these skills. The trainees were specifically 
instructed to provide a list of terminology and collocations and they could complete the task successfully, 
even if they employed only simple tools for the purpose. However, once the instruction was less specific 
and required selecting a feature that was characteristic or relevant for teaching, the participants were at a 
loss as to what to analyse and how to do it. In particular, they seemed less confident when scrutinizing 
grammatical features and patterns and presented few insights as far as discourse features were concerned. 
Lesson Plans and Teaching Materials 
As the last part of the project, the trainees were required to prepare an ESP lesson that would address chosen 
linguistic elements or skills with corpus-inspired or corpus-driven activities. Throughout the course, the 
students were given opportunities to perform and design corpus-based and corpus-driven tasks catering for 
all the language elements (i.e., vocabulary, phraseology, grammar, and discourse) as well as for reading 
and writing. They were also provided with examples of how such activities could be combined with other 
types of tasks addressing the same linguistic needs. The evaluation of this section of the projects made it 
possible to establish whether the participants were capable of designing a pedagogically-sound ESP lesson 
(irrespective of whether it was inspired, based on, or driven by corpus material). More importantly, it 
demonstrated whether these future teachers had acquired sufficient skills in exploiting corpora in their 
teaching. The largest data set (N = 50) was available for this part of the project. An example of this segment, 
drawn from the Cooking_4 project, is provided in the Appendix. On the whole, the lesson plans varied 
greatly in the degree of grounding in the earlier corpus-based analyses of the self-compiled ESP corpora 
and the use of corpus data for developing teaching materials. Table 6 presents the list of language systems 
and skills addressed in the lessons. Since the modification to the course content (introduced in the course 
editions ending in 2015 and 2016) only related to corpus-based activities addressing grammatical and 
discourse points, the results for these two features exclusively are broken down to relevant periods.  
Agnieszka Leńko-Szymańska 229 
 
Table 6. Lessons Prepared by the Participants Addressing Language Systems and Skills 
 2012-2014 2015-2016 
Language Systems 50 (100%) 
Vocabulary 48 (96%) 
Collocations 30 (60%) 
Grammar 3 (8%) 4 (19%) 
Discourse 0 (0%) 1 (5%) 
Language Skills 42 (84%) 
Reading 25 (50%) 
Writing 18 (36%) 
Listening 11 (22%) 
Speaking 11 (22%) 
DDL Activities 18 (36%) 
General Corpora 10 (20%) 
ESP Corpora 10 (20%) 
Total Lessons 29 (58%) 21 (42%) 
The great majority of lessons (N = 48) included tasks devoted to vocabulary (mainly terminology of the 
relevant discipline) and 60% (N = 30) included tasks devoted to collocations. In 60% of the lessons (N = 
30), the vocabulary and collocations were first introduced without context, through matching or sorting 
activities (e.g., match words with a picture or a definition, sort words into groups, match two words). In all 
but two cases, these activities were followed by gap-filling tasks or other context-based activities based on 
corpus data. Alternatively, the vocabulary and collocations were introduced in texts. Figures 6 to 9 illustrate 
such activities. In most cases (N = 46), the vocabulary and collocations introduced and practised during the 
lessons were drawn from the list of terminology retrieved from the ESP corpora. The sentences and texts 
providing context had the same origin (for examples, see Figure 6 and Figure 7). 
 
Figure 6. An example of a vocabulary activity (Photography) 
230 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 7. An example of a context-based vocabulary activity (Photography)6 
However, in the case of two projects, it could be doubted whether it was the analysis of the ESP corpus that 
formed an inspiration for vocabulary and collocation activities. For example, in the project on Cardiology, 
there is no activity that was clearly prompted by the corpus analysis or created using corpus data, as some 
of the target words in Exercise 1 and the text used in Exercise 2 do not even appear in the ESP corpus (see 
Figure 8 and Figure 9). 
 
Figure 8. An example of a vocabulary activity (Cardiology) 
Agnieszka Leńko-Szymańska 231 
 
 
Figure 9. An example of a context-based vocabulary activity (Cardiology)7 
Only three projects prepared in the first three editions of the course contained activities devoted to grammar 
points: one to plural verb forms following collective nous (Football_1) and two to prepositions (Beauty and 
Resuscitation). In the next two years, following the changes introduced to the content of the course, four 
more examples of grammar activities were found in the projects: prepositions (Tax Law), will versus going 
to (Weather_1), the present perfect (Cooking_3), and the gradation of adjectives (Weather_2). Three of 
these seven lessons in total involved gap-filling based on sentences retrieved from the ESP corpora. Another 
three classes including grammatical elements entailed studying examples drawn from the corpora in order 
to guess the rule. Finally, one lesson featured a traditional activity (gradation of adjectives), requiring 
learners to provide comparative and superlative forms of adjectives and had not been informed by corpus 
analysis. Only one project (Cooking_4) contained three activities devoted to discourse structure (time 
sequencers). These activities are available in the Appendix. 
The great majority of the lesson plans (N = 42) included activities designed to promote language skills. 
Tasks developing reading comprehension were the most frequent (N = 25), always based on texts retrieved 
from the ESP corpora. Writing tasks (N = 18) were generally based on model texts explored in previous 
activities (e.g., for useful expressions). Interestingly, the lessons included 11 listening tasks, though only 
one was drawn from the ESP corpus, containing transcripts of the EU debates (Political Speeches). All the 
remaining listening activities were based on supplementary materials found on the Internet. There were also 
11 instances of speaking activities based on earlier reading or listening tasks. Figure 10 provides examples 
of a speaking and writing activity drawn from the Beauty project. 
 
Figure 10. Examples of a speaking and a writing activity (Beauty) 
232 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Only 18 projects contained activities involving direct learner interaction with corpora: in 10 cases, the BNC 
or COCA, and in 10 more, the self-compiled ESP corpora (in two cases the activities involved both types 
of collections). The hypothetical learners were instructed to consult a corpus to discover or verify meanings 
of new words, to look for characteristic collocations, or to look for example sentences of a word or a 
collocation. With one exception (Football_1; see Figure 11), these activities never involved searching for 
patterns of use. On the whole, the direct corpus consultations were not well motivated and seemed a bit 
forced, creating an impression that their main function was to meet the instructor’s implicit expectations 
related to DDL. Figure 12 presents an example of such an activity—one that is unrelated to other tasks in 
the lesson and that seems to have little pedagogic value on its own. 
 
Figure 11. An example of a DDL activity on grammatical patters (Football_1) 
 
Figure 12. An example of a DDL activity (E-commerce) 
Figure 13 presents the only example of printed concordance lines found in the teaching materials. The 
projects contained many activities involving working with citations drawn from the corpus, but they 
contained full sentences and were carefully pre-selected and edited. This is the only case where the KWIC 
format was used. 
 
Figure 13. An example of a DDL activity with printed concordance lines (Dietetics) 
Agnieszka Leńko-Szymańska 233 
 
As far as the trainees’ more general teaching skills relating to ESP instruction were concerned, it was 
observed that, in most cases, they demonstrated good pedagogical skills and prepared good lessons from 
the methodological point of view; although taken as a collection, they lacked variety. The lessons consisted 
of clear and logical stages built around the presentation, practice, production paradigm. As far as the 
exploitation of corpora in language instruction was concerned, most of the lessons leaned towards 
introducing and practicing new vocabulary and phraseology retrieved from the ESP corpora and developing 
reading comprehension; very few tackled grammatical points, and almost none were related to exploring 
discourse properties. The participants preferred using corpus resources as a source of authentic texts and 
sentences for their self-developed traditional language activities (e.g., gap-filling) and were reluctant to 
engage hypothetical learners in DDL tasks based on both general and ESP corpora. 
Discussion and Conclusion 
It is worthwhile to return to the discussion of different approaches to teacher training in corpus-informed 
and corpus-based instruction mentioned above. As postulated by some researchers (Callies, 2016; 
Mukherjee, 2006), teachers need three kinds of skills in order to exploit corpus data in their classes: 
technical skills, corpus-linguistic skills, and pedagogical skills. The results of this study demonstrate that if 
the training in corpus use and corpus-driven teaching is limited solely to a one-semester course that attempts 
to cater to all three types of skills simultaneously, the future teachers do not reach satisfactory levels of 
attainment in any of the required competencies. It appears that such a limited contact with corpus analysis 
and DDL is simply not sufficient for trainees to develop their technical, corpus linguistic, and corpus-related 
pedagogical skills to a satisfactory degree. The analysis of the end-of-course assignments demonstrated that 
the participants had mastered the technical skills of manipulating corpora only at a basic level, but that they 
were not adept at applying more advanced functions and tools. The trainees had also developed only basic 
corpus-linguistic skills. They did not know how to autonomously select language points that could be 
analysed with corpora. Apart from searching for purely lexical and phraseological information, they were 
uncertain of how to use corpora for studying and finding other linguistic facts, such as register differences. 
As far as corpus-related pedagogical skills were concerned, the trainees could use corpora to design and 
develop their own teaching materials—albeit addressing mainly vocabulary and collocations and not any 
other language features. Unfortunately, it was impossible to establish if this focus on lexis and phraseology 
was a result of their lack of confidence in analysing corpus data for other features or their lack of awareness 
of the varied needs of ESP learners. In addition, the lesson plans demonstrated that the participants had not 
mastered the expertise in designing hands-on DDL activities for their learners. 
The types of problems faced by future teachers, uncovered by the present analysis, have already been hinted 
at in earlier studies based on questionnaires and reflective essays. Challenges related to technical skills of 
operating corpus-analysis software were voiced by pre-service teachers in studies by Farr (2008), Breyer 
(2011), and Zareva (2016). In a survey administered to one cohort of trainees following the course described 
in this article (Leńko-Szymańska, 2014), the participants indicated that they found it difficult to identify 
and interpret language points that they could study autonomously with the use of corpora. The same 
observation was made by the trainees described in Farr (2008) and Zareva (2016). The results of another 
questionnaire completed by a different cohort of course participants (Leńko-Szymańska, 2015) pointed to 
grammar and discourse features as more problematic than lexical and phraseological information in both 
independent corpus analyses and the design of new teaching materials. This perception was also shared by 
the pre-service teachers surveyed by Breyer (2011), who considered DDL activities as a valuable extension 
in teaching vocabulary to a much larger extent than in teaching grammar or as an aid in writing. 
The same insight was also offered by earlier analyses of trainees’ projects, which resulted from teacher 
training courses in corpora in language instruction. Breyer’s (2011) examination of three DDL activities 
prepared by her participants indicated that “creating a simple task aimed at lower to intermediate learners, 
that is linguistically relevant and successful, proved to be very difficult indeed” (p. 206). Her trainees 
experienced problems with locating suitable corpora and underestimated the importance of specific skills 
234 Language Learning & Technology 
 
and prior knowledge for successful completion of their tasks by their hypothetical learners. Heather and 
Helt (2012) found that their participants focused on lexical items and their meanings in their projects and 
did not demonstrate sufficient skills in utilizing concordance output to identify lexico-grammatical patterns. 
They also experienced problems in “organizing and presenting concordance data in ways that lead more 
clearly to autonomous learning for their students” (p. 436). 
The results of this study indicate that a one-semester, self-contained course does not give future teachers 
sufficient opportunities to develop the technical, corpus-linguistic, and pedagogical skills adequately. This 
has also been suggested by other researchers (Breyer 2011; Heather & Helt, 2012). Thus, the model of 
teacher training in corpus literacy and DDL pedagogy based on short dedicated workshops and courses, as 
frequently reported in the literature, has not proven to be satisfactorily effective. It does succeed in 
familiarizing trainees with relevant issues, and although it creates mostly positive perceptions towards 
corpus-based techniques, it does not produce autonomous corpus users and corpus-using teachers. 
Therefore, as already advocated by Farr (2010) and Breyer (2011), a better solution may be to give future 
teachers a much wider opportunity to interact with corpora in their teacher training programmes from two 
perspectives: as learners and as teachers. Trainees should get a chance to gradually develop their technical 
and corpus-linguistic skills and get to know various corpus resources in their foreign language, language 
awareness, and linguistics classes that are almost always part of teacher training (at least for pre-service 
teachers), but that are not teacher training per se. Such an approach has already been applied by several 
researchers (e.g., Amador Moreno et al., 2006; Callies, 2016; Coniam, 1998; Farr, 2008; Heather & Helt, 
2012; Zareva, 2016). It can guarantee that trainees not only develop computer and cognitive skills related 
to corpus exploitations but also realise the potential of corpora for learning, as observed by Breyer (2011): 
If teacher trainees can discover the potential of corpora for their own learning, then this may foster 
intrinsic motivation to make use of corpora in their profession as teachers. It also allows teacher trainees 
to explore and address the challenges that such an approach entails. (p. 230) 
However, the training cannot stop at language and linguistics classes—being versed in technology and 
corpus linguistics will not automatically educate future teachers in how to use corpus data in their 
instruction. The development of corpus-based pedagogical skills also has to be explicitly catered to in 
teacher training seminars (Breyer, 2009, 2011). It remains to be established whether such training should 
just focus on corpora as learning resources and teaching aids and overview their various applications to 
language pedagogy. The present study, as well as the research carried out by Breyer (2011), demonstrated 
that pre-service teachers, even if well-versed in language teaching methodologies and techniques, may lack 
sufficient pedagogical experience to design suitable and varied corpus-informed and corpus-based teaching 
materials that develop different language elements and skills. It may thus be argued that teacher training 
seminars should instead begin with particular teaching contexts, and that future teachers should be given a 
chance to discuss if and, if so, how corpus information or DDL materials (along with other instructional 
procedures and techniques) can support teaching in these settings. But such a model of DDL teacher training 
still needs to be verified and assessed empirically. 
Thus, in order to tackle the challenge of implementing DDL in language education, a model for teacher 
training in corpus-based and corpus-driven instruction can be proposed. Rather than promoting courses 
devoted solely to the use of corpora in language teaching, as is frequently the case in pre-service and in-
service teacher training programmes (if they address this issue at all), the model postulates two parallel 
strands of corpus training for future teachers. First, the trainees should be exposed to corpora in their 
language and linguistics classes. In addition, they should be presented with DDL methods and techniques 
along with other instructional procedures and techniques in general teacher training courses. Such a model 
is more likely to ensure that future teachers will not only have good technical and corpus-linguistic skills, 
but also have developed sound pedagogical skills necessary for methodologically-apt application of corpus-
based tasks and materials in the classroom. 
Agnieszka Leńko-Szymańska 235 
 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank my students for selecting my course and for submitting their work for this study. I 
would also like to thank the editors and anonymous reviewers for their invaluable comments on the earlier 
versions of this article. 
Notes 
1. The number of weeks varied from one semester to another. 
2. More details on the course and the resources used can be found in Leńko-Szymańska (2014, 2015). The 
content of the course is available on the Moodle site and at http://corpora.blog.ils.uw.edu.pl/. 
3. In previous editions of the course, earlier versions of AntConc were used. 
4. The projects were not collected in the first edition in 2011. 
5. The Freiburg-LOB Corpus (F-LOB) was compiled by Christian Mair of Albert-Ludwigs-Universität 
Freiburg and released in 1999. 
6. Some sentences were truncated. 
7. The Polish definition was truncated for the reasons of space. 
References 
Amador Moreno, C. P., O’Riordan, S., & Chambers, A. (2006). Integrating a corpus of classroom 
discourse in language teacher education: The case of discourse markers. ReCALL, 18(1), 83–104. doi: 
10.1017/S0958344006000619 
Anderson, W., & Corbett, J. (2009). Exploring English with online corpora: An introduction. New York, 
NY: Palgrave Macmillian. 
Anthony, L. (2014). AntConc (Version 3.4.3) [Computer software]. Tokyo, Japan: Waseda University. 
Retrieved from http://www.laurenceanthony.net/ 
Bennett, G. (2010). Using corpora in the language learning classroom: Corpus linguistics for teachers. 
Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. doi: 10.3998/mpub.371534 
Boulton, A. (2011). Bringing corpora to the masses: Free and easy tools for interdisciplinary language 
studies. In N. Kübler (Ed.), Corpora, language, teaching, and resources: From theory to practice (pp. 
69–96). Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Boulton, A., Carter-Thomas, S., & Rowley-Jolivet, E. (Eds.). (2012). Corpus-informed research and 
learning in ESP: Issues and applications. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. doi: 
10.1075/scl.52 
Breyer, Y. (2009). Learning and teaching with corpora: Reflections by student teachers. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 22(2), 153–172. doi: 10.1080/09588220902778328 
Breyer, Y. (2011). Corpora in language teaching and learning: Potential, evaluation, challenges. 
Frankfurt, Germany: Peter Lang. 
Callies, M. (2016). Towards corpus literacy in foreign language teacher education: Using corpora to 
examine the variability of reporting verbs in English. In R. Kreyer, S. Schaub, & A. Gulderning 
(Eds.), Angewandte Linguistik in Schule und Hochschule (pp. 391–415). Frankfurt, Germany: Peter 
Lang. 
236 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Charles, M. (2015). Same task, different corpus: The role of personal corpora in EAP classes. In A. 
Leńko-Szymańska & A. Boulton (Eds.), Multiple affordances of language corpora for data-driven 
learning (pp. 129–154). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. doi: 10.1075/scl.69.07cha 
Coniam, D. (1998). A practical introduction to corpora in a teacher training language awareness 
programme. Language Awareness, 6(4), 199–207. doi: 10.1080/09658416.1997.9959929 
Farr, F. (2008). Evaluating the use of corpus-based instruction in a language teacher education context: 
Perspectives from the users. Language Awareness, 17(1), 25–43. doi: 10.2167/la414.0 
Farr, F. (2010). How can corpora be used in teacher education? In A. O’Keeffe & M. McCarthy (Eds.), 
Routledge handbook of corpus linguistics (pp. 620–632). New York, NY: Routledge. doi: 
10.4324/9780203856949.ch44 
Flowerdew, L. (2012). Corpora and language education. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. doi: 
10.1057/9780230355569 
Frankenberg-Garcia, A., Flowerdew, L., & Aston, G. (Eds.). (2011). New trends in corpora and language 
learning. London, UK: Continuum. 
Heather, J., & Helt, M. (2012). Evaluating corpus literacy training for pre-service language teachers: Six 
case studies. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 20(4), 415–440. 
Hüttner, J., Smit, U., & Mehlmauer-Larcher, B. (2009). ESP teacher education at the interface of theory 
and practice: Introducing a model of mediated corpus-based genre analysis. System, 37, 99–109. doi: 
10.1016/j.system.2008.06.003 
Kübler, N. (Ed.). (2011). Corpora, language, teaching, and resources: From theory to practice. Bern, 
Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Lee, D., & Swales, J. (2006). A corpus-based EAP course for NNS doctoral students: Moving from 
available specialized corpora to self-compiled corpora. English for Specific Purposes, 25(1), 56–75. 
doi: 10.1016/j.esp.2005.02.010 
Leńko-Szymańska, A. (2014). Is this enough? A qualitative evaluation of the effectiveness of a teacher-
training course on the use of corpora in language education. ReCALL, 26(2), 260–278. doi: 
10.1017/S095834401400010X 
Leńko-Szymańska, A. (2015). A teacher-training course on the use of corpora in language education: 
Perspectives of the students. In A. Turula & B. Mikołajewska (Eds.), Insights into technology-
enhanced language pedagogy (pp. 129–144). Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Peter Lang. 
Leńko-Szymańska, A., & Boulton, A. (Eds.). (2015). Multiple affordances of language corpora for data-
driven learning. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. doi: 10.1075/scl.69 
Lin, M. H., & Lee, J.-Y. (2015). Data-driven learning: Changing the teaching of grammar in EFL classes. 
ELT Journal, 69(3), 264–274. doi: 10.1093/elt/ccv010 
Mukherjee, J. (2004). Bridging the gap between applied corpus linguistics and the reality of English 
language teaching in Germany. In U. Connor & T. Upton (Eds.), Applied corpus linguistics: A 
multidimensional perspective (pp. 239–250). Amsterdam, Netherlands: Rodopi. doi: 
10.1163/9789004333772_014 
Mukherjee, J. (2006) Corpus linguistics and language pedagogy: The state of the art—and beyond. In S. 
Braun, K. Kohn, & J. Mukherjee (Eds.), Corpus technology and language pedagogy: New resources, 
new tools, new methods (pp. 5–24). Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Peter Lang. 
O’Keeffe, A., McCarthy, M., & Carter, R. (2007). From corpus to classroom: Language use and 
language teaching. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Agnieszka Leńko-Szymańska 237 
 
Reppen, R. (2010). Using corpora in the language classroom. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Römer, U. (2009). Corpus research and practice: What help do teachers need and what can we offer? In 
K. Aijmer (Ed.), Corpora and language teaching (pp. 83–98). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John 
Benjamins. doi: 10.1075/scl.33.09rom 
Römer, U. (2010). Using general and specialized corpora in English language teaching: Past, present, and 
future. In M. C. Campoy-Cubillo, B. Bellés-Fortuño, & L. Gea-Valor (Eds.), Corpus-based 
approaches to English language teaching (pp. 18–35). London, UK: Continuum. 
Tribble, C. (2015). Teaching and language corpora: Perspectives from a personal journey. In A. Leńko-
Szymańska & A. Boulton (Eds.), Multiple affordances of language corpora for data-driven learning 
(pp. 37–62). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. doi: 10.1075/scl.69.03tri 
Zareva, A. (2016). Incorporating corpus literacy skills into TESOL teacher training. ELT Journal, 71(1), 
69–79. doi: 10.1093/elt/ccw045 
Appendix. Lesson (Cooking_4) 
Note. The student’s original wording and spelling are retained in the Appendix. 
 
Lesson Plan 
Student Information 
• Age of student: 27 
• Level: Intermediate (B1) 
• No of students: 1 
• Time: 60 min 
Aims of the Lesson 
• revising vocabulary for foods and actions in the kitchen 
• developing writing skills (writing recipes) 
• teaching time sequencing (using time markers before, then, until, when, immediately) in recipes 
• practicing reading comprehension skills (recipes) 
• developing social media skills 
Materials Used 
• a smartphone, tablet or laptop 
• recipes for Zucchini Bread 
1. http://smittenkitchen.com/blog/2007/07/summer-of-the-bats/ 
2. http://www.nigella.com/recipes/view/zucchini-bread-4382 
3. http://www.jamieoliver.com/recipes/member-recipes/recipe-
detail/203/#S554Us9IBxcSyTyt.97 
• Exercises 1, 2, and 3 
• film: “Zucchini Almond Bread” on Facebook fanpage Tasty 
  
238 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Stage Aim Procedure (teacher’s and learners’ tasks) Materials Time 
Lead-in arising interest 
activating schemata 
for usage of English 
T asks S who his favourite English-speaking 
famous cooks are. S names his cooking role 
models and explains why he likes this 
particular person. 
______ 3 min 
Presentation introducing subject 
of the lesson 
practicing reading 
comprehension skills 
T sends links to three different recipes for 
Zucchini Bread to the S. T asks questions: 
What are the main ingredients of Zucchini 
Bread? Can you find any differences 
between the three recipes? How did the 
authors indicate the order of performing 
actions in the kitchen? S goes to the 
websites, reads the recipes and answers the 
questions. 
smartphone, 
tablet or 
laptop; 
recipes for 
Zucchini 
Bread 
12 min 
Presentation/ 
practice 
presenting and 
practicing the rules 
of writing a recipe 
practicing speaking 
skills 
T asks S what the components of a perfect 
and useful recipe are. S shares his recipes 
experiences, S & T discuss and evaluate 
provided recipes. S writes down the rules of 
writing a recipe in a clear and well-
organised way. 
paper; 
markers 
10 min 
Presentation presenting time 
sequencing markers 
practicing reading 
skills 
S is given Exercise 1, T asks him to read the 
sentences. T asks a question: What is the 
common feature of these sentences? S 
answers the question and reads the 
sentences in Exercise 1 once again, this time 
underlining words that indicate the order of 
actions performed in the kitchen when 
preparing a meal. 
handout: 
exercise 2 
5 min 
Controlled 
practice 
practicing using time 
sequencing markers 
in a sentence 
S is given Exercise 2 and solves the gap-
filling exercise. 
handout: 
exercise 3 
5 min 
Controlled 
practice 
practicing using time 
sequencing markers 
in a sentence 
S is given Exercise 3 and matches clauses to 
create meaningful sentences. 
handout: 
exercise 4 
5 min 
Controlled 
practice 
practicing writing 
recipes 
developing writing 
skills 
developing social 
media skills 
S goes to Facebook fanpage Tasty and 
searches the Zucchini Almond Bread recipe. 
T asks him to focus on the ingredients. He 
watches the film once again and writes 
down the ingredients. T asks S to use time 
sequencing markers he has learned. S writes 
a recipe basing on what he saw in the video. 
T helps the S if need arises. 
smartphone, 
tablet or 
laptop;  
12 min 
Practice practicing speaking 
skills 
T asks S to present the recipe he wrote, as if 
he was performing on a TV cooking show. 
S stands behind a desk or a table and 
pretends to be cooking and presents the 
recipe. 
______ 8 min 
Agnieszka Leńko-Szymańska 239 
 
Student Handout 
Exercise 1 
Read the following sentences. They are fragments of authentic recipes. Each of them contains a word that 
marks the order of actions performed when preparing a recipe. Underline those words and note how they 
are used in the sentences. 
1. Heat 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large frying pan, and then add the crumbed salmon slices. 
2. The bubbles will be getting larger and larger then suddenly turning brown. 
3. My favourite method is to wash the leaves and stems and chop. Then pan fry in a little oil with 
some garlic just until everything is tender. 
 
4. Whisk butter and sugar until fluffy and well combined. 
5. Simply using a wooden spoon, cream the softened butter, caster sugar and lemon zest until light 
and fluffy in a bowl. 
6. Allow the pizza to cool for a minute or two before adding the basil on top (whole leaves, lightly 
torn, or thinly sliced). Serve immediately. 
 
7. Soak the dried mushrooms in warm water. When they have softened, drain, adding their soaking 
liquor to the casserole. 
8. Put the griddle on a medium heat and, when hot, add the batter, using a quarter-cup measure but 
only filling it two-thirds full. 
9. When the pasta is done, drain it and toss it with a bit of olive oil. 
 
10. Fifteen minutes or so before the end, start to prepare the fish. 
11. We soaked two chicken cutlets in a half-batch of brine for 30 minutes, and seasoned them before 
frying them in a pan. 
Exercise 2 
Now that you have seen how the time sequencing markers are used in context, fill in the gaps with the 
words listed in the box below. 
before then until when immediately 
 
1. Generally, ________ cooking pancakes, you turn them over when you see bubbles coming to the 
uppermost side, and while that still holds true, the bubbles are rather understated here. 
2. Leave to cool in the tin ________ cutting into pieces. Fifteen minutes or so before the end, start to 
prepare the fish. 
3. Drain your pasta, stir it through the sauce for a good minute and a half, leave it to rest for another 
30 seconds or so ________ serve ________. 
4. Peel the potatoes, slice into four lengthways, and ________ slice each piece into chips, roughly the 
same size. 
5. Repeat ________ all the dough is used. 
6. ________ the oven is ready, put the dough on a floured pizza peel, or pull the pizza stone out of 
the oven and carefully place the dough on it. 
7. Smash the hard-cooked egg yolk with the garlic and salt ________ you make the vinaigrette. 
8. Take the chips out of the oven, sprinkle over some Sarsons vinegar and serve ________ alongside 
the cooked salmon. 
240 Language Learning & Technology 
 
9. Bake for 20 minutes ________ flip the wings over with a pair of tongues and bake for a further 10 
minutes. 
10. By bread crumbing the salmon here, it cooks perfectly and remains very moist. ________ the 
addition of chopped sun dried tomatoes really adds flavour and colour to the crust. 
11. ________ it gets too crispy, throw in the garlic and stir for 10-15 seconds. 
12. In a saucepan, heat vegetable oil and sauté sweet onions, green beans, and mushrooms ________ 
tender. 
13. I always mix sweet and sour so will use sugar or honey and ________ mix in something tangy, like 
Sarson’s malt vinegar. 
Exercise 3 
Match to create meaningful sentences. Focus on how the time markers have been used. 
1 Bake the chips in the oven for 20 minutes, then… A … preparing food 
2 Bring to room temperature and rewhisk before… B … using. 
3 Cook on each side for 2-3 minutes until… C … to make it less potent. 
4 
Cut an apple in half, fill with oats, cinnamon, and 
brown sugar, then… D 
… the oats carry on drinking up liquid, and 
the pancakes will dry on standing – with 
the warm raspberry honey poured on top. 
5 
If desired, you can sauté the garlic in a bit of olive 
oil beforehand… 
E 
… place in oven until oats are golden, and 
apple is tender for a sweet treat this season. 
6 
If I were cooking for a vegetarian and a carnivore 
I’d cook the mushrooms and sausages separately 
and then… 
F 
… this is the recipe for you. 
7 
Leave to cool then… 
G 
… poke with a skewer and squeeze one 
lemon over the cake so it soaks up more 
juice. 
8 
Many people don’t take the time to thoroughly 
wash their hands before… H 
… turn them over using a large fish slice 
and carry on baking for a further 20 
minutes until golden and crispy. 
9 
Mostly when I’m cooking broccoli or 
cauliflower… 
I 
… a batter is formed. 
10 
Now, if you want a healthy sort of cake then… 
J 
… golden and crispy all over and cooked 
on the inside. 
11 
Pour liquid into dry ingredients and mix well 
until… 
K 
… it is 3mm in thickness. 
12 Serve immediately – … L … it was soft. 
13 
Sprinkle some extra flour onto a board or worktop 
and roll out half of the dough until… 
M 
… I finely slice the stems and just treat 
them the same as the florettes. 
14 
This frosting will slightly harden but still tastes 
the same when… 
N 
… but just a touch of yolk in the egg 
whites may make them unusable as the fat 
in the yolk will prevent the whites from 
whisking properly. 
15 
When separating eggs, remember that a little 
white left in the yolk doesn't matter… 
O 
… serve the beans and mushrooms and 
spinach for the vege option 
Agnieszka Leńko-Szymańska 241 
 
About the Author 
Agnieszka Leńko-Szymańska is a Lecturer at the Institute of Applied Linguistics, University of Warsaw. 
Her research interests lie in the acquisition and evaluation of second language vocabulary and formulaic 
language as explored through learner corpora. She teaches courses in BA and MA programmes which cover 
foreign language teaching and second language acquisition as well as the applications of corpora in 
language teaching.  
E-mail: a.lenko@uw.edu.pl 
