Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2017, Volume 21, Issue 3 
pp. 1–8 
COMMENTARY  
 
 
Copyright © 2017 Nina Vyatkina & Alex Boulton 
 
 
Corpora in language learning and teaching 
Nina Vyatkina, University of Kansas 
Alex Boulton, University of Lorraine 
Keywords: Corpus, Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Language Teaching Methodology, Web-Based 
Instruction 
APA Citation: Vyatkina, N., & Boulton, A. (2017). Corpora in language learning and teaching. Language 
Learning & Technology, 21(3), 1–8. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2017/commentary.pdf 
Introduction 
Corpora, in the sense of large, systematically organized electronic collections of texts, came to be used in 
language learning and teaching shortly after they emerged in their modern form in the 1960s. Whereas 
originally, most pedagogical applications were of indirect nature with corpus-based studies informing the 
contents of textbooks and reference tools (e.g., word lists, dictionaries, and grammars), the interest in more 
direct applications—when either teachers or learners interacted with corpora themselves—started to grow 
from the 1980s. The first report on a direct application of corpus-derived examples in a language classroom 
was published by McKay (1980) and was followed by a few other largely descriptive or theoretical 
publications in the same decade. However, the birth of both a distinct teaching method and a distinct 
subfield of language teaching research is generally identified with work by Johns in the late 1980s and 
1990s. Drawing on computer science, he gave this revolutionary approach the name of data-driven learning 
(DDL) and outlined its several pedagogical benefits—most famously in a special issue of the English 
Language Research Journal co-edited with Philip King (Johns & King, 1991). The first DDL research 
results were published mostly as exploratory case studies and reflection pieces, with empirical research 
taking off and growing exponentially after the turn of the century. 
Since its inception, the DDL field has accumulated a substantial body of publications. An overview can be 
gained from a number of research synthesis articles: both narrative reviews (e.g., Boulton, in press; 
Chambers, 2007b; Römer, 2011) and recent meta-analyses (e.g., Boulton & Cobb, 2017; Mizumoto & 
Chujo, 2015). Whereas the former cover the breadth of the field with its multitude of topics and 
methodologies as well as the chronology of its development, the latter provide a secondary statistical 
analysis of research results from quantitative studies. Publications have appeared in refereed journals and 
edited volumes from major publishers, but also as theses and dissertations, online publications, and articles 
in less well-known journals and conference proceedings. Several journals have also dedicated special issues 
to DDL: the English Language Research Journal (Johns & King, 1991), the Journal of English for 
Academic Purposes (Thompson, 2007), Language Learning & Technology (Tribble & Barlow, 2001), and 
ReCALL (Boulton & Pérez-Paredes, 2014; Chambers, 2007a). Published research attests to the versatility 
of DDL applications. It has been applied in second and foreign language teaching contexts in many 
countries and at diverse educational institutions with learners at different proficiency levels, has included 
both work with teacher-prepared corpus-derived materials and direct corpus searches by learners, and has 
focused on various linguistic elements, most frequently vocabulary and grammar, but also pragmatics and 
discourse. The meta-analysis by Boulton and Cobb (2017) of quantitative studies published through June 
2014 confirms that DDL is, overall, an effective and efficient approach to language teaching, inasmuch as 
it leads to significant learning gains and is better than many traditional teaching methods for various 
instructional targets. Furthermore, perception studies show that many students enjoy DDL as a novel 
learning approach. 
These overall positive results do not imply, however, that all studies have come to uniform conclusions. 
2 Language Learning & Technology 
 
DDL’s effectiveness seems to be considerably moderated by a variety of context-related, participant-
related, and linguistic variables, many of which are still underexplored. From the pedagogical perspective, 
DDL has been shown to be beneficial because it provides learners with attested usage examples, helps 
learners develop analytical and problem-solving skills, and promotes learner autonomy. However, the 
approach has also been associated with certain limitations. One obvious obstacle is the non-transparent user 
interface of many available corpora which were designed by corpus linguists for specialists like themselves, 
and not with teachers and students in mind, requiring considerable levels of linguistic and technological 
sophistication. Another limitation is that corpus examples, while being “genuine,” may not be authentic for 
language learners (Widdowson, 2000) because they are taken out of a larger context and often come from 
texts that are of little interest or relevance to learners. Finally, from the teacher’s point of view, many DDL 
activities require considerable preparation time, and ready-made teaching materials are few and far 
between. These limitations have hindered mainstream acceptance of DDL in language teaching practice. In 
summary, despite generally encouraging DDL research findings over a period of time, this field of inquiry 
is still developing and has a rich potential for the future. This consideration provided the impetus for the 
current publication. Since the only Language Learning & Technology special issue on DDL was published 
back in 2001, the present guest editors decided that the time has now come to revisit the topic, especially 
considering the relative paucity of DDL publications in North American journals and presses. 
This Issue 
Scope 
For this special issue, we solicited reports on theoretically grounded and methodologically rigorous 
empirical studies of language learning processes or outcomes in DDL contexts using expert- or native-
speaker as well as learner corpora. We were open as to the specific DDL format employed in pedagogical 
interventions: it could be hands-on (i.e., include direct explorations of corpora by learners) or hands-off 
(i.e., include indirect applications with teacher-prepared corpus-based materials), or it could present any 
combinations of the two formats. We especially welcomed proposals that aimed to fill existing research 
gaps by reporting on the use of new DDL technologies (e.g., multimodal corpora or corpus tools beyond 
concordancers), the effectiveness of different DDL types, specific DDL effects on language learning, 
longitudinal studies, integration of DDL instruction modules into regular curricula, as well as languages 
other than English, instructional contexts other than a university, and teachers other than DDL researchers. 
We did not consider submissions containing only descriptions of corpora, software, or pedagogical 
procedures without presenting in-depth empirical data. We also did not accept studies that analyzed or 
compared linguistic data from various types of corpora without examining teaching and learning processes 
and outcomes. 
The response to our call for papers exceeded our expectations with 67 initial abstract proposals. 17 were 
invited to submit a full paper, of which seven were finally accepted for publication—approaching the 
maximum that the journal can accommodate in a single issue. We would like to note that it was a struggle 
to select from many excellent submissions and we had to make our decisions with an eye to achieving a 
broad topic coverage. There are, however, several aspects on which we did not obtain a wide representation: 
all papers in this issue focus on the acquisition of English with university students as participants via 
concordancing of written or transcribed corpora. Nevertheless, the contributions to this issue expand the 
empirical DDL research base by targeting various language learning contexts (English as a first, second, or 
foreign language), proficiency levels (from low-intermediate to advanced), and instructional targets 
(grammar, vocabulary, pragmatics, discourse, reading, writing, pedagogy). A brief overview of these 
studies is presented in the next section. 
Article Overviews 
In the first study of this special issue, Bardovi-Harlig, Mossman, and Su explore the effect of corpus-based 
instruction on learner oral production of pragmatic routines. The novelty of this study is its focus on 
Nina Vyatkina and Alex Boulton 3 
 
pragmatics and speaking skills, a relative rarity in DDL research. Undergraduate English as a second 
language (ESL) students at a U.S. university worked with transcripts of academic speech from the open 
access MICASE corpus (Simpson, Briggs, Ovens, & Swales, 2002). The treatment consisted of four lessons 
and the tasks included noticing pragmatic routines associated with three speech acts (agreement, 
disagreement, and self-clarification) and practice in using these routines in learners’ own oral conversations. 
The participants were divided into three groups: one group worked with teacher-prepared paper-based 
corpus experts, the second group searched corpora directly to find relevant excerpts, and the third group 
did not receive any pragmatics instruction. All groups took a pre-test and an immediate post-test that 
consisted of a computer-based simulated discussion. The results showed that all three groups used speech 
acts and pragmatic routines more appropriately and accurately on the post-test. However, both experimental 
groups improved significantly more than the control group on the use of the routines. As far as the use of 
speech acts is concerned, only the hands-off groups that worked with teacher-prepared materials showed a 
statistically significant advantage over the control group, but not the hands-on, direct corpus search group. 
The authors attribute this to the nature of teacher-prepared examples: they presented carefully selected, 
clearly delineated speech acts, whereas direct corpus searches yielded longer stretches of text with speech 
acts not explicitly marked. It turned out to be challenging for the students to identify speech acts, especially 
ones consisting of multiple speaker turns, in these texts. The authors conclude that both DDL approaches 
are beneficial for L2 pragmatics learning but that hands-on DDL may be less appropriate for learning certain 
pragmatic targets. This study is significant not only because of its rare focus on oral pragmatic routines but 
also because the DDL treatments were administered by the regular teachers, in contrast to the majority of 
DDL interventions delivered by researchers themselves. 
In the next article, Cotos, Link, and Huffman explore the use of their Research Writing Tutor (RWT)—a 
web-based platform that contains a corpus of 900 published research articles in 30 disciplines annotated for 
rhetorical moves—by US graduate students in an academic writing course. The authors situate their study 
within the framework of genre-based writing theories, thus bringing L2 writing research and DDL together. 
This study is similar to the one by Bardovi-Harlig et al., in that it also focuses on a relatively rare research 
target in DDL research, namely, discourse moves. The instructional intervention included students’ direct 
searches of the RWT corpus with the task of noticing and writing down language patterns characteristic of 
specific genre moves. The data included students’ written responses to awareness-raising questions 
(noticing data) and two drafts of their own research papers—the second draft being a revision based on the 
corpus input (production data). The researchers employed an embedded mixed-methods design by first 
qualitatively analyzing and coding student writing for linguistic material characteristic of certain moves 
and then quantitatively comparing frequencies of the coded categories. The results showed that genre move 
patterns noticed by the students were overwhelmingly representative of expert academic writing, thus 
demonstrating high potential of DDL for awareness raising. Furthermore, the noticing results were similar 
for both native speaker (NS) and non-native speaker (NNS) novice writers. In contrast, the production data 
showed that DDL led to significant improvements in the NNS but not the NS writing, although there was 
no difference between the groups on their first drafts. The authors also provide a fine-grained, qualitative 
analysis of specific language patterns noticed and used by individual students to express individual moves 
and steps within moves. They conclude that DDL is beneficial for genre learning and academic writing for 
both NSs and NNSs, although they acknowledge that their quantitative results need to be considered with 
caution due to a small sample size, especially of the NS data. 
Whereas the first two studies were conducted in an ESL context (with Cotos et al. also including novice NS 
data), the remaining five articles report on DDL interventions in countries where English is spoken and 
learned as a foreign language. Hadley and Charles explore the use of DDL in an extensive reading program 
at a Japanese university. This study is novel because of its focus on reading skills as well as its target learner 
population—low-intermediate learners, rather than more advanced learners. The participants were divided 
into two groups, with both engaging in extensive reading from graded readers and traditional vocabulary 
learning activities (e.g., keeping a vocabulary log, writing sentences with the new words, etc.). Beyond that, 
the DDL group completed exercises with concordances from the graded reader corpus, whereas the 
4 Language Learning & Technology 
 
comparison group performed more traditional activities. Like Cotos et al., Hadley and Charles employed a 
mixed-methods design, combining a quantitative analysis of reading speed and vocabulary knowledge data 
with a qualitative analysis of learner perception data elicited via a personal construct repertory grid 
instrument adopted from psychology. The results of the study show that both groups improved significantly 
on all measures, but the improvement of the comparison group was greater. The qualitative analysis helps 
shed light on this result: the learners found hands-on DDL challenging and time-consuming, despite the 
considerable scaffolding provided by the instructors, which resulted in negative attitudes toward the 
approach and the lack of effort invested in completing the corpus tasks. Hadley and Charles conclude that 
DDL needs to be carefully tailored to learner proficiency levels and appropriately softened for novice and 
intermediate learners. 
The focus of the next three studies is more representative of DDL research in general: they all explore the 
use of lexico-grammatical constructions in learner writing and the role of DDL concordancing on enhancing 
this use. Li’s study is situated in a graduate course at a Chinese university. Students were divided into two 
groups with the same learning goals: one exposed to a traditional, deductive method of teaching verb-
preposition collocations, and the other engaged in inductive DDL, namely in direct searches of the BNC 
and COCA (Davies, 2008). Both groups wrote academic essays before the course, immediately after the 
course, and a month later. The results showed that both groups improved on their use of collocations and 
this improvement was retained on the delayed post-test. The learning was manifested in the increased 
number of academic collocations as well as improved accuracy and naturalness of these collocations. 
However, although the groups were not different from each other on the pre-test, the DDL group improved 
significantly more on both post-tests. The difference between groups had a very large effect size, which 
strongly supports the benefit of DDL for the development of productive use of collocations in English for 
academic purposes (EAP) writing, at least for graduate students with advanced English as a foreign 
language (EFL) proficiency. 
What sets apart the study by Han and Shin is their use of the web as corpus and Google as a concordancer. 
EFL students at a Korean university participated in a 4-day workshop on teaching Google search techniques 
(i.e., using quotation marks and a wildcard). Participants were tested before and after each of the three 
training sessions—the first focusing on the use of articles, the second on collocations, and the third on 
paraphrasing. The test items included correction of inaccurate or infelicitous expressions and translation of 
sentences from Korean into English. The results were significant for improvement in article use, but not 
significant for collocations and paraphrasing. The authors attribute the variable success to the participants’ 
English proficiency level—intermediate compared to, for example, the advanced learners in Li’s study. 
They also conclude that, apparently, more teacher guidance is needed for DDL with this learner population. 
Nevertheless, the learners found the learned search techniques useful, which showed potential for their 
future independent use of the web as a corpus. Additionally, the authors provide a qualitative analysis of 
Google-assisted revisions in learners’ own writing. 
Ackerley also investigates DDL effects on EFL writing, although her focus was on opinion survey reports 
instead of academic essays. What is truly impressive in her study is the sample size: two cohorts consisting 
of 240 and 233 Italian university students, respectively. The linguistic target in this study was, like in two 
other studies discussed above, collocations. The first cohort learned how to write survey reports with a 
traditional method, which included conventional vocabulary and collocation exercises as well as the perusal 
of a number of reports written by experts and pre-selected by the teacher. The second learner cohort, 
enrolled in the same course during the next year, was engaged in DDL. They worked with a corpus of expert 
(NS) reports as well as with a learner corpus that comprised reports written by the previous cohort of their 
fellow students. The exercises included both hands-off and hands-on DDL activities with concordances and 
frequency data. Both groups wrote their own survey reports at the end of the module. Ackerley conducted 
a fine-grained analysis of the use of specific collocations in all three corpora: the expert corpus, the control 
learner corpus, and the DDL learner corpus. The author concludes that the DDL group used a wider range 
of genre-appropriate (i.e., expert-like) collocations and produced a lower number of stock phrases. She also 
found that the learners benefited more from hands-off than from hands-on exercises. This finding can be 
Nina Vyatkina and Alex Boulton 5 
 
explained by the participants’ proficiency level, since the intermediate students may have found the vast 
input resulting from direct corpus searches overwhelming. 
In the final article in this issue, Leńko-Szymańska tackles the topic of developing corpus literacy among 
pre-service language teachers and analyzes corpus-based teaching projects prepared by participants in 
Poland as a result of a semester-long course. For the projects, participants compiled their own small, 
specialized corpora from texts found on the web and prepared teaching materials based on those corpora. 
The researcher analyzed the projects qualitatively with an eye to whether participants had developed three 
types of DDL-related skills: technical, corpus-linguistic, and pedagogical. She concludes that technical 
skills were developed to a moderate extent, but there was little evidence of developed corpus-linguistic and 
DDL-pedagogical skills. In the light of her findings, the author proposes to reconsider the approach to 
teacher education courses that aim at DDL pedagogy. Table 1 summarizes the main design characteristics 
of all studies. 
Table 1. Design Features of the Studies in This Issue 
   Participants 
Authors Focus Corpora L2 Setting L1 UG or G L2 Level 
Bardovi-Harlig, 
Mossman, & Su 
Pragmatics, 
Speaking 
MICASE (EAP NS 
and NNS corpus) 
ESL Various UG Advanced-
low 
Cotos, Link, & 
Huffman 
Discourse, 
Writing 
Custom-made NS 
EAP corpus 
ESL, NS Various G Advanced 
Hadley & Charles Vocabulary, 
Reading 
Oxford Bookworm 
Graded Readers 
EFL Various UG Intermediate
-low 
Li Collocations, 
Lexico-
Grammar, 
Writing 
BNC, COCA  EFL Chinese G Advanced 
Han & Shin Collocations, 
Grammar, 
Writing 
Web as corpus EFL Korean UG Intermediate 
Ackerley Collocations, 
Writing 
Custom-made NS 
and learner corpora 
(opinion surveys) 
EFL Italian UG Intermediate 
Leńko-Szymańska Pedagogy, 
Writing 
Learner-made NS 
corpora (various 
topics) 
EFL Polish G Advanced 
Note. UG = undergraduate; G = graduate. 
Summary and Outlook 
Editing this special issue provided insights into current and likely future directions for DDL. We also 
received further insight from the DDL colloquium that we organized at the AAAL 2017 conference. The 
colloquium, which was a namesake of this special issue and where the presentations mainly overlapped 
with the papers presented here, has sparked a similarly high level of interest among both the audience and 
numerous academic publishers. There are a number of common trends that emerge from a synthesis of the 
papers here. First, the focus firmly remains on English as a target language and university contexts, which 
no doubt reflects real-world needs despite our efforts to encourage a wider variety in this respect. Second, 
we were very pleased to have received honest and critical reports as our authors did not hesitate to describe 
6 Language Learning & Technology 
 
cases in which DDL turned out not to live up to expectations in all respects. We consider it very important 
that such reports get published to avoid the file-drawer problem, a serious issue not just in the DDL field 
but in applied linguistics more broadly and, indeed, in scientific research as a whole. In particular, the 
studies collected here show that hard DDL may be less helpful than softer versions or traditional teaching 
methods for learners with lower L2 proficiency (Ackerley; Hadley & Charles; Han & Shin); for fuzzy 
instructional targets like speech acts (Bardovi-Harlig et al.), as opposed to lexico-grammar in particular; 
and for developing complex pedagogical skills in pre-service teachers within a limited time frame (Leńko-
Szymańska). At the same time, hard hands-on DDL is highly effective and efficient for learning very 
specific instructional targets (e.g., collocations, discourse moves, pragmatic routines) and for more 
advanced learners (Bardovi-Harlig et al.; Cotos et al.; Li). Third, a major strength of the submissions in this 
issue is a careful description of the instructional contexts in which DDL interventions were conducted. 
These descriptions, which helped the authors to explain many of their findings, resulted in a colorful mosaic 
of various L1s, countries, institutions, and participant profiles represented in this issue. Fourth, we are 
grateful to our authors for their great efforts toward ensuring the methodological rigor of their studies. The 
quantitative analyses included very useful effect size statistics, which give a different perspective from the 
usual significance tests and allow comparisons across studies. The qualitative analyses provided detailed 
descriptions of the participants and the data. It was also gratifying to see that several authors chose to use 
mixed designs that combined both quantitative and qualitative analyses or included delayed post-tests and 
explored long-term DDL effects. Finally, we are glad to see a wide range of instructional targets and 
language skills represented in these studies, expanding the DDL field beyond the still dominant focus on 
collocations and writing. 
We would like to conclude our commentary by suggesting some directions for future DDL research. First, 
while English is, doubtlessly and understandably, the most popular target language, we would like to 
reiterate that more DDL research on other target languages is needed. There are corpora in many world 
languages, including open access corpora with built-in search and analysis tools, and pedagogical 
experiments with these corpora would immensely enrich the DDL landscape by providing insights into the 
applicability of DDL for languages typologically different from English (e.g., inflectional languages; see 
Vyatkina, 2016a, 2016b). Furthermore, we would like to invite researchers to explore the potential of a 
wider variety of corpus types (such as the web as corpus, multimodal corpora, parallel corpora) and corpus 
tools beyond the still prevalent concordancers (e.g., Google as a language search tool, word profiling, 
timelines, frequency lists, network analysis tools). After all, what the term DDL actually implies is noticing 
and analyzing language patterns in textual data with the help of electronic tools. Such a broadened 
understanding of corpora and DDL may help bridge the notorious research–teaching divide and bring more 
DDL into teaching approaches, manuals, and syllabuses. Furthermore, there is much potential in expanding 
the collaboration between educators dedicated to DDL and those working to promote digital humanities 
and other types of digital literacy. The level of computer skills and access to electronic media and tools is 
constantly growing across learner populations. While current DDL studies, including those in this issue, 
still show that lower-proficiency learners require substantial scaffolding and assistance, we predict that this 
gradual overall improvement of computer literacy will lead to increasing success of hands-on DDL even 
with beginning and intermediate L2 learners. After all, hands-on approaches are the ultimate goal of DDL 
educators as this promotes learner autonomy and allows for lifelong learning and using corpora as a 
reference resource beyond the classroom. We acknowledge, however, that the global digital divide 
(Warschauer, 2003) is not going to disappear in the foreseeable future, so we hope that DDL researchers 
and educators will develop and promote more open-access hands-on DDL resources as well as paper-based 
DDL materials for learners with limited access to technology. Methodologically, we would like to 
encourage DDL researchers to avail themselves of statistical tools that afford multidimensional, 
multifactorial, dynamic, and longitudinal analyses. Such methods would allow researchers to account for 
multiple learner and task variables, which are inevitably present in any language learning context, and thus 
lead to more precise results and richer interpretations of them (Cunnings, 2012). As far as qualitative 
analyses are concerned, we agree with Levy (2015) that they are most effective when used in combination 
with quantitative analyses in mixed-methods designs and that their primary goal should be “closing in on 
Nina Vyatkina and Alex Boulton 7 
 
the learner’s experience” (p. 554). Furthermore, future replication studies would strengthen the findings 
from past DDL research with small sample sizes (see Chun, 2012). Finally, we think that there is much 
underexplored potential in bringing DDL research more closely together with theories and pedagogical 
principles of instructed second language acquisition (ISLA). As Boulton notes: “Curiously, perhaps, while 
many empirical studies refer to theoretical and pedagogical foundations, few seek directly to test [those 
foundations], and theory has not been a major driving force leading to new practices” (in press). Several 
studies in this issue have explicitly grounded their research questions in SLA and ISLA theories and have 
empirically tested specific theoretical principles, and we hope that more future studies will follow suit. 
Acknowledgements 
We wish to thank all the authors who submitted their manuscripts. We also want to acknowledge all the 
reviewers who provided their expert comments and opinions during multiple rounds of revision. 
References 
Boulton, A. (in press). Research timeline: Corpora in language teaching and learning. Language 
Teaching, 50(4). doi: 10.1017/S0261444817000167 
Boulton, A., & Cobb, T. (2017). Corpus use in language learning: A meta-analysis. Language Learning, 
67(2), 348–393. doi: 10.1111/lang.12224 
Boulton, A., & Pérez-Paredes, P. (Eds.). (2014). Researching new uses of corpora for language teaching 
and learning. ReCALL, 26(2). doi: 10.1017/S0958344014000068 
Chambers, A. (Ed.). (2007a). Integrating corpora in language learning and teaching. ReCALL, 19(3). doi: 
10.1017/S0958344007000134 
Chambers, A. (2007b). Popularising corpus consultation by language learners and teachers. In E. Hidalgo, 
L. Quereda, & J. Santana (Eds.), Corpora in the foreign language classroom (pp. 3–16). Amsterdam, 
Netherlands: Rodopi. 
Chun, D. (2012). Review article: Replication studies in CALL research. CALICO Journal, 29(4), 591–
600. doi: 10.11139/cj.29.4.591-600 
Cunnings, I. (2012). An overview of mixed-effects statistical models for second language researchers. 
Second Language Research, 28(3), 369–382. doi: 10.1177/0267658312443651 
Davies, M. (2008). The corpus of contemporary American English: 450 Million Words, 1990–Present. 
Retrieved from http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/ 
Johns, T., & King, P. (Eds.). (1991). Classroom concordancing. English Language Research Journal, 4. 
Levy, M. (2015). The role of qualitative approaches to research in CALL contexts: Closing in on the 
learner’s experience. CALICO Journal, 32(3), 554–568. doi: 10.1558/cj.v32i3.26620 
McKay, S. (1980). Teaching the syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic dimensions of verbs. TESOL 
Quarterly, 14(1), 17–26. 
Mizumoto, A., & Chujo, K. (2015). A meta-analysis of data-driven learning approach in the Japanese 
EFL classroom. English Corpus Studies, 22, 1–18. 
Römer, U. (2011). Corpus research applications in second language teaching. Annual Review of Applied 
Linguistics, 31, 205–225. doi: 10.1017/S0267190511000055 
Simpson, R. C., Briggs, S. L., Ovens, J., & Swales, J. M. (2002). The Michigan corpus of academic 
spoken English. Ann Arbor, MI: The Regents of the University of Michigan. Retrieved from 
http://quod.lib.umich.edu/m/micase/ 
8 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Thompson, P. (Ed.). (2007). Corpus-based EAP pedagogy. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 
6(4). doi: 10.1016/j.jeap.2007.09.010 
Tribble, C., & Barlow, M. (Eds.). (2001). Using corpora in language teaching and learning. Language 
Learning & Technology, 5(3). Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num3/default.html 
Vyatkina, N. (2016a). Data-driven learning for beginners: The case of German verb-preposition 
collocations. ReCALL, 28(2), 207–226. doi: 10.1017/S0958344015000269 
Vyatkina, N. (2016b). Data-driven learning of collocations: Learner performance, proficiency, and 
perceptions. Language Learning & Technology, 20(3), 159–179. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2016/vyatkina.pdf 
Warschauer, M. (2003). Technology and social inclusion: Rethinking the digital divide. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 
Widdowson, H. G. (2000). On the limitations of linguistics applied. Applied Linguistics, 21(1), 3–25. 
About the Authors 
Nina Vyatkina is Associate Professor and Chair of the Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures 
at the University of Kansas. Her research interests include ISLA, corpus-based language learning and 
teaching, and learner corpus research. Her articles have appeared in leading applied linguistics journals and 
she serves on the editorial boards of Language Learning & Technology and International Journal of 
Learner Corpus Research. 
E-mail: vyatkina@ku.edu 
Alex Boulton is Professor of English and Applied Linguistics at the University of Lorraine. Research 
interests relate generally to lexis, language learning, and new technologies, specifically potential uses of 
corpus linguistics for ordinary teachers and learners (DDL). Editor of ReCALL and on committees for 
several other journals and associations, he is currently assistant director of the ATILF (Analyse et 
Traitement Informatique de la Langue Française: UMR 7118–CNRS & University of Lorraine) and head 
of its research group Crapel (Didactique des langues et sociolinguistique), as well as assistant director of 
the first UFR Lansad (faculty of languages for non-specialists) in France. 
E-mail: alex.boulton@univ-lorraine.fr 
