Language Learning &Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
June 2017, Volume 21, Issue 2 
pp. 200–226 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2017 Murad Abdu Saeed & Kamila Ghazali 
 
 
Asynchronous group review of EFL writing: 
Interactions and text revisions 
Murad Abdu Saeed, University of Malaya 
Kamila Ghazali, University of Malaya 
Abstract 
The current paper reports an empirical study of asynchronous online group review of argumentative 
essays among nine English as foreign language (EFL) Arab university learners joining English in their 
first, second, and third years at the institution. In investigating online interactions, commenting patterns, 
and how the students facilitate text revisions, a three-level analysis of learners’ comments in terms of the 
language functions, nature and focus area, and connections to subsequent text revisions was conducted. 
The learners produced a number of 1792 comments which were exploratory, including scaffolding and 
non-scaffolding (72%), procedural (11%), and social (17%) comments. In relation to the nature and 
focus area, 53% of the exploratory comments were revision-oriented comments—focusing on global (n = 
799; 84%) and local (n = 149; 16%) issues of learners’ essays—whereas non-revision-oriented 
comments (47%) focused on learners’ socio-relational space (74%), task management (23%) and 
technical challenges (3%). The findings also showed that 46% of the overall global (n = 615) and only 
10% of the overall local (n = 838) text revisions were connected to learners’ comments, indicating the 
value of global oriented comments in facilitating learners’ global text revisions. Differences of 
occurrence of these commenting patterns among the three groups were found. Such findings suggest that 
global text revisions need to be modelled by instructors. 
Keywords: Asynchronous Group Review, Interactions, Text Revisions, EFL Learners 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English 
APA Citation: Saeed, M. A., & Ghazali, K. (2017). Asynchronous group review of EFL writing: 
Interactions and text revisions. Language Learning & Technology, 21(2), 200–226. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2017/saeedghazali.pdf 
Introduction 
Peer work such as peer review plays a role in mediating English as second language (ESL) and English as 
foreign language (EFL) learners’ cognitive processes and pooling their linguistic knowledge (Storch, 
2005). It engages learners in reciprocally assisting and directing each other’s attention to various 
problems in their texts (de Guerrero & Villamil, 2000). 
Recently, the increasing applications of synchronous and asynchronous technologies to ESL and EFL 
group learning (e.g., Darhower, 2002; Pena-Shaff & Nicholls, 2004) have attracted researchers’ attention 
to explore learners’ interactional dynamics in collaborative writing (e.g., Elola & Oskoz, 2010; Kessler, 
Bikowski, & Boggs, 2012) and in peer review (e.g., Jones, Garralda, Li, & Lock, 2006; Liang, 2010; 
Razak & Saeed, 2014). In online peer review, learners engage in questions seeking explanation and 
justification (Di Giovanni & Nagaswami, 2001), evaluation, clarification and suggestion (Liou & Peng, 
2009), and even scaffolding (Razak & Saeed, 2014), involving themselves in a recursive process of 
reflection and revision of written texts (Saeed & Ghazali, 2016). Interaction in the revision-oriented space 
means that learners remain on the task, for they target global (content, organization, and purpose) and 
local (wording, grammar, and punctuation) issues of their texts (Bradley, 2014; Liou & Peng, 2009; Liu 
& Sadler, 2003; Pham & Usaha, 2015). Yet, most previous studies have disregarded the focus areas of 
Murad Abdu Saeed and Kamila Ghazali 201 
 
comments in the non-revision-oriented discourse where learners need to establish a sound social context 
(Liang, 2010). Although there are a few studies that have looked at the connections of online interaction 
to learners’ text revisions through textual analysis (e.g., Hewett, 2006; Liang, 2010), how learners’ 
interaction facilitates their text revisions in online peer review still needs further investigation. This is 
because interaction plays an important role in facilitating learners’ cognitive processes (Paulus, 2005), 
meaning negotiation (Foster & Ohta, 2005), construction of knowledge (Choi, Land, & Turgeon, 2005), 
and text revisions (Liang, 2010). Therefore, the present study aims to address this need by investigating 
the interactional commenting patterns in an online asynchronous group review of three argumentative 
essays among nine EFL university learners with mixed levels of English proficiency. Specifically, the 
study focused on the language functions, the nature and focus areas or scope of their comments, and how 
the asynchronous interaction facilitates their text revisions or end-products. 
Literature Review 
Vygotsky’s Sociocultural Perspective of Learning 
In his sociocultural perspective of learning, Vygotsky (1978) pointed out that individual mental ability is 
formed within the zone of proximal development (ZPD). The ZPD is “the distance between the actual 
developmental level as determined by the individual’s independent problem-solving and the level of 
potential development as determined through problem-solving in collaboration with more capable peers” 
(p. 86). One of the most important implications of the ZPD is in ESL and EFL learning situations where 
learners are assisted in developing their language competence (Aljaafreh & Lantolf, 1994; Duff, 2007; 
Lantolf, 2000; Lee, 2008). Learning within the ZPD occurs through “dialogic assistance” (Aljaafreh & 
Lantolf, 1994, p. 495), also known as scaffolding, that is provided by the instructor or a more 
knowledgeable individual to a less knowledgeable one (Lantolf, 2000; Lee, 2008; Swain & Lapkin, 
1998). However, the ZPD can be extended from asymmetrical dyadic interactions to symmetrical dyadic 
interactions (Fernandez, Wegerif, Mercer, & Rojas-Drummond, 2001). This implies that scaffolding can 
be not only a unidirectional assistance provided by an expert or a more capable learner to a less capable 
learner, but also a bidirectional assistance which is reciprocally provided and received by novice learners 
while accomplishing their tasks (de Guerrero & Villamil, 2000; Hyland & Hyland, 2006; Ohta, 1995; 
Storch, 2005; Villamil & de Guerrero, 1996; Yang, 2011; Yang & Meng, 2013). 
Interaction as the key element of this theory plays an important role in mediating learning (Ellis, Tanaka, 
& Yamazaki, 1994). In online group learning, interaction facilitates learners’ cognitive processes (Paulus, 
2005) such as thinking and reflection (Pena-Shaff & Nicholls, 2004), as well as knowledge construction 
(Choi et al., 2005). It also helps learners to make decisions and solve problems in their joint tasks (Elola 
& Oskoz, 2010; Kessler et al., 2012). 
Patterns of Learners’ Interaction in Online Group and Peer Review 
Applications of synchronous and asynchronous technologies in ESL and EFL writing can be “a way to 
promote interaction about writing through peer response groups” (Ware & Warschauer, 2006, p. 109). In 
online asynchronous peer review, ESL and EFL learners evaluate their texts, suggest useful ideas for 
revising texts, clarify their intended ideas or meanings, and offer alterations (Bradley, 2014; Ho, 2015; 
Liou & Peng, 2009). Similar patterns of interactions are identified by studies combining both 
asynchronous and synchronous (Chang, 2012) as well as face-to-face and synchronous modes of peer 
review (Liu & Sadler, 2003). Learners seek explanations and justifications and express agreement and 
disagreement with their peers’ suggestions (DiGiovanni & Nagaswami, 2001) when they interact 
asynchronously and synchronously. Agreements and disagreements were also identified by Jones et al. 
(2006) in online peer review. Yet, these studies have not identified instances of scaffolds in dyadic 
interaction in online peer review. As a process of negotiating information within the ZPD (Lundstrom & 
Baker, 2009), peer review engages learners in scaffolding each other in the form of making confirmation 
checks and hints, eliciting and responding to elicitation, instructing on a certain aspect, providing options, 
202 Language Learning & Technology 
 
seeking and providing advice or suggestions, using L1, and defining (see de Guerrero & Villamil, 2000; 
Razak & Saeed, 2014; Villamil & de Guerrero, 1996; Yang, 2011). Such scaffolds carrying an explicit 
verbal assistance to detect and solve problems are important in group review. Together, the above 
interactional exchanges that partly inform our analysis of the EFL learners’ interactional comments are 
indicative of how learners verbally assist one another and how they make their reflections on their texts 
more visible to one another. 
Yet, there is still a need to go beyond the above mere categorization of patterns of interactional comments 
in online peer review and to examine the nature and focus areas of such comments. Regarding this, 
research on learners’ interaction in revision-oriented discourse through asynchronous (Bradley, 2014; Ho, 
2015; Liou & Peng, 2009; Pham & Usaha, 2015), synchronous (Liu & Sadler, 2003), or even both 
asynchronous and synchronous modes of peer review (Chang, 2012) has focused on global issues—such 
as idea development, organization, audience, and purpose—or local issues—such as wording, grammar, 
and punctuation. Moreover, online asynchronous peer review assists learners in targeting a higher number 
of global issues than local issues (see Bradley, 2014; Ho, 2015; Liou & Peng, 2009; Pham & Usaha, 
2015). However, Chang (2012) reported that learners’ asynchronous interaction targeted more local issues 
than global issues due to the delayed time between posting a question and an answer as one feature of 
asynchronous technological tools. According to Hewett (2006), most learners’ synchronous interaction 
focused on writing processes, organization, and thesis statements while the less interaction focused on 
grammar and mechanics. Liang (2010) also found that content-related interaction outnumbered meaning 
and error correction in online synchronous peer review. Such results emphasize learners’ critical 
evaluation of the global aspects of texts in peer review (Lundstrom & Baker, 2009), including content 
refining, idea organizing, and thesis statement stating (Jones et al., 2006). 
Virtual collaborative writing enables learners to interact in the social space (Elola & Oskoz, 2010) where 
they can establish relationships as a community (Kessler et al., 2012). Yet, most researchers disregard 
learners’ interaction in the non-revision-oriented discourse except Cha and Park (2010) and Liang (2010). 
These two exceptional studies reported that interaction in the social space helped learners establish a 
shared social context and maintain relations, which informed our analysis of comments in this study. 
Relationships between Interactions and Text Revisions in Online Peer Review 
Another focus of previous research is how synchronous and asynchronous interactions facilitate learners’ 
text revisions. Only a few researchers have investigated this by textually linking text revisions to learners’ 
interactions. For instance, Hewett (2006) found that learners could incorporate most of their synchronous 
interaction into their text revisions, but did not report any formal connections in the study. Moreover, 
Liang (2010) reports that EFL learners’ synchronous interaction facilitated their text revisions, though this 
differed among the groups of learners according to the tasks. The tasks in this study were writing a book 
review and a research paper review. It was found that for the book review task, two groups integrated 
most of their content-related interaction into their text revisions. However, for the research paper revision, 
only a very small proportion of text revisions were linked to learners’ interaction as learners made most of 
the text revisions based on their own decisions and other interactional processes such as social 
interactional comments. According to Liou & Peng (2009), learners’ incorporation of the asynchronous 
interactional comments in their text revisions was not high due to their unwillingness to revise texts based 
on comments. Pham and Usaha (2015) found that comment-based text revisions were at higher levels 
(sentence) while self-made revisions were at lower levels (word and phrase) in online asynchronous peer 
review. Yet, these last two studies did not provide any evidence of the interaction-revision connections. 
From the above studies in online peer review, some studies focused on learners’ asynchronous peer 
review (Bradley, 2014; Ho, 2015; Liou & Peng, 2009; Pham & Usaha, 2015; Razak & Saeed, 2014) while 
others focused on synchronous peer review (Hewett, 2006; Liang, 2010; Liu & Sadler, 2003). A few 
combined both modes (Chang, 2012; DiGiovanni & Nagaswami, 2001). This suggests the need to further 
investigate the role of asynchronous peer review in engaging learners in both revision-oriented and non-
revision-oriented discourses of interaction. The delayed time in asynchronous interaction facilitates 
Murad Abdu Saeed and Kamila Ghazali 203 
 
learners’ reflection on their learning (Pena-Shaff& Nicholls, 2004). However, this still needs to be further 
substantiated by an empirical textual analysis. Therefore, the current study looks at online interactional 
comments and text revisions among nine EFL Arab university learners enrolling at three levels of 
English: first level, second level, and third level. Heterogeneously composed groups, in terms of their 
language levels, are more productive in online group learning, especially when they work together as a 
group (Resta & Laferrière, 2007; Zhao, Sullivan, & Mellenius, 2014). Specifically, by looking at the 
group review activities beyond the classroom space in an online learning community via a Facebook 
group, this study attempts to answer the following research questions: 
1. What are the interaction commenting patterns identified in the online asynchronous review of 
argumentative essays among the three English-level groups of EFL learners? 
2. How do the interactional comments facilitate learners’ text revisions of argumentative essays? 
Context of the Study 
The current study was carried out in an online learning community (an open Facebook group connected to 
a forum) that was created by the researchers and two tutors in June 2011 as an out-of-classroom space for 
EFL learners to enhance their English. Unlike most of the above previous studies on online peer review, 
the current study used a Facebook group allowing EFL learners to create online learning communities 
where they could engage in shared activities in English beyond the classroom (Mazman & Usluel, 2010; 
Razak & Saeed, 2014). Moreover, their interaction in Facebook could be facilitated by features such as 
like, unlike, comment, poke, share links, pictures, videos, and message exchanges via chats (Shih, 2011). 
In this study, the EFL learners were members of this open Facebook group who interacted in English on 
various topics with their peers and other members of the group. This motivated the researcher and 
instructor to engage them in peer review activities as well. Moreover, the structure of Facebook groups 
suits the nature of group learning in studies framed within the sociocultural theories (Kabilan, Ahmad, & 
Abidin, 2010). Facebook groups can be also useful for learners’ peer review activities, especially if the 
instructor pins posts or posts links shared from a forum in order to avoid the destruction of other posts in 
the group (Razak & Saeed, 2014). Yet, its utility among learners for educational purposes (McCarthy, 
2013) still needs further research. Therefore, in this study, the online instructor shared the link of each 
review discussion including the instruction and first draft of each essay from the forum (see Figure 1) to 
the Facebook group and pinned it for learners to read. As the learners clicked on the link shared from the 
forum, they were able to read the first draft in that link with the instruction, but they interacted and 
commented under these pinned links of the activities in the open Facebook group. This enabled them to 
comment without being disturbed by other daily posts in the open Facebook group. The comment 
functions in the Facebook (as shown in the visualized two comments) also enabled the learners to point at 
the part of the essay being revised and the peers being addressed by mentioning thier Facebook ID. 
204 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 1. A sample pinned peer review discussion shared from the forum to the open Facebook group 
with a sample comment. 
Participants 
The participants in this study were nine EFL Arab university students (8 females and 1 male). As may be 
seen in Table 1, the participants represented three different levels of English based on their university 
years: first year, second year, and third year. The First Year Group consisted of S1A, S1B, and S1C; the 
Second Year Group consisted of S2A, S2B, and S2C; and the Third Year Group consisted of S3A, S3B, 
and S3C. The three groups were selected based on their needs, interests, and willingness to enhance their 
argumentative essays through group review. 
Table 1. Profiles of the Samples in the Current Study 
ID Name Country Gender University Year in English 
S1A Algeria F First year 
S1B Yemen M First year 
S1C Saudi Arabia F First year 
S2A Syria F Second year 
S2B Algeria F Second year 
S2C Yemen F Second year 
S3A Sudan F Third year 
S3B Tunisia F Third year 
S3C Tunisia F Third year 
Research Procedure  
Prior to the online group review reported in this study, the online instructor engaged the learners in 
Murad Abdu Saeed and Kamila Ghazali 205 
 
preparation, pre-writing and writing, and training stages highlighted in blue (see Figure 2). In the 
preparation stage, the online instructor suggested the idea of group review in the online learning 
community and selected writing argumentative essays based on the needs of the nine participants who 
were members of the community. This stage also focused on exposing the learners to sample 
argumentative essays, dividing them into three mixed groups (each group of three learners with three 
levels for the pre-writing and writing activities) and topic selection. This stage ended with the creation of 
three separate Facebook groups (each group was exclusively accessed by the three learners, the instructor 
and the researcher). Each mixed group pre-wrote and wrote their first drafts based on the topics selected 
by them (N = 3 first drafts) and submitted them to the online instructor. Ferris and Hedgcock (2013) 
emphasized the need for effective preparation of learners through training and explicit instruction in peer 
review to enable them to generate valuable online comments that enhance their text revisions (see also 
DiGiovanni & Nagaswami, 2001; Liang, 2010). Therefore, the instructor trained the three groups on peer 
review in the open Facebook learning group. He acted as the overall facilitator who provided explicit 
instruction in the form of probing questions (see Appendix A) and guided them in the process of revision 
discussed below. 
 
Figure 2. Stages of the study procedure. 
The findings of this study are exclusive to the group review stage highlighted in red in Figure 2 that 
comprised nine weekly review discussions (each discussion lasted for three hours). In each session (three 
discussions), the learners had to revise one essay together by commenting and posting multiple text 
revisions (see Figure 3). Of the multiple text revisions, each English-level group (three learners joining 
the same level) had to produce one final version (N = 3 final versions for each first draft). The tutor and 
researcher were both virtually present in each group review discussion. The tutor also posted comments as 
scaffolds when necessary (e.g., in situations of ambiguity). His other comments functioned as announcing 
and coordinating the activities (e.g., redirecting the learners towards the revision process). The post-
review stage was concerned with posting questions seeking learners’ reflection on their experience in the 
form of writing one reflective account each. The study used learners’ interactional comments and text 
revisions as primary sources of data collection and sample reflective statements extracted from learners’ 
accounts as a secondary source. 
Preparing 
The learners 
were 
introduced to 
argumentative 
essays and 
divided into 
mixed groups, 
and then they 
selected 
topics. 
Pre-Writing 
and Writing 
The three 
mixed groups 
worked 
separately on 
generating 
ideas and 
writing their 
three first 
drafts. 
Review 
The three 
groups jointly 
reviewed the 
drafts and each 
level-group 
produced one 
final version 
out of text 
revisions. 
Training 
The three 
groups were 
combined 
together for 
training and 
peer review 
through 
instruction. 
Post-
Review 
The learners 
wrote 
reflective 
accounts on 
the experience 
of working 
together. 
206 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 3. An illustration of revision process. 
Data Analysis 
The analysis of the data was carried out at three levels. The first level focused on the online interactional 
commenting patterns following a coding scheme developed from previous research reviewed above. 
Regarding this, we read each single comment carefully and identified all patterns of comments based on 
their language functions (see Appendix B). We analyzed inductively the rest of the comments that did not 
fit the coding scheme. Then, we clustered all of the interactional comments into exploratory, procedural, 
or social based on whether a comment was about learners’ explicit reflection on the task, the procedure of 
revision, or social aspects. Finally, we further categorized the exploratory category into scaffolding and 
non-scaffolding comments based on whether a comment had an explicit evidence of verbal assistance 
(e.g., drawing learners’ attention to a particular problem, assisting them to propose a solution to it; see de 
Guerrero & Villamil, 2000; Villamil & de Guerrero, 1996). In addition, we traced the directions of the 
scaffolding comments based on our own guiding questions: (a) Who provided the scaffold? (b) Who 
received it? (c) Are the scaffolders and scaffoldees from the same or from different English-level groups? 
The aim of this was to identify whether scaffolding was just unidirectional or bidirectional. 
Learners Read the Multiple 
Text Revisions & Decide  
Only Learners with 
Incorrect Revisions Revise 
and Post Them 
Each Level Group 
Produces a Final Version 
from the Revisions 
Final Version 
Third Year Group  
First Year Group  
Second Year Group  
Group Review 
Learners Read the First 
Draft 
Instructor as a Facilitator  
Learners Comment on the 
First Draft 
Learners Post Multiple 
Text Revisions 
Individually  
First Draft  
No Yes 
Murad Abdu Saeed and Kamila Ghazali 207 
 
The second level of analysis dealt with learners’ interactional comments in terms of its nature and focus 
area, based on the taxonomy of Liu and Sadler (2003). At this level, we also read each comment and 
coded it in terms of its nature as revision-oriented or non-revision-oriented. Moreover, for the comments 
in the revision-oriented discourse, we identified the focus area of each comment: global (content, 
organization of ideas, audience, and argumentative genre awareness) or local (meaning or lexical 
appropriation, grammar, and punctuation; see Appendix C). For learners’ comments in the non-revision-
oriented discourse, we analyzed their focus areas by referring to a few previous studies (Cha & Park, 
2010; Liang, 2010) and categorized them into socio-relational or mechanical challenges. 
The third level of analysis aimed to investigate the connections between learners’ interactions and text 
revisions. Prior to this, we highlighted the learners’ text revisions and identified their levels (below-word, 
word, phrase, clause, sentence, or above-sentence) and focus areas (global or local). As shown in Table 2, 
in the first sample, S2A made a sentence-level addition to the pre-revised counterargument, which 
focused on elaborating the content. In the second sample, S1B made a word-level substitution that 
focused on appropriate meaning. After this, we traced the connections between text revisions and 
interactional comments. For the global text revisions, especially for content or idea development and 
elaboration, we used a textual analysis adopted from Hewett (2006) and Liang (2010). Regarding this, we 
highlighted words, phrases and even clauses in learners’ global text revisions which were textually linked 
to their interactional comments. For other global text revisions (e.g., organization, audience, and 
argumentative genre) as well as for local revisions, we just searched for signals and evidences from 
learners’ interactional comments preceding text revisions (see Appendix D). This aimed to identify 
learners’ comment-based revisions and self-made revisions (Liou & Peng, 2009). Finally, we carried out a 
thematic analysis of learners’ reflective accounts on their experience and identified themes supporting the 
findings obtained from comments and text revisions. 
Table 2. Sample Analysis of Global and Local Text Revisions 
Pre-Revised Segment Revised Segment 
Secondly, others might argue that there 
are no equal capacities in these groups, 
which makes it difficult for them. 
S2A: Secondly, others might argue that there are no equal 
capacities in these groups, which makes it difficult for them. 
For example, some learners need to improve their language 
skills while the others want to be efficient writers, and that 
may cause some learners' reluctance to continue learning if 
not given the task they need. 
The main core of higher education is 
basically related to the broad base of 
knowledge that students should acquire. 
S1B: The main purpose of higher education is basically 
related to the broad base of knowledge that students should 
acquire. 
Two coders were trained on coding learners’ comments and text revisions. In the first round, the inter-
rater reliability was only 79%. However, the two coders discussed their cases of disagreement until they 
reached an agreement with a rate of 93%. One of the researchers was the second coder. 
Findings 
Learners’ Interactional Commenting Patterns 
The EFL learners posted a large overall number of asynchronous interactional comments (N = 1792) 
which were exploratory, procedural, and social interactional comments (see Table 3). The exploratory 
comments (n = 1290; 72%) were divided into scaffolding and non-scaffolding comments. The scaffolding 
comments carried an explicit evidence of the verbal assistance provided and received by the learners in 
attending to and solving a particular trouble in their essays (see Appendix B). The learners engaged in 
seeking and providing suggestions, eliciting and responding to elicitation, asking questions in the form of 
208 Language Learning & Technology 
 
confirmation checks and hints to the other learners, providing options or alternatives, instructing in the 
form of a mini lesson on a certain aspect, and defining. Overall, the learners posted 228 (18%) scaffolding 
comments that were distributed among the Third Year Group (n = 137; 11%), Second Year Group (n = 
69; 5%), and First Year Group (n = 22; 2%). 
Table 3. Commenting Patterns among the Groups 
Exploratory First Year Group Second Year Group Third Year Group Overall 
Exploratory     
Scaffolding 22 (2%) 69 (5%) 137 (11%) 228 (18%) 
Non-scaffolding 233 (18%) 311 (24%) 518 (40%) 1062 (82%) 
Procedural 37 (20%) 57 (29%) 104 (51%) 198 (100%) 
Social     
On-Task 38 (13%) 62 (20%) 43 (14%) 143 (47%) 
Off-Task 31 (10 %) 52 (17%) 78 (26%) 161 (53%) 
Moreover, as can be seen in Figure 4, identification of the directions of the above scaffolding comments 
as situated in the asynchronous interaction showed the bi-directional nature of scaffolding between 
learners in the same level-group and in different English-level groups. In each group, the arrows 
connecting each two learners show the bidirectional nature of scaffolds in dyadic interactions (except 
S1A–S1B in the First Year Group and S2B–S2C in the Second Year Group). The bi-directional arrows 
connecting each group show that scaffolds were not exclusively directed from a higher English-level 
group to a lower English-level group, but rather in both directions. The green, blue, and red colors stand 
for the scaffolds provided by the First Year Group, Second Year Group, and Third Year Group, 
respectively. 
 
Figure 4. A diagram representation of directions of learners’ scaffolds. 
 
Murad Abdu Saeed and Kamila Ghazali 209 
 
Excerpt 1 illustrates the above bi-directional nature of scaffolds between two learners in the same level-
group (S2A–S2C) and different level-groups (S2B–S3A). Such overt scaffolding comments in the form of 
dyadic question–response exchanges assisted each pair of learners in identifying problems and solving 
them. Both examples of reciprocal scaffolds show how each pair of learners acted as an expert and a 
novice, becoming reciprocal sources for each other. 
Excerpt 1. 
S2A: Sorry “For, they can’t be wholly adopted in all education fields; and more than that? 
S2C: Yes ‘for’ here means because, giving reasons. 
S2A: Thanks. 
S2C: Im doubting the structure of this sentence: Too, facebook group may lose some of the exciting!? 
How? 
S2A: we should use another linking device “Moreover. ...” etc. 
---- 
S2B: so, I suggest this question: what are the advantages that make social networks a “vital” element 
in each one life? How? 
S3A: OK. We can replace the word ‘vital’ by saying “a part of each one life”! How about that? 
S2B: we can say “important or essential” too. 
S3A: Agree with you. What are the advantages that make social networks an important element in 
each one life? 
Scaffolds among more than two learners show instances of collective scaffolds. In the Excerpt 2, each 
learner provided a different suggestion (e.g., deleting phrases, modifying the structure, etc.). The different 
scaffolds contributed to the quality of S3C’s draft. 
Excerpt 2. 
S3C: well if any other suggestions to clarify the idea why not? 
S2B: I think we need to eliminate a few phrases from it. 
S1A: the introduction should be clear. 
S2A: I agree with you. We should make it clear as it was little confusing when reading it. 
S3B: ok, I think that the last idea needs to be modified. 
S2C: Exactly, because the alternation of ideas made me lost while reading it. 
S3A: hi the structure needs to be slightly changed as to avoid the problems of confusion and the 
repetition. 
S1B: we can just re-organize the phrases and it will be fixed. 
S1C: you need to change the structure of the sentences and replace few words to get rid of the 
confusion and the repetition like proclaiming that' repeated in the same sentence. 
The learners also engaged in non-scaffolding exploratory comments (n = 1026; 82%) that visualized their 
cognitive reflection on the texts (see Appendix B). They functioned to evaluate, seek or provide 
clarification and justification, and check or confirm understanding or comprehension of a given point in 
the text. Other comments served to check or express certainty and knowledge versus a lack of certainty 
and knowledge or to agree on certain suggestions. The learners also engaged in situations of disagreement 
210 Language Learning & Technology 
 
or rejection of suggestions, but through persistence, elaboration, and interpretation of intended ideas or 
meaning, they could usually reach an agreement. They were involved in speculating, detecting problems, 
summarizing main points, and comparing various revisions. The Third Year Group posted the highest 
proportion of the non-scaffolding comments (n =518; 59%), followed by the Second Year Group (n = 
311; 56%) and the First Year Group (n = 233; 18%). 
The qualitative analysis of the learners’ reflective statements also supported the above reciprocal and 
collective scaffolds as some learners stated: 
We also correct each other's written ideas, discuss and scaffold till we all agree on the best version of 
each. (S2A) 
Many especially those who have great ideas, but a limited ability to use a foreign language i.e their 
style of writing is restricted may accomplish a great work with the help of the other members who are 
gifted with better writing skills. (S3B) 
Other learners also realized the importance of their interaction in facilitating their reflection on their texts 
by stating that online interaction enabled them to analyze the ideas: 
It helps so much to exchange information among members by analyzing each idea they wrote. (S2B) 
Plus, not just exchanging, but discussing it, which is more interesting. (S3A) 
The procedural comments referred to the learners’ interactions on the routine execution of the task of 
revision, such as handling the task, seeking or providing information about it, providing directives, task-
organizing, and pointing at part of the essay (see Appendix B). They recorded the least occurrence (n = 
198; 11%), distributed among the Third Year Group (n =104; 51%), the Second Year Group (n = 57; 
29%), and the First Year Group (n = 37; 20%). 
The social interactional comments (n = 304; 17%) were divided into on-task (n = 143; 47%) and off-task 
comments (n = 161; 53%). The on-task comments served as reactions and were thanking or welcoming 
exchanges with smiley symbols, praising peers, and expressing surprises. The off-task comments were 
those social comments on irrelevant matters such as greetings and checking one another’s wellbeing, as 
well as other non-social comments such as encountering technical problems (see Appendix B). The 
Second Year Group produced the largest number of on-task interactions (n = 62; 20%), followed by the 
Third Year Group (n = 43; 14%) and the First Year Group (n = 38; 13%). However, for the off-task social 
interactions, the Third Year Group produced the highest proportion, followed by the Second Year Group 
and the First Year Group. 
Focus Areas of Interactional Comments 
The second-level analysis of the nature and focus areas of the interactions showed that 948 exploratory 
comments (53%) were revision-oriented comments that focused on global and local issues in the essays. 
Other exploratory, procedural, and social comments (n = 844; 47%) were non-revision-oriented 
comments. As can be seen in Table 4, the EFL learners posted a higher number of global revision-
oriented comments (n = 799; 84%) than local revision-oriented comments (n = 149; 16%). Moreover, 
they exchanged a higher number of global comments than local comments in each group. The Third Year 
Group posted the highest number of global comments (n = 350; 37%), followed by the Second Year 
Group (n = 270; 28%) and the First Year Group produced the lowest proportion of such comments (n = 
179; 19%). 
Excerpt 3 shows how these revision-oriented comments focused on global issues of the texts, such as its 
content (S3C), unity and organization of ideas (S2B), audience (S3B and S1A), and argumentative genre 
awareness (S1B). 
  
Murad Abdu Saeed and Kamila Ghazali 211 
 
Table 4. Comments in the Revision-Oriented versus Non-Revision-Oriented Discourses 
 First Year Group Second Year Group Third Year Group Overall 
Revision-Oriented     
Global 179 (19%) 270 (28%) 350 (37%) 799 (84%) 
Local 25 (3%) 46 (5%) 78 (8%) 149 (16%) 
Non-Revision-Oriented     
Socio-relational 114 (14%) 166 (20%) 337 (40%) 617 (74%) 
Task management 37 (4%) 57 (7%) 104 (12%) 198 (23%) 
Technical Challenges 6 (1%) 12 (1%) 11 (1%) 29 (3%) 
Excerpt 3. 
S3C: the content of the introduction could be more clarified. The topic should be controversial which 
we can't clearly find in the introduction 
S2B: This sentence should come after the four sentences we corrected: They are long-term advanced 
skills which help students learn autonomy and venture so that they will take mature decisions in their 
future careers. 
S3B: The reader feels lost as when looking at the thesis there in the introduction we feel we’re going 
through an expository essay. 
S1A: yes the reader cannot get it. 
S1B: Since the writer is with, there should be rebuttal for paragraph 2 in the body. 
The occurrence of the local revision-oriented comments varied from 78 (8%) for the Third Year Group to 
46 (5%) for the Second Year Group and 25 (3%) for the First Year Group. Excerpt 4 illustrates how such 
comments focused on local issues of the essays such as grammar (S2C), accurate meaning (S2B), and 
punctuation (S3A). 
Excerpt 4. 
S2C: The sentence should be either present continues or simple present and the present simple will 
better. 
S2B: Hi change the word “vital” as the word vital means the basic elements of life like food, water. 
So change it. 
S3A: Just pay attention to the punctuation marks in that sentence dear. 
S1A: Ok done thank you. 
The EFL learners’ comments in the non-revision-oriented discourse (n = 844; 47%) focused on the socio-
relational space (n = 617; 74%), task management (n = 198; 23%), and technical challenges (n = 29; 3%). 
Their distribution shows that the Third Year Group produced the highest number of non-revision-oriented 
comments for the socio-relational space (n = 337; 40%) and for task management (n = 104; 12%). The 
Second Year Group produced fewer comments for the socio-relational space (n = 166; 20%) and for task 
management (n = 57; 7%) and the First Year Group produced the fewest for the socio-relational space (n 
= 114; 14%) and for task management (n = 37; 4%). However, all three groups were balanced in respect 
to their comments on technical challenges (1%). In the socio-relational space, the comments focused on 
maintaining relationships and creating a friendly atmosphere by valuing suggestions or revisions, 
praising, and socially supporting one another. For instance, in Excerpt 5, S3B introduced her global 
comment by a non-revision-oriented comment that embraced the strategy of initially valuing the essay 
212 Language Learning & Technology 
 
and praising the First Year Group. She also backed it up with an argumentative motivation. 
Excerpt 5. 
S3B: Hi dear , of course a GREAT WORK  you have come up with. 
S1A: thanx dear for sharing your opinion. 
S3B: But, sorry, we should mention one clear personal position from the outset honey. Then , we 
have to present the counter claims and refute them later in order to strengthen our point of view 
S1B: Hi dear  I want to tell u that we tried in the essay to collect various opinions on the subject 
without focusing on clarifying our own position. 
S3B: Yes this is because not clear whether you are against or for the topic. Just our suggestions. 
S1C: Ok thank you we can enhance it now. 
The non-revision-oriented comments focused on establishing a sound social context (e.g., exchanging 
comments on irrelevant matters), while other comments concentrated on task management (23%) and 
technical challenges (3%), as shown Excerpt 6. 
Excerpt 6. 
S1B: good evening and have a wonderful time. 
S3C: Hi how are you all friends here? Miss you all. 
S1A: Hi   ^____^ happy Friday. 
---- 
S3C: Hello you can start reading the paragraph and think about the questions till we are all here? 
S2A: Okay , I'll check them now. 
---- 
S2B: my net again sorry friends for posting mine late. 
S3A: hahaha happened to me too!! It is really annoying. 
S1C: Ok thank you we can enhance it now. 
The learners’ reflective statements also supported the above findings as some participants stated that such 
interaction helped them to identify issues in their texts at both the global and local levels. They also 
admitted that they commented less on local issues such mechanics or punctuations. 
Interaction helped us to focus firstly on the ideas and organization. That happens automatically, I find 
myself commenting on them. (S1A) 
I concentrated on mechanics (spelling and punctuation) because they are the least being paid 
attention. (S3C) 
The learners also valued the asynchronous interaction because of the sound social context where they 
could maintain good relations characterized by respect: 
Esp. when the kind of comments and replying to each other is characterized as being peaceful, 
respectable and kind, which make u feel more comfortable. (S1B) 
Respect and trust can also be maintained in our collaborative work. (S2C) 
Murad Abdu Saeed and Kamila Ghazali 213 
 
Relationships between Learners’ Revision-Oriented Interactions and Text Revisions 
The third level of analysis aimed to examine the learners’ global and local text revisions which were 
subsequently linked to their revision-oriented interactions. The text revisions linked to comments were 
labeled as comment-based text revisions while the text revisions having no clue of connection to the 
preceding comments were labeled as self-made text revisions (see Table 5). 
Table 5. Global and Local Comment-Based Text Revisions versus Self-Made-Text Revisions 
 First Year Group Second Year Group Third Year Group Overall 
Global     
Comment-Based  79 (13%) 92 (15%) 111 (18%) 282 (46%) 
Self-Made 30 (5%) 65 (11%) 238 (38%) 333 (54%) 
Local     
Based on Interactions 32 (4%) 23 (3%) 26 (3%) 81 (10%) 
Self-Made 116 (14%) 155 (18%) 486 (58%) 757 (90%) 
The number of global comment-based text revisions (n = 282; 46%) was lower than that of the global 
self-made text revisions (n = 333; 54%). Moreover, the global comment-based text revisions outnumbered 
the global self-made text revisions for the First Year Group (n = 79; 13 vs. n = 30; 5%) and for the 
Second Year Group (n = 92; 15% vs. n = 65; 11%). The Third Year Group, however, made a smaller 
number of global comment-based text revisions (n = 111; 15%) than global self-made text revisions (n = 
238; 38%). Appendix D provides a sample of how the global comments facilitated learners’ global text 
revisions by textually linking the revisions highlighted in yellow to learners’ preceding comments in the 
discussions. In the sample, the three groups integrated the ideas from both their and their peers’ 
suggestions in their interactional comments by discussing the problem related to inadequate ideas and 
supporting details. However, it is apparent that while the Third Year Group integrated a few suggested 
ideas from the comments and added more new ideas and details to the text that were not highlighted in 
their revised segments, the other two groups integrated such suggested ideas without adding further 
information (except in one case with S2A). This could support the higher percentages of the global 
comment-based text revisions made by the First Year Group and the Second Year Group. In other words, 
the First Year and Second Year Groups relied more heavily on their peers’ comments when revising their 
essays globally. The EFL learners also made global text revisions in terms of unity and organization of 
their ideas, audience, and argumentative genre awareness, based on their comments. 
For the local text revisions, the number of the comment-based text revisions (n = 81; 10%) was lower 
than that of the self-made text revisions (n = 757; 90%). There are similar percentages of local comment-
based text revisions for the First Year (32%), Second Year (23%), and Third Year Groups (26%). 
Samples of how learners made local text revisions in terms of sentence structure based on their comments 
are provided in Appendix D. Yet, when comparing the local and global comment-based text revisions, the 
overall number of local comment-based text revisions (n = 81; 10%) was lower than that of the global 
comment-based text revisions (n = 282; 46%). This can be seen in each group as well. This indicates that 
the learners’ integration of comments into the global text revisions is higher than their integration of 
comments into their local text revisions. It may also be due to the lower percentage of the local comments 
posted by the learners. Moreover, the learners might have preferred to make local text revisions by 
themselves rather than making them based on their interactional comments. 
Some learners pointed out that asynchronous interactions played a role in facilitating their text revisions. 
They stated that they could revise their texts based on comments and that they could seek for further 
clarification and accordingly fix their essays. 
The activities provided me the chance to write and edit my ideas to feedback. (S3C) 
214 Language Learning & Technology 
 
We get the chance to interact and ask for further explanations so we can get the idea fixed in our 
revisions. (S1C) 
Discussion 
The purpose of this study was to investigate online interactional commenting patterns and how they 
facilitated text revisions in asynchronous group review among three English-level groups of EFL learners. 
For the first research question concerning the EFL learners’ online interaction commenting patterns in the 
asynchronous review, the findings provided an in-depth understanding of learners’ interactional 
commenting patterns. Overall, the learners highly engaged with the task of reviewing, as it was 
substantiated by their highest number of exploratory comments. Part of this category, referred to 
scaffolding comments, provided explicit evidence of the verbal assistance reciprocally exchanged by the 
learners in the three groups. In line with results of previous research, the findings showed that EFL 
learners engaged in seeking and providing advice (de Guerrero & Villamil, 2000; Villamil & de Guerrero, 
1996; Yang, 2011), eliciting and responding to elicitation, and asking questions in the form of 
confirmation checks and hints (de Guerrero & Villamil, 2000; Villamil & de Guerrero, 1996). They also 
assisted one another by providing options or alternatives, instructions in the form of mini lessons on a 
certain aspect (de Guerrero & Villamil, 2000; Villamil & de Guerrero, 1996), and defining (de Guerrero 
& Villamil, 2000; Razak & Saeed, 2014). Such scaffolding comments as mediated assistance within the 
ZPD show how the learners guided one another to attend to a particular trouble that needed to be solved 
(de Guerrero & Villamil, 2000). Within the sociocultural theory, scaffolding is not only unidirectional 
assistance provided by a more capable learner to a less capable one (e.g., Duff, 2007; Swain & Lapkin 
1998), but also bidirectional or mutual assistance (de Guerrero & Villamil, 2000; Hyland & Hyland, 
2006; Ohta, 1995; Storch, 2005; Villamil & de Guerrero, 1996; Yang, 2011; Yang & Meng, 2013). In 
such dyadic scaffolding comments shown above, each learner (either less or more proficient) acted as a 
reciprocal source of information for the other learners. This finding, which supports those of previous 
research (Yang, 2011; Yang & Meng, 2013), showed how reciprocal scaffolding assisted the EFL learners 
to refine their texts. 
Other exploratory non-scaffolding interactional comments did not carry explicit evidence of verbal 
assistance. Nevertheless, they corroborated their importance in making learners’ reflections and critical 
evaluations of the task visible, especially in the online learning context (Pena-Shaff & Nicholls, 2004; 
Paulus, 2005). This is because they showed learners’ evaluations of various aspects of their texts. Online 
asynchronous group review was also a process of negotiation by which the EFL learners sought and 
provided explanations and justifications, confirming what DiGiovanni and Nagaswami (2001) identified 
in asynchronous and synchronous peer review. Working as a group, the EFL learners engaged in 
situations in which they disagreed or rejected their peers’ suggestions and revisions (DiGiovanni & 
Nagaswami, 2001; Jones et al., 2006). Moreover, the EFL learners commented on the procedure of 
revision itself and on irrelevant or personal matters. Such comments, as part of the learners’ asynchronous 
interaction in the non-revision-oriented discourse in this study, were also reported to be inseparable from 
learners’ interaction in synchronous peer review (Cha & Park, 2010; Liang, 2010). 
In terms of the nature and focus areas of comments, overall, the EFL learners exchanged a higher number 
of revision-oriented comments than non-revision-oriented comments, which supports results of most of 
previous studies in online asynchronous (Bradley, 2014; Ho, 2015; Liou & Peng, 2009) and even 
synchronous peer review (Chang, 2012; Hewett, 2006; Liu & Sadler, 2003). Moreover, largely 
corroborating results of these studies (except Chang, 2012 and Liu & Sadler, 2003), the number of 
comments targeting global issues was higher than those targeting local issues. This could be due to the 
explicit instruction in the training stage that placed an emphasis on the global concerns of texts. Opposed 
to Chang’s (2012) results showing that asynchronous interaction in peer review focused mostly on local 
issues of texts, it appears that the delayed time in the asynchronous review in this study allowed the EFL 
learners to reflect on more global issues of their essays—a merit of asynchronous interactions for learners 
Murad Abdu Saeed and Kamila Ghazali 215 
 
(Choi et al., 2005; Paulus, 2005). However, this needs learners’ virtual presence at secluded hours. 
Otherwise, Chang (2012) found that the delayed time might have caused a lack of interaction, disabled 
student-reviewers to know peers’ intentions, and consequently shifted their attention to local aspects. In 
this study, the EFL learners’ non-revision-oriented comments, with the highest percentage focusing on the 
socio-relational aspects such as establishing and maintaining social relations, support the learners’ social 
talk reported by Cha and Park (2010) and Liang (2010), as well as task management and technical 
challenges in asynchronous peer review (Liang, 2010). 
Distributions of the above commenting patterns among the three groups differed according to the level of 
each group in English. This explains how a higher English-level group was more linguistically capable of 
contributing to the essays than the other two groups by scaffolding peers, reflecting on the text, and 
targeting global and local issues. According to Lundstrom and Baker (2009), this underlies the linguistic 
ability of learners in lower levels as an important pedagogical issue in mixed group reviews. The First 
Year Group was still learning how to engage in peer review and seemed to encounter difficulty when 
trying to target more global issues. Another possible issue, reported by Liang (2010), could be the 
learners’ knowledge of the topic of each essay, especially since the EFL learners reviewed three essays on 
three different topics in this study. Overall, each group posted a higher number of comments than the 
lower level groups in the non-revision-oriented discourse. The only exception was the on-task social 
comments—as the Second Year Group posted the highest number of such comments. This implies that 
this group reacted to other groups’ comments most frequently by thanking, agreeing and disagreeing, or 
praising their peers for their comments. 
For the second research question regarding how the asynchronous interaction facilitated learners’ text 
revisions, this study yielded interesting findings. In spite of the lower percentage of the global comment-
based text revisions, it was interesting that the global comments helped the learners to refine their texts. 
This means that the value of synchronous interaction in facilitating learners’ content-related revisions 
reported by Hewett (2006) and Liang (2010) can be applicable to the EFL learners’ asynchronous 
interaction. This finding also supports those of Pham and Usaha (2015), who reported that learners made 
more text revisions at higher levels based on their asynchronous interactional comments. The different 
percentages of the global comment-based text revisions among the three groups were attributed to the 
quality and quantity of interactions and the texts in Liang’s (2010) study. Similarly, the percentages of the 
global comment-based revisions for the First Year Group and the Second Year Group were higher than 
those for the Third Year Group. This is indicative of the role of asynchronous interaction in assisting less 
proficient learners to make global text revisions. However, unlike Hewett’s (2006) and Liang’s (2010) 
results, the local comments in this study also facilitated local text revisions. Yet, the number of such local 
comment-based revisions was lower than the global comment-based text revisions. 
Implications and Conclusion 
Investigating learners’ asynchronous interaction in the revision- and non-revision-oriented discourses 
provides EFL instructors with an overall view of group dynamics that do not devalue one space at the 
expense of the other. While the first space indicates that learners remain on the task by revising their texts 
locally and globally, the latter space reflects how they establish a sound social space for maintaining good 
social relations that can contribute to their pursuit of online group review. Moreover, the delayed time in 
such asynchronous group review fosters learners’ reflection on their texts. Still, this cannot guarantee the 
interactive nature of group review without training or the virtual presence of learners and instructors at 
fixed hours. Facebook groups as asynchronous tools can be of an instructional value for group review 
beyond the classroom context, as they facilitate meaningful interactions and text revisions. 
Given that the findings are not yet conclusive, future research will need to address some issues based on 
some of the limitations in this study. First, the small number of EFL Arab participants and their 
heterogonous levels in English limit the generalizability of findings to other peer review situations among 
216 Language Learning & Technology 
 
learners with homogenous levels. Therefore, the findings should be interpreted carefully. Moreover, the 
delayed time in the asynchronous review could have fostered learners’ reflection on global concerns of 
their essays, and thus affected the findings. Therefore, future research should combine both asynchronous 
and synchronous tools for peer review in order to provide further insights into the similarities and 
differences between the two modes. The present study focused on the contributions of each English-level 
group while future research should focus on the contributions of each learner in each group. Finally, the 
findings showed that the instruction could assist learners to model global aspects, especially in their 
comments. Yet, learners producing fewer global text revisions suggests the need for further modeling text 
revisions by instructors in the training stage. 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Dr. Najeeb Kaid Al-Shorgani and Dr. Waheb Abdul Jabbar Shaif for their 
assistance in formatting the first and final versions of this paper. Our thankfulness should be dedicated to 
the reviewers and the editors of this journal for providing us with valuable suggestions. 
References 
Aljaafreh, A., & Lantolf, J. P. (1994). Negative feedback as regulation and second language learning in 
the zone of proximal development. Modern Language Journal, 78(4), 465–483. 
Bradley, L. (2014). Peer-reviewing in an intercultural wiki environment: Student interaction and 
reflections. Computers and Composition, 34, 80–95. 
Cha, Y., & Park, L. E. (2010). An analysis of synchronous interaction and its influence on EFL writers’ 
revisions. Multimedia Assisted Language Learning, 13(2), 9–36. 
Chang, C. F. (2012). Peer review via three modes in an EFL writing course. Computers and Composition, 
29, 63–78. 
Choi, I., Land, S. M., & Turgeon, A. J. (2005). Scaffolding peer-questioning strategies to facilitate 
metacognition during online small group discussion. Instructional Science, 33(5–6), 483–511. 
Darhower, M. (2002). Interactional features of synchronous computer-mediated communication in the 
intermediate L2 class: A sociocultural case study. CALICO Journal, 19(2), 249–277. 
de Guerrero, M. C. M., & Villamil, O. S. (2000). Activating the ZPD: Mutual scaffolding in L2 peer 
revision. Modern Language Journal, 84, 51–68. 
DiGiovanni, E., & Nagaswami, G. (2001). Online peer review: An alternative to face-to-face? ELT 
Journal, 55(3), 263–272. 
Duff, P. (2007). Second language socialization as sociocultural theory: Insights and issues. Language 
Teaching, 40, 309–319. 
Ellis, R., Tanaka, Y., & Yamazaki, A. (1994). Classroom interaction, comprehension, and L2 vocabulary 
acquisition. Language Learning, 44, 449–491. 
Elola, I., & Oskoz, A. (2010). Collaborative writing: Fostering foreign language and writing conventions 
development. Language Learning & Technology, 14(3), 51–71. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2010/elolaoskoz.pdf 
Fernandez, M., Wegerif, R., Mercer, N., & Rojas-Drummond, S. (2001). Re-conceptualizing 
“scaffolding” and the zone of proximal development in the context of symmetrical collaborative 
learning. Journal of Classroom Interaction, 36(2), 40–54. 
Murad Abdu Saeed and Kamila Ghazali 217 
 
Ferris, D. R., & Hedgcock, J. (2013). Teaching L2 composition: Purpose, process, and practice. New 
York, NY: Routledge. 
Foster, P., & Ohta, A. S. (2005). Negotiation for meaning and peer assistance in second language 
classrooms. Applied Linguistics, 26, 402–430. 
Hewett, B. (2006). Synchronous online conference-based instruction: A study of whiteboard interactions 
and student writing. Computers and Composition, 23, 4–31. 
Ho, M.-C. (2015). The effects of face-to-face and computer-mediated peer review on EFL writers’ 
comments and revisions. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 31(1), 1–15. 
Hyland, K., & Hyland, F. (2006). Feedback on second language students’ writing. Language Teaching, 
39(2), 83–101. 
Jones, R. H., Garralda, A., Li, D. C. S., & Lock, G. (2006). Interactional dynamics in on-line and face-to-
face peer-tutoring sessions for second language writers. Journal of Second Language Writing, 15, 1–
23. 
Kabilan, M. K., Ahmad, N., & Abidin, M. J. Z. (2010). Facebook: An online environment for learning of 
English in institutions of higher education? The Internet and Higher Education, 13(4), 179–187. 
Kessler, G., Bikowski, D., & Boggs, J. (2012). Collaborative writing among second language learners in 
academic web-based projects. Language Learning & Technology, 16(1), 91–109. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/kesslerbikowskiboggs.pdf 
Lantolf, J. P. (2000). Introducing sociocultural theory. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and 
second language learning (pp. 1–26). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Lee, L. (2008). Focus-on-form through collaborative scaffolding in expert-to-novice online interaction. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(3), 53–72. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/lee.pdf 
Liang, M. (2010). Using synchronous online peer response groups in EFL writing: Revision-related 
discourse. Language Learning & Technology, 14(1), 45–64. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num1/liang.pdf 
Liou, H. C., & Peng, Z. Y. (2009). Training effects on computer-mediated peer review. System, 37, 514–
525. 
Liu, J., & Sadler, R. W. (2003). The effect and affect of peer review in electronic versus traditional modes 
on L2 writing. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2, 193–227. 
Lundstrom, K., & Baker, W. (2009). To give is better than to receive: The benefits of peer review to the 
reviewer’s own writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 18(1), 30–43. 
Mazman, S. G., & Usluel, Y. K. (2010). Modeling educational usage of Facebook. Computers & 
Education, 55(2), 444–453. 
McCarthy, J. (2013). Learning in Facebook: First year tertiary student reflections from 2008 to 2011. 
Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 29(3), 337–356. 
Ohta, A. (1995). Applying sociocultural theory to an analysis of learner discourse: Learner–learner 
collaborative interaction in the zone of proximal development. Issues in Applied Linguistics, 6(2), 93–
121. 
Paulus, T. M. (2005). Collaborative and cooperative approaches to online group work: The impact of task 
type. Distance Education, 26(1), 111–125. 
Pena-Shaff, J. B., & Nicholls, C. (2004). Analyzing student interactions and meaning construction in 
computer bulletin board discussions. Computers & Education, 42(3), 243–265. 
218 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Pham, V. P. H., & Usaha, S. (2015). Blog-based peer response for L2 writing revision. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 1, 1–25. 
Razak, N. A., & Saeed, M. A. (2014). Collaborative writing revision process among learners of English 
as a foreign language (EFL) in an online community of practice (COP). Australasian Journal of 
Educational Technology, 30(5), 580–599. 
Resta, P., & Laferrière, T. (2007). Technology in support of collaborative learning. Educational 
Psychology Review, 19, 65–83. 
Saeed, M. A., & Ghazali, K. (2016). Modeling peer revision among EFL learners in an online learning 
community. Electronic Journal of Foreign Language Teaching, 13(2), 275–292. 
Shih, R., C. (2011). Can web 2.0 technology assist college students in learning English writing? 
Integrating Facebook and peer assessment with blended learning. Australasian Journal of 
Educational Technology, 27(5), 829–845. 
Storch, N. (2005). Collaborative writing: Product, process, and students’ reflections. Journal of Second 
Language Writing, 14(3), 153–173. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1998). Interaction and second language learning: Two adolescent French 
immersion students working together. Modern Language Journal, 82, 320–337. 
Villamil, O. S., & de Guerrero, M. C. M. (1996). Peer revision in the L2 classroom: Social-cognitive 
activities, mediating strategies, and aspects of social behavior. Journal of Second Language Writing, 
5(1), 51–75. 
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society. The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
Ware, P. D., & Warschauer, M. (2006). Electronic feedback and second language writing. In K. Hyland & 
F. Hyland (Eds.), Feedback in second language writing: Contexts and issues (pp. 105–122). 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Yang, Y. F. (2011). A reciprocal peer review system to support college students' writing. British Journal 
of Educational Technology, 42(4), 687–700. 
Yang, Y. F., & Meng, W. T. (2013). The effects of online feedback training on students’ text revision. 
Language Learning & Technology, 17(2), 220–238. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/yangmeng.pdf 
Zhao, H., Sullivan, H. P. K., & Mellenius, I. (2014). Participation, interaction, and social presence: An 
exploratory study of collaboration in online peer review groups. British Journal of Educational 
Technology, 45(5), 807–819. 
Appendix A. The Instruction on Modeling Writing Revision 
1. Content of the paragraph: Make sure you focus on the content of the essay by following these four 
aspects and questions: 
What do you think of the content of the essay? 
Do the ideas and supporting details give sufficient information about the topic? 
Are these ideas and supporting details clearly expressed for readers? 
Are the ideas and supporting details relevant? 
  
Murad Abdu Saeed and Kamila Ghazali 219 
 
2. Unity and Organization: Make sure you focus on the unity and organization of the ideas and 
paragraphs in the essay by following these four aspects and questions: 
Are the ideas and details in the parts of the essay organized? 
Are these ideas and details coherent? Or are there sentences that need to be linked through cohesion 
devices? 
Are the ideas and details in the paragraph well organized or logically sequenced? 
Do you see that all ideas and supporting details make up a well-unified essay? 
3. Argumentative Genre: Make sure you focus on the various aspects of argumentative essays: 
Does the author take a clear stand or position in the thesis statement? 
What do you think of the claims presented in the body of the essay? 
Are they strong enough to support the author’s stand? 
And what about the counter-claims or opposing claims in the body of the essay? Has he or she 
highlighted these opposing claims well? 
Does the author refute these opposing claims? 
Does the author use accurate language signposts to introduce the opposing claims and rebuttals? 
4. Language: Make sure you focus on the language (meaning and grammar) of the essay here by 
answering these questions: 
Do you see that the linguistic items (words, phrases) used accurately express the intended meaning? 
Do you think that these linguistic items give the intended meaning or clearly express the ideas? 
Do you see that the sentences are grammatically accurate or correct? 
What about the sentences? Are they well structured? 
5. Mechanics of the Paragraph: Make sure you focus on the spelling, capitalization, punctuations, and 
so forth. 
Note: In case, you see that there are problems with the above aspects in relation to the questions, please 
state the problem clearly, clarify it, give good reasons why, and provide examples as evidence. You can 
also suggest what should be done to correct it. 
Appendix B. Coding Scheme of Learners’ Patterns of Online Interaction 
Comments Based on Discourse Functions 
Exploratory Comments 
Type Definition Sample 
Scaffolding   
Requesting 
advice 
Asking for suggestions S2A: Great !! So now any other suggestions for the 
second paragraph?! 
Advising Suggesting revisions or 
recommending changes be 
made 
S1B: Since the writer is with, there should be 
rebuttal for paragraph 2. 
220 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Eliciting Drawing out opinions or 
reactions about additional 
information of the content or 
eliciting explicit feedback 
from members 
S1A: yes, that what I mean but maybe I am 
mistaken. What u think ? 
Responding to 
eliciting 
Reacting by giving opinion 
or evaluative comments on 
certain information in the 
text 
S1C: Hi: I think it is a little bit general since the 
paragraph is about communication. So get it focused. 
Questioning as 
hints 
Questioning a peer’s 
comment or revision as a 
hint to assist him or her in 
detecting an error 
S2A: why addresses and facilitates? 
S3B: YES I tend to use the simple present dear as it 
is a general truth. 
S2A: but why the s?? Since it's plural?? 
S3C: can you check the subject please? 
S3B: Yes dear I will accord it. Sorry for that 
mistake. 
Providing 
options 
Providing options or 
alternatives as an attempt to 
scaffold others and solve a 
problem 
S2C: Will be either present continues or simple 
present. 
Instructing Giving mini lessons or 
instructions on a particular 
aspect of revision 
S3C: What lacks here is a strong introductory 
sentence to the body first part 'claim. So firs, define 
the position then after that you provide evidence 
either by examples or logic reasoning. 
Defining Defining a particular term or 
concept to scaffold others 
S3A: Rebuttal: a part in the body that forms an 
evidence to strengthen one's position and by which 
the writer refutes any counter claims. It comes at the 
end of the body in an essay (clustering pattern). 
Non-scaffolding   
Requesting 
clarifications 
Asking a partner to clarify S2C: what do you mean about these two 
statements?! 
Clarifying Giving clarifications S3C: Hi I mean that losing connection like this is an 
evidence of the negative points of online learning 
communities. 
Questioning Asking questions seeking 
justifications from other 
participants 
S2A: Sorry but what does “For? Why did they use 
“FOR” here?! 
Justifying Defending comments by 
giving reasons 
S2B: yes, we do support her for her suggested 
alternative sentences in the introduction as the ideas 
are more related and linked. 
Comprehension 
check 
Checking peers’ 
understanding of a particular 
point 
S1B: look got me now ? 
Confirming 
understanding 
Responding to a peers’ 
question by confirming 
understanding 
S3C: got you but do you think that would be an 
argument for? 
Murad Abdu Saeed and Kamila Ghazali 221 
 
Certainty check Checking a peers’ certainty 
on a particular point 
S2A: Sure? 
Expressing 
certainty or 
uncertainty 
Responding to a peers’ 
question by confirming 
certainty or uncertainty 
S1C: About the Q that suggested, i am not sure i got 
it but i will wait to see it. For the other one, yes sure 
as it is a new unconventional strategy. 
Expressing 
knowledge or 
lack of 
knowledge  
Expressing knowledge or 
lack of knowledge 
S1B: We know the author is with online learning 
form the conclusion only. 
S1A: But through the two bodies u feel lost, we don't 
know which side he supports. 
Responding to 
advice 
Accepting, agreeing to, or 
questioning the validity of 
advice or rejecting it by 
disagreeing 
S3C: Great! and like your previous suggestion of 
this sentence. 
S1C: If u mean this is thesis statement I don’t agree 
with it at all. 
Persisting Continuing with an opinion 
in an attempt to convince 
others of that the information 
or opinion is correct 
S2B: Hi it’s not wrong not to mention that the 
structure is virtual, as we all know that it’s, it’s 
obvious for the reader: u can know that it’s virtual 
by reading the word Social networks. 
Elaborating Clarifying a previous 
comment by giving examples 
S1C: look dear in the first one the learner hasn’t 
exams and he is not obliged to achieve success in 
them, so we find that he focuses just on learning and 
improving his level, i think that's the real aim of 
learning, but the other who learn in the real 
classrooms he just focuses on getting marks to 
succeed in the exams, and just when he write his 
answers on the paper he will forget all what he 
learnt. 
Interpreting 
intended idea 
Interpreting a partner’s 
comment, response, or 
revision based on intended 
meaning 
S1A: As a reader, when the writer mentioned that 
SN are WEB SITES in the second sentence, it’s 
clear that he meant a virtual network. 
Negotiating Negotiating terms or even 
conditions of an agreement 
on a particular aspect of 
revision in order to solve a 
trouble 
S3B: Hi dear. we have already agreed that the topic 
sentence should be more general, which means we 
need only to mention that we’re dealing with the 
disadvantages of the SNs. 
Speculating Seeking or showing that one 
is engaging in thinking or 
reflecting on the task 
S2B: Hi friends I am thinking how can some 
sentences be just examples to others. I am also 
thinking of the sequencing of those ideas and if any 
possible new idea could modify the whole layout. 
Detecting a 
problem 
Detecting and identifying a 
problem in the text 
S1C: There is a sort of jumping from facebook to 
online learning communities and vice versa i!!! 
Summarizing Attempting to review or 
summarize important points 
in a paragraph or essay 
S1A: The introduction starts with defining the social 
networks In general, it gives a brief what about 
social network and includes the main points of the 
topic. 
222 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Comparing Pointing out similarities or 
differences between 
comments and revisions 
S3C: Hi: I see that this topic is different from two 
others suggested topics by you both as the two 
others are more specific and here, in this topic, is 
more general as it talks about networks in human 
life unlike the others as they talk about social 
networks in communication .  
Note. The parts of the sample comments in italics underlie the patterns of the interactional comments in terms of 
their language functions and focus areas in online peer review. 
Procedural and Social Comments 
Type Definition Sample 
Giving directives Ordering peers to take an action S1C: Go on we are at the beginning. 
Pointing Pointing to a specific part of the 
text when responding 
S2C: This is the sentence here: Many groups have 
been formed for the sake of knowledge, and they 
reflect clearly the community of learning. 
Notification Notifying others of handling a 
task 
S1A: My suggested topic sentence for paragraph 1: 
Expressing 
surprise, 
frustration, or 
confusion 
Showing or expressing surprise, 
frustration, or confusion 
S2C: Oh! That's true!! 
Organizing the 
task 
Organizing or controlling 
behavior in a discussion 
S2A: Hey u know?? Since i am already here... I’ll 
try to come up with some more supporting details 
and then as they are all here, we can go back to the 
paragraph and discuss it. Sounds good? 
Encountering 
challenges 
Commenting or complaining 
about facing a certain procedural 
or technical challenge 
S3B: Sure, I find it so difficult to comment here 
because of the tiny writing. 
S1B: friends, sorry if my post is late as the net it is 
too bad and the electricity is the worst 
Praising Praising or expressing admiration 
for a particular revision or 
comment 
S1A: bravo because if you we can advance quickly. 
Social presence Notifying another of social 
presence or checking others’ 
presence 
S3C: well fine and ready. What about others? 
S2B: Hello friends, I’m here and ready. 
S1C: I am here too and its good to prepare a cup of 
coffee. 
Expressing 
feelings 
Exchanging comments that 
express feelings towards others 
(e.g., missing someone, hoping, 
well-wishing, etc) 
S3C: we missed you here. 
S3B: bless u 
Exchanging 
greetings 
Exchanging greetings or 
checking and confirming 
wellbeing 
S1A: hello friends: 
S1B: good evening my great teacher. Have a 
wonderful time. 
S3C: have a blessed Friday sister Maria thank you. 
Note. The parts of the sample comments in italics underlie the patterns of the interactional comments in terms of 
their language functions and focus areas in online peer review. 
Murad Abdu Saeed and Kamila Ghazali 223 
 
Appendix C. Coding Scheme of the Global and Local Interaction Comments 
Based on their Nature and Focus Area 
 Revision-Oriented Non-Revision-Oriented 
Global   
Content S1B: Hi: I think it is a little bit 
general since the paragraph is about 
communication. So get it focused. 
S2A: About the content of the introduction, I 
think it reflects the topic discussed here and 
gives a simple idea about it 
Unity and 
organization 
S1C: They just need to be 
reorganized.... similar ideas next to 
each other. 
S2B: Just a remark: I can’t follow the ideas 
well because the main idea is not very clear 
(the relation between FB and learning 
community) 
Audience S1A: if the reader stops reading he 
or she can’t get it. 
S1B: The introduction is very clear to the 
readers 
Argumentative 
genre 
S1B: But through the two bodies u 
feel lost, we don’t know which side 
he supports. 
S2C: I think the first one is the topic for it 
states the writer’s position and it’s the most 
important. 
Local   
Language 
grammar 
S3B: Of course I’ve read that before, 
and have only a slight remark here 
delete the prep[Of] here. 
S3C: of course no mistakes of vocab and 
grammar. 
Language 
meaning 
S3A: here I think it’s better to use 
the word “obstacles”. 
S2B: Wow, I like this word nice suggestion 
Mechanics S2C: Aha only something sweetie in 
punctuation (No need for the comma 
before since. 
S1C: Let’s take the example of mechanics 
Appendix D. Sample Learners’ Global & Local Text Revisions Linked to their 
Interaction Comments 
Sample Learners’ Interaction Comments 
S1B: O.k. now, but shall I revise the ideas and details in the counterargument paragraph according to my 
topic sentence or according to the real topic sentence? 
S3C: Idea 1: in fact includes 3 separate ideas which could be supported by examples./ Idea2: I see it not 
an argument against / Idea 3: could be better introduced by a sentence / As for other information we can 
talk abt people lose privacy ; lack of trust is another concern. 
S2C: I think the ideas and supporting details give information relevant to the topic sentence and the topic 
of the essay. 
S2A: they are all relevant to the topic sentence of the essay which is the effects of SNs on communication 
and socialization. 2. not so sufficient.. Mean we can come up with more or explain more especially about 
how SNs affect the one family’s members in real life. 
S1C: it seems they are two ideas, and all of them need more supporting details. I suggest hiding from the 
failure and the loneliness of their real lives. They build imaginary world. 
S2A: Actually sometimes, me and my brother use Facebook, what's up or any other application to discuss 
224 Language Learning & Technology 
 
sth while we are in the same house! Making a voice/ video call through Skype! Sometimes for fun, other 
times due to laziness. 
S3A: I agree with you great example as we also so this here with my little sister haha. They become 
somehow addicted to this kind of communication. 
S3B: Sorry can I suggest more ideas?  
S3C: Yes, I've been developing my second idea.  
S2A: I think we can add examples ... ummmm what about “spending much time using social sites less 
attention to their face-to-face social relations? 
S1A: Bravo we can talk about how the youngsters could have easy ways to corruption. 
S3B: Of course we’ve to deal with: 1- juvenile delinquency as influence the social lives of people in a 
negative way and the building up of an introvert personality which may represent an important threat too. 
and this is my second supporting idea. 
S3A: we can talk about advertising via SNs also the change in dialects with the cyber language especially 
for the youths. 
S2B: we may add about how overusing the SNs change badly the whole communication system and visits 
between family and friends with a Facebook message. 
S2A: wow, great I like ur suggested ideas and details. 
S3C: Thanks liked yours too.  Hi well I think I need to clarify that better how hacking someone’s account 
makes socializing hard to be achieved in a good way because it is an 'abuse' against users and make them 
more cautious of online communication. 
S2C: Ok. We need to mention an example creating fake accounts, posting abusive materials as immoral 
videos or illegal pictures. 
Sample Learners’ Content Text Revisions Linked to Above Interaction Comments 
S2A: Many users think of social networks such as Facebook as a way to destroy the intimate relationships 
among the one family and friends. Recently, it has become a global phenomenon to see a family gathering 
only for dinner or lunch while spending much of their time contacting their online friends and 
communicating with them. Thus, they are destroying the family atmosphere for the sake of the cyber 
socializing they entertain themselves with, and thus creating a gap among the members of the family. For 
instance, my brother and I often use Facebook, or any other application to discuss certain matters while 
we are in the same house: making a voice, video calling through Skype …and sometimes we do that just 
for fun or out of laziness. 
S3B: Others will say that these sites influence the social lives of people in a negative way by making 
them unsocial in the real life as some used to spend hours in front of the computers screen and so 
excluding themselves from the real world. Of course this may lead to build up an introvert personality, 
but I can say that through organizing time and learning self-control skills, this problem can be avoided as 
it has been proven that social net works enhance the communication skills if it is used wisely. 
S1C: One of the most important effects of these social networks is the fact that the more time they spend 
using social sites, the less they pay attention to their face-to-face social relations. Actually, their daily 
users become after a while lost between their real life and their life on the Internet, as they become 
somehow addicted to this kind of communication while on the other hand, they also need to pursue the 
real contact with their society and surroundings. 
S2B: The overuse of the SNs changed (badly) the whole communication system (.) We replaced visits 
between family and friends with a Facebook message or (a tweet). (Also) specialists notice the change in 
Murad Abdu Saeed and Kamila Ghazali 225 
 
dialects with the cyber language especially for the youths, which cause an intellectual and linguistic gap 
between them and their elders. 
S1B: Some people who become addicted to this kind of communication, they actually hide from the 
failure and the loneliness of their real lives. They build imaginary world in the social networks. The more 
imaginary world in the social network the more destroyed in the real world. 
S1A: Due to Social networking, users lose their social life. They become addicts and they spend their 
whole time on the screen. SNS can influence negatively their personalities and even to an extent that they 
become antipathetic with time. 
S2C: people who use SNS, especially the most important ones, the youngsters, could have easy ways to 
corruption. They create fake accounts,post abusive materials as immoral videos or illegal pictures. 
S3C: Being on a social network one volunteers his/her personal information online, which means people 
lose privacy when they choose to be online SNs participants. For instance, hacking someone's account is 
actually an emerging problem that should be accurately focused on. 
S3A: Trustis also another concern of most SNs users due to the different social context. Trust can't be 
communicated when people use fake accountsor post untrue things. Some others are exaggerating or 
boasting to be perfect for others. In this case we could hardly socialize through SNs, simply because of 
the erroneous sense of certainty. 
Sample Local Text Revisions Based on Learners’ Interaction Comments 
Sample Segment of Pre-Revised Draft 
But, proclaiming that the major aim of of college education is to prepare and qualify students for the 
world of work; proclaiming that would evidently bring about a great deal of debate. Supporters of that 
idea are, alas, less convincing -- if not kidding themselves by providing pieces of evidence to defend the 
vocational purpose of higher education. University or college learning can't logically be confined to that 
limited conception. Conceptualizing post- secondary education in relation to life-long successful 
achievements should rather have multi-dimensional perspectives. 
Learners’ Sample Interaction Comments 
S2B: It's right that the introduction gives the readers information and background about the topic, but I 
think I was lost on reading it. 
S1C: Greatdear so can u please be so precise about what sentences that seem confusing? 
S2B: the last part of the paragraph is not coherent. I mean this part “Supporters of that idea are, alas, less 
convincing……….. perspectives”. 
S1A: the introduction is not really clear. 
S3C: what is the ambiguity there? 
S2A: I agree with you, I think it was little confusing maybe cause of many conceptions. 
S1B: Exactly, both of you because the alternation of ideas made me lost while reading it. 
S2A: We have lots of things in common, dear 
S2B: Yes dear we have. 
S3C: would you please state these conceptions? 
S2B: I mean repetition too as I can see in the introduction 
S3B: ok , I think that the last sentence needs to be modified. 
S2A: Hi it's not that they were unclear but ummm, as if one has to focus well or will lose the idea. For 
226 Language Learning & Technology 
 
example, conceptions: conceptualizing. 
Sample Segments of Revised Drafts  
S3A: But the question of what the major aim of education is, brought up a great deal of debate as some 
belief that the aim is to prepare and qualify students for the world of work, while others reject this limited 
point of view claiming that university or college learning can't logically be confined to that limited 
purpose. Accordingly, they proclaim that the purpose of post- secondary education in relation to life-long 
successful achievements should rather have multidimensional perspectives.  
S2A: As many claim that the major aim of college education is to prepare and qualify students for the 
world of work. However, there is another point of view that suggests widening this idea and not soecify it 
to this limited conception. Conceptualizing post- secondary education in relation to life-long successful 
achievements should rather have multi-dimensional perspectives. 
S1B: Education is one of the most important elements of success so many people think that the major 
aims of collage and universities is to prepare and qualify students for the world work- successful workers 
while the major aims should be qualify successful people. 
Note. The parts highlighted in yellow and in red font indicate those interactional comments textually linked to text 
revisions. 
About the Authors 
Murad Abdu Saeed was a lecturer of English at Hodeidah University, Yemen, and is currently a post-
doctoral research fellow at the Department of English Language, Faculty of Languages and Linguistics, 
University of Malaya. He received his PhD from the School of Language Studies and Linguistics 
(SOLLS), Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities, UKM. His research interests are online peer review 
in writing and use of social networks among EFL learners beyond the university classroom context as 
online learning communities. 
E-mail: muradsaeed16@yahoo.com 
Kamila Ghazali is a professor at the Department of English Language, Faculty of Languages and 
Linguistics, University of Malaya. Among her research interests are discourse analysis and 
sociolinguistics. 
E-mail: kamila@um.edu.my 
