Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2018, Volume 22, Issue 1 
pp. 52–55 
NEWS  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
News from our sponsoring organizations 
 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center 
University of Hawai‘i Center for Language and Technology 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center 
(NFLRC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
The 6th Business Chinese Workshop in Conjunction With the 2nd International 
Conference on Business Chinese Education 
Beyond a Limited Scope: Chinese for Specific and Professional Purposes 
March 30–31, 2018, Honolulu, HI 
The NFLRC is pleased to be co-sponsoring and co-organizing this joint event focused on business 
Chinese. Highlights will include pre-conference workshops by James Dean Brown (University of Hawai‘i 
at Mānoa) and Orlando R. Kelm (University of Texas at Austin); keynote talks by James Dean Brown 
(University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa), Christine Grosse (Arizona State University), Chu-Ren Huang (Hong 
Kong Polytechnic University), and Hongyin Tao (University of California, Los Angeles); and nearly 70 
panel, paper, and poster sessions. The early registration deadline is February 15, 2018. 
2018 Fundamentals of Project-Based Language Learning Online Institute 
Become part of a network of colleagues who have a common interest in quality project-based language 
learning (PBLL) implementation as experts guide you through the generation of project ideas and the 
skills you will need to create a project. Learn about the elements of high quality, rigorous PBLL and 
explore PBLL’s connections with pragmatics, task-based language teaching, and performance assessment. 
Register today for Option 2 (self-study). Successfully complete all assigned tasks to earn an NFLRC 
Digital Badge by the deadline, which will qualify you to apply for the NFLRC PBLL Intensive Summer 
Institute offered in Honolulu in 2018. 
The 4th International Conference on Interactivity, Language, and Cognition (CILC4): 
Educational Enskillment, Event, and Ecology 
August 1–5, 2018, Honolulu, HI 
The University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa is pleased to host the 4th International Conference on Interactivity, 
Language, and Cognition on its campus. The theme of CILC4 is Educational Enskillment, Event, and 
Ecology. These intersecting ideas converge on how processual events sustain human and community 
News 53 
 
becoming. In addition to addressing these issues, we welcome papers that discuss how Eastern and 
Western assumptions about knowledge and becoming can be linked and how such links may be fruitfully 
exploited in theory and practice. Thus, in Chinese philosophy there is a reciprocal metaphor that connects 
the cosmos and the body through Qi, an energetic flow that operates on different scales. In the West, 
proponents of 4E cognition (embodied, embedded, extended, enactive) are increasingly preoccupied with 
ideas that share similar assumptions. We propose to explore Qi in both its holistic macro and micro 
potentials and ask how concepts like ecosystems, events, and Qi contribute to our understanding of 
languaging, thinking, and feeling. 
Highlights of the conference will include keynote talks by Roger Ames (Beijing University), Stephen 
Cowley (University of Southern Denmark), Graham Crookes (University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa), Hannele 
Dufva (University of Jyväskylä), Andrew Lambert (College of Staten Island, CUNY), Li-Hsiang Lisa 
Rosenlee (University of Hawai‘i at West O‘ahu), Sune Steffensen (University of Southern Denmark), 
Paul Thibault (University of Agder), Steven Thorne (Portland State University), Li Wei (University 
College London), and Chuming Wang (Guangdong University of Foreign Studies). Conference 
registration opens February 1, 2018. 
Join the NFLRC Listserv 
To get announcements and reminders on NFLRC news, publications, professional development events, 
and more, please subscribe to the official announcements email list for the National Foreign Language 
Resource Center at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa. We may occasionally post announcements of 
other news and events of interest to our listserv subscribers, but in general, posts will be kept to a 
minimum. 
If you prefer social media, you could instead join our 4,000+ fans on Facebook or 800+ followers on 
Twitter. All key announcements will be posted there as well. 
  
54 Language Learning & Technology 
 
NFLRC Publications 
Interactional Competence in Japanese as an Additional Language (Pragmatics & 
Interaction, Volume 4) 
 
In the research literature on interactional competence in talk among second 
language speakers and their co-participants, this volume of Pragmatics & 
Interaction is the first to focus on interaction in Japanese. The chapters 
examine the use and development of interactional practices in a wide range 
of social settings, from everyday talk among friends to service encounters, 
workplace interaction, a rakugo performance, various activities in Japanese 
language classrooms, and oral language assessment. Conducted from the 
shared perspective of conversation analysis, the studies in this volume show 
in detail how activities are accomplished through the generic methods of 
interactional organization, multimodal practices, and the specific linguistic 
resources of Japanese. 
ScholarSpace 
 
NFLRC maintains a large searchable archive of free language research and 
teaching materials which currently contains over 350 items. These items 
include foreign language teaching materials (in print, audio, and video), 
language acquisition research papers, and collections of conference 
materials. 
 
Save the trees! Check out our other two online, open-access journals 
 
 
 
 
Language Documentation & Conservation (LD&C) is 
a refereed, open-access journal sponsored by the 
NFLRC and published by University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to 
language documentation and conservation, as well as 
book reviews, hardware and software reviews, and 
notes from the field. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed 
international journal of issues in foreign 
language reading and literacy, published twice 
yearly on the World Wide Web and sponsored 
by the NFLRC and the College of Languages, 
Linguistics, and Literature at the University of 
Hawai‘i at Mānoa. 
 
View all NFLRC Publications 
  
News 55 
 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research 
(CLEAR) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
Professional Development 
CLEAR is pleased to announce its professional development offerings for Summer 2018. The topics are 
as follows: 
• Increasing proficiency through World Language Core Practices (Section 1): June 25–26 (2-day 
workshop) 
• Differentiated instruction in the language classroom: June 27 (1-day workshop) 
• Real-life genres for teaching reading and writing: From nutrition labels to restaurant reviews: 
June 28 (1-day workshop) 
• Proficiency-oriented games: How to make games useful and why: June 29 (1-day workshop) 
• Increasing proficiency through World Language Core Practices (Section 2): July 30–31 (2-day 
workshop) 
• Maximizing target language use in classroom instruction: August 1–2 (2-day workshop) 
Online registration is open on our website. 
Conferences 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We enjoyed seeing many of you at ACTFL 
in Nashville, TN and look forward to seeing even more at the Central States Conference on the Teaching 
of Foreign Languages in Milwaukee, WI in March. 
Newsletter 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe here. 
