Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2018, Volume 22, Issue 1 
pp. 119–136 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Dawn Bikowski & J. Elliott Casal 
 
 
Interactive digital textbooks and engagement: 
A learning strategies framework 
Dawn Bikowski, Ohio University  
J. Elliott Casal, Pennsylvania State University 
Abstract 
This mixed-methods study explored non-native English speaking students’ learning processes and 
engagement as they used a customized interactive digital textbook housed on a mobile device. Think aloud 
protocols, surveys of anticipated and actual engagement with the digital textbook, reflective journals, and 
member checking constituted data collection. Participants included 13 students in a large U.S. university 
Business English class. This study responds to the call for further research on how interacting with digital 
textbooks and mobile devices may affect student reading behaviors and the learning process, using the 
cultures-of-use conceptual framework by Thorne (2003) as a lens for analysis. Results of a paired Wilcoxon 
signed-rank test found that participants entered the course with high expectations for the digital textbook 
and ratings remained high over the term, with only one area showing a significant decrease in engagement. 
Analysis of think aloud protocol and reflective journal data resulted in the creation of the Framework for 
Learning with Digital Resources. This framework of learning processes and strategies can be used by 
materials designers in creating digital textbooks and resources and by educators in supporting students as 
they move from using digital devices mainly for personal use to utilizing them effectively in their learning. 
Keywords: Language Learning Strategies, Reading, Multimodal Texts, Mobile Learning, English for 
Specific Purposes 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English 
APA Citation: Bikowski, D., & Casal, J. E. (2018). Interactive digital textbooks and engagement: A 
learning strategies framework. Language Learning & Technology, 22(1), 119–136. doi:10125/44584 
Introduction 
Digital textbooks are increasingly common for the teaching of English and other languages and across 
educational contexts as well as in content oriented courses. They are also commonly accessed through 
mobile digital devices (e.g., tablets, smartphones). In addition to increased affordability and portability, 
potential benefits include multimodality (Vaarala & Jalkanen, 2010), a more enjoyable learning process 
(Gu, Wu, & Xu, 2015), increased motivation (Huang, 2013), and, if implemented correctly, hypertextuality 
(DeStefano & LeFevre, 2007). Students need sufficient time, however, in learning to take advantage of 
these features (Chou, 2016), and concerns about the development and use of digital materials exist. Studies 
have shown that students prefer print textbooks over their digital counterparts (see Chou, 2016; Woody, 
Daniel, & Baker, 2010). Reasons for dissatisfaction include reading long texts on screens and consequent 
eye strain, limited notetaking features, technological difficulties, lack of sufficient learner training (Baek & 
Monaghan, 2013), inadequate teacher support (Gu et al., 2015), and difficulties comprehending online texts 
(Lam, Lam, Lam, & McNaught, 2009) or learning through digital texts (Daniel & Woody, 2013). The new 
skills required for learning with technology have led to increased discussions on digital literacy as a 
disposition (Gillen, 2014), particularly since many students are not sufficiently trained on learning in these 
media-rich environments. 
Digital textbooks (also called e-textbooks or electronic textbooks) can be created through many tools, 
developed by large publishers or individual educators, and housed on devices or in the cloud. While many 
120 Language Learning & Technology 
 
are largely-static replicas of print counterparts, others are designed specifically for digital mediums and can 
thus integrate the affordances of mobile technology and a variety of digital resources into a single 
customized package. Thus, educators and writers of materials are increasingly able to create digital 
textbooks that are both interactive and customized to their educational context. As these textbooks can be 
specifically designed to target the course objectives, to deliver course content and text models, and with 
learner needs and broader cultural context in mind, they are an attractive option for English for specific 
purposes (ESP) courses. A customized interactive digital textbook which was created for university level 
Business English will be explored in this study. 
The majority of research on digital textbooks explores those that are electronic versions of print texts (e.g., 
Chou, 2016; Huang, 2013; Lam et al., 2009), while relatively little research considers those that are 
customized (e.g., McFall, 2005) to the device or context; no research was found on the use of customized 
interactive digital textbooks with non-native English speaking (NNES) students. Survey studies of student 
satisfaction have revealed that the majority of student experiences are neutral or negative (e.g., Baek & 
Monaghan, 2013; Lam et al., 2009), and closer consideration suggests potentially negative changes in 
student learning behavior (e.g., Daniel & Woody, 2013) and a “crucial disjuncture … when moving from 
print to digital…” (Evans & Po, 2007, p. 56). Some may interpret these findings as calling for a return to 
print-based textbooks. Yet, it may be that students are ill-equipped for such learning, given that learner 
processes and strategies for digital texts are largely shaped outside the classroom, while their learning 
experiences are largely print-based within a classroom. As they transition to using their devices for 
academic in addition to personal purposes, students need to put forth extra “effort and involvement in 
productive learning activities,” two key components of engagement that Kuh (2009, p. 6) identifies. While 
engagement can provide the motivation students need to navigate this new learning environment, the design 
of the digital textbook must also be considered, and it cannot be assumed that users will automatically 
become successful learners. As such, the importance of customizability becomes clear and learner training 
becomes crucial. 
This exploratory study thus responds to the call for further research of digital textbooks as they support 
learning (Gu et al., 2015) and “how the conventions of readings shift when students interact with digital 
texts” (Evans & Po, 2007, p. 70), specifically with NNES students (Huang, 2013) developing disciplinary 
writing skills. It seeks to move beyond the examination of student perception or preference and explore 
students’ learning processes, strategies (i.e., conscious employment of a learning process), and engagement 
as they use a customized interactive digital textbook. It is based on a broad application of the cultures-of-
use conceptual framework of activity theory by Thorne (2003, 2016), which “provides a lens through which 
to explore, and potentially to pedagogically address, tool socialization and its variabilities and 
consistencies” (Thorne, 2016, p. 188). The framework also suggests that learners’ limited exposure to 
digital text mediums and limited use of mobile digital devices in educational contexts may affect how they 
engage with such materials for learning. 
Literature Review 
Digital Textbooks in the Classroom 
Research on digital textbooks has focused more heavily on classes for native-English speaking (NES) 
students, but findings provide important considerations for NNES students as well. Most studies focus on 
preferences and utilize surveys, with many finding that students prefer print to digital textbooks. Baek and 
Monaghan (2013) found that only 34% of the over 600 NES students surveyed indicated feeling satisfied 
with their publisher-created digital textbook. Older students were more likely to report positive opinions, 
perhaps due to younger students’ use of computers for entertainment over academic purposes. The authors 
advocate the use of faculty-created customized digital textbooks. Working with 12 NNES students, Lam et 
al. (2009) found that participants who used publisher-created digital textbooks for extended periods 
expressed more negative opinions than those who used them for shorter times. Measuring students’ 
perceptions initially and over time can thus provide more in-depth information. 
Dawn Bikowski and J. Elliott Casal 121 
 
Other research moves beyond surveys and focuses on students’ learning and experiences. Daniel and 
Woody (2013) found no differences in NES students’ learning (measured through quiz scores) when using 
print versus digital textbooks, though students using the digital textbooks were shown to require more time 
for reading and to spend more time on a range of non-academic activities than they did while reading print-
based versions of the same text. The authors question the efficacy of asking students to learn with the same 
devices they utilize for personal use without providing sufficient training. Yet, while Daniel and Woody 
point out the draw that the technology can have on students’ attention, others have noted students’ 
difficulties in engaging with these technologies. Evans and Po (2007) found that their 12 NES 
undergraduate participants were “unable to engage with digital texts” largely due to “their previous 
interactions with technology” (p. 70). Similarly, McFall (2005) found that many features of the customized 
digital textbook were challenging and unfamiliar, and therefore not utilized by the 33 undergraduate NES 
participants. The author underscores the importance of design and customization in learning with digital 
textbooks, noting that training must include critical reading skills. Training in this area is particularly salient 
given that each new online reading experience potentially requires a different set of skills and strategies 
(Leu et al., 2011). 
Customization is critical with disciplinary writing and learning in ESP, which is a pragmatic, needs-based 
approach to language teaching and learning within specific contexts (Belcher, 2009) such as Business 
English. This customization is increasingly occurring via technology (e.g., authentic videos and texts, 
communication with professionals). Technology offers students many affordances, meaning it offers a 
“‘match’ between something in the environment … and the learner” (van Lier, 2004, p. 96). With these 
new environments, however, comes the need for new learning strategies. 
NNES students cannot necessarily rely on familiar strategies as they read and learn with digital textbooks 
(Chou, 2012). Reading on a screen introduces new challenges (e.g., distinct annotation procedures, eye-
strain) to what many find an already daunting task. As of yet, no studies have outlined the processes and 
strategies these students utilize as they engage in this new context. Research into processes learners use in 
other learning contexts has moved beyond surveys and added cognitive-based methods such as think aloud 
protocols (TAPs), which are useful for understanding problem solving and cognitive functions while using 
technology-based learning tools (e.g., Okuyama & Igarashi, 2007; Sun, 2003; Vinther, 2005) and during 
second language reading (Brown & Rodgers, 2002). 
Evolving Pedagogical Practices and Training 
The inconclusive findings about digital textbooks may be surprising, considering the prominence of digital 
texts in society and educator expectations, but they also highlight the gap between their societal (e.g., social 
media) and educational uses (e.g., digital textbooks, learning management systems). Following the work of 
Kessler, Bikowski, and Boggs (2012) we can reframe this gap as an opportunity, a space wherein tools, 
pedagogical practices, and use can “co-evolve” (p. 105) for successful learning. Kessler et al. explain that 
changes in a developing tool or use require new or revised pedagogies, broadly suggesting that successful 
pedagogical practices are conceived with tools and student usage patterns in mind. Likewise, there is little 
reason to expect that the ways we use technology in our everyday lives are optimized for or even compatible 
with learning; learners may require training for learning and need to be engaged in the learning process. 
Hubbard (2004) distinguishes between operational and learning competence in his discussion of training. 
Learners may struggle and resist, as Thorne (2003) finds in computer-mediated communication contexts, 
or ignore technologies they do not perceive as useful, as Conole, de Laat, Dillon, and Darby (2008) find. 
Instructors may need to make deliberate efforts to foster learning relationships between students and their 
digital textbooks and devices. Hubbard (2004) supports this view in arguing that effective training develops 
learner awareness of the connection between learning objectives and technology-based resources. A 
component of this connection is engagement, which can be the path for students as they expand their use 
from solely personal to academic. How students expect the digital textbook to affect their engagement, 
compared to how they reflect on its actual impact, has not been measured. 
122 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Theoretical Framework 
In his cultures-of-use conceptual framework, Thorne (2003, 2016) highlights the importance of tools and 
how their use (including for learning) is determined by society: “The design of the tool as well as the 
habitual patterns of its use influence the purposes to which it is put and methods by which it is used” 
(Lantolf, Thorne, & Poehner, 2015, p. 209). The way a tool (or artifact) is used leads to a culture-of-use; 
for example, a tablet can fit into a personal or academic culture-of-use. Thorne (2003) found that a learner’s 
prior artifact-mediated activity can either facilitate or constrain their future learning activity. These cultural 
artifacts become empowered within specific contexts. As such, critical, academic engagement with a 
mediating learning artifact may lead to increased feelings of engagement and positive educational 
outcomes, but these cannot be expected to arise naturally and can benefit from teacher guidance and peer 
discussions. 
The studies discussed above track digital texts or textbooks in distinct contexts, but one similarity is that 
training users for learning competence with such resources does not occupy a central role. Even though 
Lam et al. (2009) include limited training in their study, the focus appears to be on operational competence. 
While learners in these studies may have begun with, developed, or even been trained for capacity to use 
digital texts or textbooks (e.g., navigation features, functionality of notetaking tools), there is little evidence 
that they were trained to learn from them (e.g., previewing, notetaking strategies). As such, a poorly 
developed academic culture-of-use surrounding these texts and a lack of learning strategies may have 
represented a learning barrier and discouraged learner engagement. Participants were placed in innovative 
learning environments, but they were not necessarily fully prepared to succeed. 
Taken together, these findings reveal that (a) reading and learning with digital textbooks is at least as 
challenging as learning with print texts, (b) the design of digital textbooks must be considered, (c) many 
learners are unsure of how to learn with them, and (d) training is therefore crucial. Previous efforts to utilize 
digital textbooks have not included conscious efforts to establish an academic culture-of-use surrounding 
the resource or digital device and have not capitalized on the opportunity that customization can provide in 
disciplinary contexts. As such, this exploratory study provides insights into the nature of NNES students’ 
experiences with a customized interactive digital textbook after they have used the book for the course and 
undergone consistent training. Participants were in a university-level first-year Business English course; 
the digital textbook had gone through prior usability testing and was fully embedded within the curriculum. 
This study is driven by the following research questions: 
1. To what extent do students report engagement (anticipated and actual) with the digital textbook, 
and what is the nature of that engagement as they are developing an academic culture-of-use? 
2. What learning processes and strategies are part of students’ developing academic culture-of-use as 
they are trained to use an interactive and customized digital textbook? 
Methods and Materials 
Setting and Participants 
The context chosen for this study was a first-year 15-week Business English course in a large Midwestern 
U.S. university. This project-based course had a local non-profit organization focusing on environmental 
education as a client, with students researching collaboratively in small teams (of three to four people) and 
engaging in business genres (e.g., memos, progress reports, analytic reports). The overall goal of the course 
was to support students as they developed higher-level writing skills to help them succeed in business 
courses and their careers. This course was chosen since it required customized materials, collaboration, and 
technology use and offered students sufficient time to develop the strategies needed for learning with the 
digital textbook (Chou, 2016). 
Participants were 13 fully-matriculated undergraduate students: their average age was 22 (range, 20–24); 
there were nine females and four males; their native languages were Mandarin Chinese (9), Arabic (2), 
Dawn Bikowski and J. Elliott Casal 123 
 
Japanese (1), and Dutch (1). All students owned a smartphone or a tablet. On average, participants felt very 
comfortable using their smartphone or tablet at the beginning of the course (M = 4.38/5.00, SD = 0.77) and 
used it for a variety of tasks: interacting in social media (M = 13.35 hours/week, SD = 15.34); reading digital 
books (M = 8.5 hours/week, SD = 9.86); reading the news (M = 4.35 hours/week, SD = 3.59); watching 
movies (M = 4.31 hours/week, SD = 3.25); studying, learning, or using educational apps (M = 4.15 
hours/week, SD = 3.16); playing games (M = 3.54 hours/week, SD = 4.70); checking email (M = 2.65 
hours/week, SD = 1.70); and shopping online (M = 1.92 hours/week, SD=1.79). Some participants also 
wrote digitally via personal blogs, news commentary, or product and media reviews. Seven of the 13 
students had used a digital textbook created by a publisher; none reported using a customized digital 
textbook. 
Digital Textbook Used for this Study 
The digital textbook was created as an iBook due to this platform’s features regarding stability, interactivity, 
and the affordances offered within the device (an iPad). Students who did not own an iPad were lent one 
during the term. For simplicity, the customized interactive digital textbook used in this study will be referred 
to as a digital textbook, with customized and interactive being understood. The digital textbook included 
course materials (e.g., syllabus, rubrics) as well as content chapters which explored issues related to 
professional writing (e.g., considering audience) and the course project (e.g., challenges facing non-profit 
organizations), with examples from students’ home countries integrated when possible (e.g., relevant 
examples of non-profit organizations). Design principles followed in order to reduce cognitive load 
included having shorter readings (approximately 30 minutes) with bulleted material and sufficient white 
space; integrating learning tools and hyperlinks within and outside the iBook; and interspersing text with 
highly connected images, videos (open source or custom-made), and interactive content (e.g., self-
assessment quizzes, links to Google Forms homework tasks). Guidelines followed regarding design from a 
learning perspective included allowing students to collaborate, maintain control, use previous experiences 
and knowledge, and give and receive feedback within the digital textbook and device (e.g., see Lim, Song, 
& Lee, 2012). The digital textbook underwent several iterations of usability testing, focusing on the 
attributes of learnability, effectiveness, and efficiency (see Kessler & Plakans, 2001; Lim et al., 2012). The 
book was used, tested (via student surveys, observations, and in-class discussions), and revised eight times 
prior to this study to maximize progress toward the course objectives. 
Procedure and Analysis 
A phased research design was used, following Vinther (2005). During Phase I (Weeks 1–2), all participants 
took an anticipated engagement survey and six participated in the first round of TAP. This information 
informed the reflective journals and training students received in Phase II (Weeks 3–10). Phase III (Weeks 
11–15) included the survey of actual engagement, the final TAP, and member checking. This triangulation 
of data collection improved the credibility, dependability, and confirmability of qualitative and 
introspective data (Brown & Rogers, 2002). 
Engagement Survey 
Engagement with the digital textbook was measured via surveys (Week 1: anticipated; Week 11: actual). 
Handelsman, Briggs, Sullivan, and Towler’s (2005) Student Course Engagement Questionnaire, created for 
college students, was modified and used (see Table 1). Based on theories of motivation and a 
multidimensional definition of engagement, this survey was tested for validity and reliability. It has been 
modified and used in other learning technology research, such as with studies of engagement within online 
learning (Dixson, 2010; Young & Bruce, 2011). An overall question and 15 items were included from the 
three factors (i.e., skills, emotion, and participation and interaction) that related to this study and to the 
definition of engagement utilized by Kuh (2009): effort and involvement. Three questions were re-worded 
slightly for relevance (similar to Dixson, 2010) or for clarity to NNES students, and one question was added 
about the digital environment. Participants rated the questions on a 5-point Likert scale, per Handelsman et 
al. (2005), and spaces for comments were included. Questions asked the extent to which participants 
124 Language Learning & Technology 
 
anticipated the digital textbook would (term initial) and then actually did (term final) influence them in 
various behaviors and feelings. General demographic and computer-use questions were also included. 
Distributing the survey in Week 1 also allowed for the identification of potential participants for the TAPs. 
Potential participants were identified based on total time spent on two activities: hours/week reading digital 
books and hours/week studying, learning, or using educational apps. Of the 13 participants, the three with 
the lowest total hours, the three closest to the mean total hours (M = 12.65 hours/week), and the three with 
the highest total hours were invited. Of those nine, six agreed to participate in the TAPs: one from the lower 
three (3.5 hours/week), all three closest to the mean (11, 13, and 16 hours/week), and two from the upper 
three (23 and 33 hours/week). P1 (Participant 1), P2, P3, and P5 were native Chinese speakers, P4 Japanese, 
and P6 Dutch. 
The same engagement survey was given during Week 11, but with verbs changed to the past tense. A 
Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to compare participants’ anticipated and actual feelings of engagement 
with the digital textbook. This non-parametric test was chosen given the non-normal distribution of the data 
set. The effect size (r) was calculated as the Z score divided by the square root of N minus any ties (Larson-
Hall, 2010). 
Think Aloud Protocols 
This study used both concurrent (verbalizing thoughts during decision making) and retrospective 
(verbalizing thoughts after decision making but while they are still in short-term memory) TAPs (Kuusela 
& Paul, 2000) with material participants had not yet seen. The two types were used in order to minimize 
data collection concerns and given that researchers often utilize both (e.g., Chamot & Kupper, 1989; 
Charters, 2003). This study followed established guidelines for collecting data using TAPs, including 
participant training, task design, and researcher behavior (Ericsson & Simon, 1993). Retrospective TAP 
questions were informed by the notes taken during the concurrent TAP and by the possible strategies and 
processes identified in the literature. Sessions (ranged 30–45 minutes) were videotaped and transcribed. No 
participants appeared to have difficulties with the TAP. 
The Phase I TAP analysis (Week 2) followed a two-cycle coding system (Miles, Huberman, & Saldaña, 
2014), moving from provisional (initial summary of the data) to pattern coding (grouping provisional codes 
into themes). Codes were informed by learning and reading strategies used by second language learners 
(Chamot & Kupper, 1989; Grabe, 2009; Oxford, 1989), strategies and processes used by learners using 
technology (Okuyama & Igarashi, 2007; Sun, 2003; Vinther, 2005), and Hubbard’s (2004) operational and 
learning competencies training framework. The coding scheme followed Gu’s (2014) recommendation to 
be grounded in a theoretical framework but expanded to include more detail and examples. This coding 
scheme resulted in the Framework for Learning with Digital Resources (see Table 6) and was used to 
identify training needs (a 6-point training plan) during Phase II as well as the analysis of TAPs in Phase III. 
The Phase III (Week 11) TAP was analyzed qualitatively according to the guidelines established by 
Charters (2003) and Gu (2014). A qualitative lens was chosen given the small sample size (six TAP 
participants) and the purpose of this study. Gu (2014) notes the importance of understanding students’ 
motivations in using a strategy over simply obtaining quantitative tallies of presence or absence codes. TAP 
sessions were analyzed by coding each comment or behavior into the coding scheme created in Phase I (see 
Table 6). Two raters (one of the researchers and a research assistant) independently rated 25% of the 
videotaped TAP sessions. Given strong interrater reliability (96.25%), the two researchers completed the 
remaining coding. By the sixth and final TAP participant, Gu’s (2014) recommendation to reach the point 
of data saturation was accomplished, and analysis demonstrated that the coding scheme was comprehensive. 
Training and Implementation  
The 6-point training plan carried out in Phase II (Weeks 3–10) was developed out of the coding scheme 
and framework developed in the Phase I TAP (see Table 6), which was itself influenced by Hubbard’s 
(2004) competencies framework. Training was collaborative, student-centered, and adaptive, emphasizing 
Dawn Bikowski and J. Elliott Casal 125 
 
critical awareness of learning decisions and reflective practices. Each week, students engaged in a variety 
of brief activities designed to prepare them for learning with the digital textbook and to develop critical 
thinking skills (Sun, 2003). These activities can be broadly grouped according to purpose: introduction of 
features or strategies, implementation of behavior into personal practices, and reflection on effectiveness 
of behavior and needs. Tasks included brief demonstrations, classroom activities using the technology, 
personal reflective journals, and collaborative discussion of strategies with peers to develop their own 
metacognitive awareness (Chamot & Kupper, 1989). To emphasize peer learning, particular emphasis was 
placed on “collaborative debriefings” (Hubbard, 2004, p. 54) that created recurring spaces for learners to 
share and reflect on their strategies while thinking toward future activity. 
Reflective Journals 
Reflective Journals in Phase II (Weeks 3–10) allowed for the inclusion of a broader range of participants’ 
experiences. Reflective journal topics were based on the coding scheme and the literature on engagement 
(Kuh, 2009) and digital literacy (Gillen, 2014). They included academic uses (notetaking, reading online, 
writing papers or assignments, and experiences with print vs. digital textbooks) and potential engagement 
(describing their learning experience with the digital textbook). The journal entries were analyzed and 
included in the results to provide more in-depth understanding to the engagement survey and to the TAPs 
(see Lam et al., 2009). 
Member Checking 
Member checking, also termed respondent validation (Phase III), allowed for increased participant 
perspectives and credibility in the analysis (Gu, 2014; Lincoln & Guba, 1985). Two of the six TAP 
participants chose to participate, spending approximately one hour each. Participants were shown the 
coding and asked to look for misrepresentations, errors, or inaccurate codes, and if they felt that the coding 
treated them with respect. The participants asked many questions and discussed the coding and project with 
the researcher; neither participant identified any areas of inaccuracies or errors in the coding, and thus no 
changes were made. The checking process added to the credibility of this study in that participants 
supported the data collected and its analysis. 
Results 
Overall, students (N = 13) were very satisfied (M = 4.33/5.00, SD = 0.72) with the digital textbook and 
strongly recommended that it be used for future courses (M = 4.27/5.00, SD = 1.16). Only one student did 
not recommend a digital textbook, commenting that they were difficult for notetaking and not motivating 
based on past experiences, although the same student expressed strong satisfaction (M = 5.0) for the digital 
textbook used for this class. In comparing digital to print textbooks, one reflective journal comment 
expressed a preference for this particular customized digital textbook but indicated that often there is no 
difference. Reasons (from reflective journals) for preferring this digital textbook over print textbooks 
included increased flexibility and learner control (e.g., more flexible reading experience), increased 
engagement and interest (e.g., We truly are more connected to this book), increased learning (e.g., This 
iBook can make me understand more about the concept), and ease of use and convenience. In addition to 
overall satisfaction with the digital textbook, the role of the digital textbook in their feelings of engagement 
to the course was measured. 
Engagement 
Participants’ self-reported anticipated and actual engagement with the digital textbook and course was 
measured and then compared using a paired Wilcoxon signed-rank test (see Table 1).  
126 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Table 1. Anticipated and Actual Engagement with the Course Digital Textbook (N = 13) 
The digital textbook will encourage 
(encouraged) me to… 
Anticipated 
Engagement 
 Actual 
Engagement 
  
M SD  M SD Z p 
Put forth effort 3.92 0.64  3.77 0.93 -0.59 .557 
Do all the homework 4.23 0.60  3.85 0.90 -1.51 .132 
Do all the assigned readings 3.62 0.96  4.15 1.14 -1.15 .250 
Be organized 4.08 0.95  3.62 1.26 -1.04 .298 
Take good notes 3.38 1.04  3.00 1.00 -0.88 .380 
Come to class every day 3.85 0.69  3.38 1.12 -1.27 .206 
Look up online answers to questions I have 
about the material 
4.23 0.60  3.85 0.99 -1.41 .160 
Apply course material to my life 3.85 0.80  3.85 1.21 -0.30 .763 
Make the course interesting to me 4.31 0.63  3.77 1.30 -1.22 .223 
Think about the course material between 
class meetings 
3.92 0.95  3.62 1.39 -0.58 .564 
Really desire to learn the material 3.77 0.83  3.62 1.12 -0.12 .903 
Ask questions when I don’t understand the 
instructor 
3.92 0.76  3.23 0.73 -2.04 .041* 
Have fun in class 3.69 0.75  3.77 1.17 -0.43 .666 
Participate in class activities 4.38 0.65  4.23 1.01 -0.71 .480 
Help classmates 3.92 0.76  3.31 1.03 -1.64 .101 
The digital textbook will impact (impacted) 
how I feel about the course overall 
4.00 0.71  4.16 0.55 -0.71 .480 
Note. 1 = strongly disagree and 5 = strongly agree 
*Significant at p < .05. 
Participants entered the course with high expectations for the digital textbook, and ratings remained high 
over the term. The overall rating of how they anticipated it would impact their feelings about the course 
started strong (M = 4.00/5.00) and remained high for their actual experience (M = 4.16/5.00). No mean 
scores were below neutral (3.00) for any items. Highest scores were with the digital textbook encouraging 
them to participate in class activities (M = 4.38/5.00), making the course interesting (M = 4.31/5.00), and 
helping them do homework (M = 4.23/5.00). The engagement area scoring the lowest was in encouraging 
them to take good notes (M = 3.38/5.00). In fact, the only survey comments about features that did not 
contribute to engagement and learning were typing or taking notes with an iPad. Open-ended survey 
comments indicated that anticipated engagement scores were based on students’ past experiences and 
expectations (e.g., I like using electronic devices and I am used to it, I am a digital man). 
For actual engagement measured at the end of the term, participants’ ratings remained high, though not 
quite as high as they had anticipated. The highest scores were for feeling that the digital textbook helped 
them participate in class activities (M = 4.23/5.00) and complete assigned readings (M = 4.15/5.00). One 
participant whose engagement increased commented, I changed my mind [about the digital textbook]. It is 
the best way to help us study, it supports this class more, and it attracts us. In only one engagement area 
did scores decrease significantly: asking questions when I don’t understand the instructor (Z = -2.04, p = 
0.041); the effect size was calculated as medium. For this item, almost every participant (10 out of 13) 
Dawn Bikowski and J. Elliott Casal 127 
 
scored it lower at the end of the term, while one participant scored it higher and two stayed the same. 
Engagement survey responses confirmed that few students (four of the 13) used the iPad for communication 
(e.g., texting, email, social media, etc.). 
The nature of students’ engagement was explored via survey comments, from which three roles emerged 
for the digital textbook (see Table 2). Participants noted roles for their digital textbook that ranged from 
pedagogical (i.e., learning facilitator and resource) to more personalized (i.e., motivator, relationship 
builder). Participants used the same device for class and personal use, with nine of the 13 noting that they 
used it to relax or for fun (e.g., games, videos). Participants recognized the distinct domains of use, with 
one student noting in her survey that academic work with her iPad was different because it is my personal 
device. Further, some reflected on transitioning from personal to academic use of a device, or as one student 
noted in their survey response, turning the iPad into the learning tool instead of entertainment machine. 
Many students commented on the responsibility of the individual learner in making this transition, noting 
that the person himself can make these devices beneficial through his using, or warning that lots of students 
will go to social media or games in their smartphone during studying. In spite of these concerns, one 
participant concluded that using these devices the right way means to learn knowledge, and all participants 
stated in their reflective journals that they appreciated having fun while learning. Enjoyment and 
engagement thus appeared to play a role in students’ personal use of digital devices and for learning. 
Table 2. Student-Assigned Roles for the Course Digital Textbook (N = 13) 
Role Student Survey Comments: “The digital textbook…” 
Learning 
Facilitator and 
Resource 
“is my tutor” 
“is my guider” 
“plays a big role to facilitate the studying and learning process inside and outside the 
class” 
“facilitates translation and taking notes” 
“offers tools such as translators, dictionaries, search engines, and research 
websites/articles” 
“has many videos, links and pictures that can help us understand” 
Motivator “makes reading and processing not become boring” 
“makes our class better and better” 
“helps my learning in a more dynamic way” 
“encourages me to learn” 
“encourages students to read and learn, because of its flexible features and functions” 
“is a good way to help those students who do not like reading books or finishing 
homework. The iBook is more fun than books because it is well organized and 
includes videos and pictures. It will draw students attention.” 
Relationship 
Builder 
“is a friend” 
Learning Processes and Strategies used in the Digital Learning Environment 
The TAPs resulted in the development of the Framework for Learning with Digital Resources (see Table 
6), which was divided into two main competencies identified by Hubbard (2004): operational and learning 
competencies. The following tables show the strategies and processes associated with operational 
competence (Table 3), learning competence for monitoring learning (Table 4), and learning competence for 
making connections (Table 5). This framework is comprehensive in that all observed learning processes 
and strategies are included, yet strategy use varied by individual. Examples of effective strategy use are 
included in the tables, while areas that at least some participants struggled with or were not observed follow 
128 Language Learning & Technology 
 
each table. 
Operational Competence: Recognizing Features in the Digital Environment 
Operational competence (Table 3) refers to students recognizing features and knowing how to operate the 
device, while learning competence (Table 4 and Table 5) identifies choices students make for effective 
learning using these affordances. Recognizing a link is a process that falls within operational competence; 
knowing when to follow (vs. skip) the link and return to the digital textbook is a strategy that relates to 
learning competence. 
Table 3. Operational Competence: Recognizing Features in the Digital Learning Environment 
Strategy or Process and 
Description Examples of Effective Strategy Use 
Recognizes or discovers the 
organization, features, and 
affordances of the digital 
learning environment 
Participant recognizes 
affordances (e.g., 
hypertextuality, navigational, 
highlighting, notetaking) or 
discovers through exploration 
and clicking; is successful at 
troubleshooting. 
P1 recognized the links as customizing his learning experience 
through a model of “click, expand, and research.” 
P1 appreciated the teacher-created captions in an authentic video 
and knew he could expand and pause the video as needed.  
P6 recognized recurring image-based visual cues that asked 
students to reflect on prior material or complete a homework 
assignment, stating “There’s a question on the bottom here, so I 
should answer.” 
P4 commented that though he had never used an iBook, during the 
course he taught himself to find features (e.g., the dictionary, links, 
digital table of contents) through discovery tapping. 
By the end of the term, most participants exhibited behaviors consistent with strong operational 
competence. Behaviors needing further training included (a) accessing and utilizing advanced navigational 
digital textbook features, (b) noticing visual cues meant to prompt reflection, (c) resolving technical issues 
alone, and (d) accessing the digital textbook dictionary. Only one participant used the dictionary in the 
digital textbook. Two others used a browser-based dictionary on their smartphones rather than using the 
built-in iBook dictionary or the iPad’s browser-based dictionary, either of which could have been navigated 
in their native language if desired. A behavior that was not observed was taking notes or highlighting text 
within the digital textbook, though retrospective TAP comments indicated that all participants knew how 
to do so, and the engagement survey and reflective journals indicated that six of the 13 participants did take 
notes in the digital textbook (the remaining students used their laptop, smartphone, or paper). Thus, while 
students know how to take notes in a digital textbook, many still do not prefer to do so. Similarly, only two 
participants reported in their reflective journals that they used the iPad to write academic material aside 
from what was embedded in the iBook with Google Forms; others preferred a laptop or desktop. 
Learning Competence: Monitoring Learning in the Digital Environment 
In addition to operational competence, learning competence was identified and explored. The Framework 
for Learning with Digital Resources divides monitoring learning into two aspects related to varying 
behaviors and planning learning (see Table 4). While some strategies are similar to those used with print-
based materials, others are unique to this learning environment or are modifications of print-based 
strategies. 
Strategy behavior varies according to project, individual, and task. For example, one participant (P2) was 
unprepared for the homework task even after interacting with the chapter content, showing that while he 
had clearly focused on the content, he had not connected it to his learning. Deciding when to interrupt 
reading and look up unknown words also falls into this learning competence. While three students looked 
up unknown words, the other three chose not to, even though the words were important for understanding 
Dawn Bikowski and J. Elliott Casal 129 
 
and the students stated they did not understand them. Plans for next learning steps ranged from academic 
(e.g., identifying which information to further explore and where) to personal (e.g., expressing interest in 
joining a partner organization activity). 
Table 4. Learning Competence: Monitoring Learning in the Digital Environment 
Strategy or Process and 
Description Examples of Effective Strategy Use 
Varies or adapts behavior 
depending on reading 
purpose, learning purpose, or 
affordances of the digital 
environment 
Participant navigates digital 
space making intentional 
choices (e.g., previewing, 
scanning, notetaking, 
accessing content, returning 
to task) that match their 
stated purpose. 
P1 previewed chapter content, stating that he looks at headings and 
images in order to “get a general idea of how the parts are related and 
what it is talking about.” 
P5 moved through the digital textbook intentionally (a) scanning for 
specific information (“I know I have homework, so I am trying to find 
it”) and (b) skipping unnecessary information. 
P3 accessed links and previewed link content to determine if she would 
read them, deciding “I’ll read this because I need to know more about 
this” and then returned to the digital textbook. 
P2 used his smartphone to support his digital learning by (a) looking up 
unknown words and (b) taking pictures of digital textbook content as a 
means of taking notes. 
Plans next learning steps 
Participant expresses a plan 
for next steps after 
exploring digital content 
(e.g., task completion, 
information to look up). 
P4 wanted to revisit content from a previous course, stating he “will 
have to use both” perspectives and listing specific sources (e.g., 
website, YouTube, guest speaker) beyond textbook content. 
P3 commented that the chapter content gave her the idea to administer a 
Google Survey via the iPad for her project. 
P1 commented that after interacting with chapter content he wanted to 
join partner organization activities and communicate further with the 
director to further his understanding. 
Learning Competence: Making Connections in the Digital Environment 
Making connections during learning consists of three components (see Table 5). Students make connections 
to construct meaning or resolve confusion by (a) connecting prior knowledge or experience and digital 
material, (b) connecting across ideas or digital material, and (c) finding connections that are personally 
motivating. Chapter content being directly related to students’ project and home countries allows for great 
potential in this area. 
While four of the six participants made numerous connections to build learning during the TAP, two 
students struggled. P5 made minimal connections due to her perception that she had sufficient background 
knowledge, limiting her ability to connect with and learn from the material. She was also unable to connect 
emotionally to the topic of philanthropy, stating In my life I don’t suffer, and in another instance stating I 
don’t usually think this way when asked by the digital text to consider an abstract question. Similarly, P2 
struggled to use his prior experiences to understand content, saying it cannot help me to understand this, 
although his experiences seemed highly relevant to the researchers.  
130 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Table 5. Learning Competence: Making Connections While Learning in the Digital Environment 
Strategy or Process and 
Description Examples of Effective Strategy Use 
Makes connections between 
prior knowledge or 
experiences and digital 
material to construct meaning 
or resolve confusion 
Participant uses prior 
knowledge or experiences 
to guide their meaning-
making process (e.g., 
through comparisons, 
exploration, considerations). 
P4 uses prior knowledge to build meaning, stating, “Whatever article 
talks about, I have my opinion and I’m going to compare it.” 
P1 connected past in-class experiences to digital textbook content, 
stating “Oh, this is related to constructivism and provides a real-world 
example and asks students to think about it…. It’s a hard question.” 
P2 linked information from marketing courses and partner organization 
needs to chapter content in order to inform data collection. 
P1 accessed past experiences in his country to explain abstract chapter 
content about corruption. 
Makes connections across 
ideas or digital material to 
construct meaning or resolve 
confusion 
Participant connects ideas, 
particularly across media, 
(e.g., images, text, videos, 
links) in their meaning-
making process. 
P4 makes connections between several seasonal images, saying that the 
organization helps with “year round problems.” 
P1 used chapter reflection questions to guide his navigation, “There is a 
question—it seems I need to watch the video to find the answer.” 
P6 read chapter text to resolve confusion: “I’m a little confused about 
the picture, maybe it’s discussed in the text.” … “oh, they’re talking 
about…” 
Finds a personally motivating 
connection between own 
experiences and digital 
material 
Participant connects with 
content on an emotional or 
personal level and uses 
connection to motivate 
further learning or 
exploration. 
P6 commented how much she liked seeing the “picture from my home 
country,” in addition to pictures that caused her to reflect favorably on 
her own relationship with nature, her childhood and nature, and her 
hometown. 
P4 connected emotionally to chapter content and reflected on his past 
experiences donating money to disaster relief in his home country, 
commenting that his views have changed.  
P1 was motivated to act on a personal level to the topic after engaging 
with chapter content: “Maybe I will support this organization because I 
think they are helping people.” 
Discussion 
Past research has shown that while digital textbooks are commonly used, many students find them 
challenging for learning (Baek & Monaghan, 2013; Lam et al., 2009), are “unable to engage” with them 
(Evans & Po, 2007, p. 70), and often prefer print texts (Chou, 2016; Woody et al., 2010). This study has 
responded to calls for research in this area, specifically how digital textbooks may support learning (Gu et 
al., 2015) and how students may vary their reading and learning habits in this environment (Evans & Po, 
2007). The digital textbook used in this study offered the customization necessary for this ESP course. 
Student Engagement with their Digital Textbook and Device 
This study demonstrates that students can have high expectations and feel engaged throughout the term 
when using a customized interactive digital textbook. While students’ experiences with the technology did 
not fully meet their expectations, they did report high overall satisfaction, and differences were not at a 
statistically significant level except in one area—asking the instructor questions. Students reported the 
Dawn Bikowski and J. Elliott Casal 131 
 
greatest levels of engagement in the digital textbook encouraging them to complete assigned readings (e.g., 
the device attracting their attention, the material being fun) and to participate in class (e.g., reacting to 
media, feeling the textbook supported their learning). These results are promising, given past findings that 
students often struggle with digital readings (Baek & Monaghan, 2013) and that increased time spent with 
a digital text can lead to decreased satisfaction (Lam et al., 2009). Key to this digital textbook helping 
students complete readings are customization and design features reducing eye strain. Also important is 
that students were familiar with digital devices and received considerable time with (Chou, 2016) and 
training on (Hubbard, 2004) learning in this environment. 
It is interesting that any type of course material can encourage students to participate in class or impact 
students’ feelings about a course as did this digital textbook. The engagement students reported was clearly 
linked to the three roles the digital textbook played: learning facilitator and resource, motivator, and 
relationship builder. Students’ recognition of the human-like roles played by their devices supports 
Thorne’s (2016) view that we can no longer conceptualize “artifacts and humans as distinctly independent 
from one another” (p. 189). While past research has identified increased motivation (e.g., Huang, 2013) and 
a more enjoyable learning process (e.g., Gu et al., 2015) as being benefits to digital textbooks, few studies 
have found that students view these digital devices as occupying personalized roles in learning 
environments. One explanation for this difference may be that past studies have explored digital textbooks 
that are frequently used with a computer and not paired to a mobile device or specific platform. In this 
study, however, the device was intricately linked to the digital textbook itself. These findings support 
Thorne’s (2016) assertion that “digital environments and the human experience of activity form unified 
ecologies with agency distributed throughout the system” (p. 189). As technologies have evolved to be 
more interactive, customized, and engaging, users have given more agency and personality to their devices. 
This study moves beyond an emphasis on the convenience of learning with digital devices and highlights 
the impact of the more personalized aspects they offer learners. Students studying with a mobile device 
may experience learning differently than when they study with a textbook or different technologies (e.g., 
computer). Other research has shown that people can develop feelings for technologies that are more 
personalized (e.g., Kidd & Breazeal, 2008). This study suggests that projected feelings and a sense of 
rapport play a role in learning with that device. Device rapport, then, must be considered as we develop 
materials using mobile technologies. Device rapport can be defined as a companion-like feeling that a user 
projects onto a personal mobile device and that in many ways mirrors a harmonious relationship. It can be 
the foundation on which a learner builds an academic culture-of-use or expands a personal culture-of-use. 
Most students come to our classes with some type of rapport with a device and a personal culture-of-use 
with entertainment or social communication. They also enter courses with an academic culture-of-use with 
books and various online media. As digital textbooks and mobile learning increase, our responsibility will 
be to help students expand their academic culture-of-use to include learning with devices. The pathway to 
this expanded culture-of-use can be found in engagement, defined as effort and involvement (Kuh, 2009), 
with their device and learning. Measuring and monitoring student engagement allows for an understanding 
of student effort and involvement, but also provides insights into student achievement, given the strong 
correlation between high engagement and high achievement (Handelsman et al., 2005). 
Engagement can be accelerated or decelerated based on the learner’s disposition, which in Gillen’s (2014) 
discussion of digital literacy includes (a) “flexibility—including recognition of change as a constant”; (b) 
“resilience in the face of setbacks” with a willingness to adapt; and (c) questioning technologies and 
resources critically (p. 154). Behaviors identified in the current study provide insight into the role of learner 
disposition. Flexibility and resilience can be recognized in a variety of strategies (e.g., varying behavior 
depending on learning purpose). Evaluation of technology was demonstrated when participants offered 
suggestions for the course digital textbook. 
This study also provides insight into behaviors that indicate the development of an expanded culture-of-use 
that incorporates learning with digital devices. As students expand their culture-of-use, they are able to take 
advantage of specific functionalities for learning, monitor their learning in a hypertextual environment, and 
132 Language Learning & Technology 
 
draw connections between digital materials. Previous experience, as noted by Thorne (2003), also plays a 
role in the development of a culture-of-use. The interplay between students’ experiences and their 
disposition can lead to increased or decreased rigidity and can affect how they engage with such materials 
for learning. 
Strategies and Processes for Effective Learning with Digital Resources 
Analysis of student behavior and comments with their textbook and device resulted in the creation of the 
Framework for Learning with Digital Resources (see Table 6). This framework identifies key learning 
processes and strategies within operational competence (recognizing features in the learning environment) 
and learning competence (monitoring learning and making connections during learning) in this 
environment. Similar to findings by Conole et al. (2008), this framework indicates a “shift in the way in 
which students are working and suggest[s] a rich and complex inter-relationship between individuals and 
tools” (p. 521). Behaviors noted by Conole et al. but not observed as prevalently in this study included 
pervasive use (sharing resources with and seeking help from a peer community) and transferability 
(transferring technology skills to other learning situations). Students in this study did not use the iPad for 
communication with the instructor or teammates as often as they could have, most likely because they 
already had established patterns of communicating electronically via other means (e.g., a smartphone). 
While some participants transferred skills from their personal culture-of-use for digital devices, others 
failed to make key connections in this area. Further research can explore the ways in which students’ prior 
knowledge and skills with the technology influence their learning processes and strategies in these areas. 
Table 6. Framework for Learning with Digital Resources 
Strategy or Process  Description 
1. Operational Competence: Recognizes Features in the Digital Learning Environment 
 Recognizes or discovers the 
organization, features, and affordances 
of the digital learning environment 
Participant recognizes affordances (e.g., hypertextuality, 
navigational, highlighting, notetaking), or discovers through 
exploration and clicking; is successful at troubleshooting. 
2. Learning Competence: Monitors Learning in the Digital Environment 
2a. Varies or adapts behavior depending on 
reading purpose, learning purpose, or 
affordances of the digital environment 
Participant navigates digital space making intentional choices 
(e.g., previewing, scanning, notetaking, accessing content, 
returning to task) that match their stated purpose. 
2b. Plans next learning steps Participant expresses a plan for next steps after exploring 
digital content (e.g., task completion, information to look up). 
3. Learning Competence: Makes Connections while Learning in the Digital Environment 
3a. Makes connections between prior 
knowledge or experiences and digital 
material to construct meaning or 
resolve confusion 
Participant uses prior knowledge or experiences to guide their 
meaning-making process (e.g., through comparisons, 
exploration, considerations). 
3b. Makes connections across ideas or 
digital material to construct meaning or 
resolve confusion 
Participant connects ideas, particularly across media, (e.g., 
images, text, videos, links) in their meaning-making process. 
3c. Finds a personally motivating 
connection between own experiences 
and digital material  
Participant connects with content on an emotional or personal 
level and uses connection to motivate further learning or 
exploration. 
The role of student agency while applying learning strategies with a digital textbook is key. Lack of feature 
use does not necessarily indicate a user limitation but can rather be an expression of autonomy. Faced with 
Dawn Bikowski and J. Elliott Casal 133 
 
device limitations related to typing, for example, some students developed creative notetaking strategies 
(e.g., taking pictures with their smartphone). Also crucial is making informed educational choices, such as 
choosing when to follow hyperlinks and how much information to read before returning to digital textbook 
content. Strong critical thinking skills allow students to establish what can be complex connections in the 
digital textbook, either across content or to their background knowledge or lives. 
Student agency stems from their past experiences as well. Some are more emergent in their use of the digital 
textbook: they know how to use the technology for certain learning processes but somewhat regularly 
choose not to even when it would benefit their learning. They are at the threshold where operational 
competence merges into learning competence. Others are more proficient, meaning that they demonstrate 
a broader range of strategies and display more conscious choices over how they monitor their learning and 
connect with digital material. A deeper understanding of strategies and processes employed by more 
proficient users can be used for training those who are more emergent. 
Pedagogical Implications and Future Research 
Implications for teaching with digital textbooks and mobile technology fall into the interdependent 
categories of materials design and student training. The Framework for Learning with Digital Resources 
(see Table 6) developed out of this research can be used to provide guidance in these areas—with the 
understanding that learner strategies may vary depending on the digital resources being utilized, and the 
digital resource may well influence a user’s cognition and learning (Thorne, 2016). Regarding materials 
design, digital textbooks are most effective and engaging when they are customized to the technology, 
course and students; interactive in exploiting the hypertextual, multimodal, and communicative affordances 
of the platform; and usability tested with the students and teachers, revising as needed. Training, then, 
supports students so that any “inherent imperfection” with the technology does not hamper learning 
(Okuyama & Igarashi, 2007, p. 54), and should be iterative, flexible, collaborative, reflective, and 
customized to the context and students. While usability testing allows materials designers to align the text 
with student expectations and preferred use, training allows educators to help students maximize learning 
and utilize affordances. 
This exploratory research marks an important early step, but is somewhat limited in its generalizability due 
to the small number of participants with a narrow range of native languages. Future research can further 
explore students’ development of an expanded academic culture-of-use with digital textbooks and devices, 
compare strategy use over time or across contexts, identify learner characteristics that may encourage more 
effective strategy use, or compare strategies and processes by students at different levels of proficiency in 
the second language or with the technology. The roles that students assign to their devices in the learning 
process can also be more fully understood, particularly as those roles relate to the device rapport students 
may experience. 
Conclusion 
This study has demonstrated that students can have high expectations and feel engaged throughout the term 
when using a customized interactive digital textbook. It has also identified the learning processes and 
strategies non-native speakers utilize as they learn with a digital textbook designed to maximize the 
affordances offered by current technologies. Our students are likely to encounter digital textbooks in some 
form at all levels of their educational experiences. Though many have substantial experience with devices 
and the digital environment, at least for their personal lives, they often are not fully prepared to learn in 
digital environments (Winke & Goertler, 2008). A pathway offered to support students as they expand 
personal device use to an academic culture-of-use is that of engagement between the class content, the 
student, and the device. This engagement can sustain students through training and lead to the increased 
time they need with the digital textbook in order to develop new strategies and processes, as well as 
determine which existing strategies should be transferred or modified for this environment. The Framework 
for Learning with Digital Resources offered in this study highlights strategies particularly effective in this 
134 Language Learning & Technology 
 
hypertextual, multimodal environment where students draw on a variety of print- and media-based 
resources. Teachers and designers need to incorporate flexibility in their materials and assignments so that 
students can choose among a variety of tools or strategies in order to customize learning for their specific 
disciplinary context and student goals within this co-evolving educational landscape. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank the LLT editors and anonymous reviewers for their suggestions and 
comments on improving this paper. We would also like to thank the students who agreed to participate in 
this research. 
References 
Baek, E., & Monaghan, J. (2013). A journey to textbook affordability: An investigation of students’ use 
of eTextbooks at multiple campuses. The International Review of Research in Open and Distance 
Learning, 14(3), 1–26. 
Belcher, D. D. (2009). What ESP is and can be: An introduction. In D. D. Belcher (Ed.), English for 
specific purposes in theory and practice (pp. 1–20). Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
Brown, J. D., & Rodgers, T. S. (2002). Doing second language research. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press. 
Chamot, A. U., & Kupper, L. (1989). Learning strategies in foreign language instruction. Foreign 
Language Annals, 22(1), 13–24. 
Charters, E. (2003). The use of think-aloud methods in qualitative research: An introduction to think-
aloud methods. Brock Education Journal, 12(2), 68–82. 
Chou, I. (2012). Understanding on-screen reading behaviors in academic contexts: A case study of five 
graduate English-as-a-second-language students. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 25(5), 411–
433. 
Chou, I. (2016). Reading for the purpose of responding to literature: EFL students’ perceptions of e-
books. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 29(1), 1–20. 
Conole, G., de Laat, M., Dillon, T., & Darby, J. (2008). ‘Disruptive technologies,’ ‘pedagogical 
innovation:’ What’s new? Findings from an in-depth study of students’ use and perception of 
technology. Computers & Education, 50(2), 511–524. 
Daniel, D. B., & Woody, W. D. (2013). E-textbooks at what cost? Performance and use of electronic v. 
print texts. Computers & Education, 62, 18–23. 
DeStefano, D., & LeFevre, J. (2007). Cognitive load in hypertext reading: A review. Computers in 
Human Behavior, 23(1), 1616–1641. 
Dixson, M. D. (2010). Creating effective student engagement in online courses: What do students find 
engaging? Journal of the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 10(2), 1–13. 
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis: Verbal reports as data. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. 
Evans, E., & Po, J. (2007). A break in the transaction: Examining students’ responses to digital texts. 
Computers and Composition, 24(1), 56–73. 
Gillen, J. (2014). Digital literacies. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Dawn Bikowski and J. Elliott Casal 135 
 
Grabe, W. (2009). Reading in a second language: Moving from theory to practice. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Gu, X., Wu, B., & Xu, X. (2015). Design, development, and learning in e-Textbooks: What we learned 
and where we are going. Journal of Computers in Education, 2(1), 25–41. 
Gu, Y. (2014). To code or not to code: Dilemmas in analysing think-aloud protocols in learning strategies 
research. System, 43, 74–81. 
Handelsman, M. M., Briggs, W. L., Sullivan, N., & Towler, A. (2005). A measure of college student 
course engagement. The Journal of Educational Research, 98(3), 184–192. 
Huang, H. (2013). E-reading and e-discussion: EFL learners’ perceptions of an e-book reading program. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 26(3), 258–281. 
Hubbard, P. (2004). Learner training for effective use of CALL. In S. Fotos & C. M. Browne (Eds.), New 
perspectives on CALL for second language classrooms (pp. 45–67). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum. 
Kessler, G., & Plakans, L. (2001). Incorporating ESOL learners’ feedback and usability testing in 
instructor-developed CALL materials. TESOL Journal, 10(1), 15–20. 
Kessler, G., Bikowski, D., & Boggs, J. (2012). Collaborative writing among second language learners in 
academic web-based projects. Language Learning & Technology, 16(1), 91–109. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/kesslerbikowskiboggs.pdf 
Kidd, C. D., & Breazeal, C. (2008). Robots at home: Understanding long-term human-robot interaction. 
In Proceedings from IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Sept. 
2008 (pp. 3230–3235). New York, NY: IEEE. 
Kuh, G. D. (2009). The national survey of student engagement: Conceptual and empirical foundations. 
New Directions for Institutional Research, 141, 5–20. 
Kuusela, H., & Paul, P. (2000). A comparison of concurrent and retrospective verbal protocol analysis. 
The American Journal of Psychology, 113(3), 387–404. 
Lam, P., Lam, S., Lam, J., & McNaught, C. (2009). Usability and usefulness of eBooks on PPCs: How 
students’ opinions vary over time. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 25(1), 30–44. 
Lantolf, J. P., Thorne, S., & Poehner, M. E. (2015). Sociocultural theory and second language 
development. In B. VanPatten & J. Williams (Eds.), Theories of second language acquisition: An 
introduction (pp. 207–226). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Larson-Hall, J. (2010). A guide to doing statistics in second language research using SPSS. New York, 
NY: Routledge. 
Leu, D. J., McVerry, J. G., O’Byrne, W. I., Kiili, C., Zawilinski, L., Everett-Cacopardo, H., Kennedy, C., 
& Forzani, E. (2011). The new literacies of online reading comprehension: Expanding the literacy and 
learning curriculum. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 55(1), 5–14. 
Lim, C., Song, H., & Lee, Y. (2012). Improving the usability of the user interface for a digital textbook 
platform for elementary-school students. Educational Technology Research and Development, 60(1), 
159–173. 
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
McFall, R. (2005). Electronic textbooks that transform how textbooks are used. The Electronic Library, 
23(1), 72–81. 
Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldaña, J. (2014). Qualitative data analysis: A methods sourcebook 
(3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
136 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Okuyama, Y., & Igarashi, H. (2007). Think-aloud protocol on dictionary use by advanced learners of 
Japanese. The JALT CALL Journal, 3(1-2), 45–58. 
Oxford, R. (1989). Use of language learning strategies: A synthesis of studies with implications for 
strategy training. System, 17(2), 235–247. 
Sun, Y. (2003). Learning process, strategies, and web-based concordancers: A case study. The British 
Journal of Educational Technology, 34(5), 601–613. 
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38–67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/thorne 
Thorne, S. L. (2016). Cultures-of-use and morphologies of communicative action. Language Learning & 
Technology, 20(2), 185–191. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2016/thorne.pdf 
Vaarala, H., & Jalkanen, J. (2010). Changing spaces, expanding mindsets: Towards L2 literacies on a 
multimodal reading comprehension course. Language Value, 2(1), 69–99. 
van Lier, L. (2004). The ecology and semiotics of language learning: A sociocultural perspective. Boston, 
MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Vinther, J. (2005). Cognitive processes at work in CALL. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 18(4), 
251–271. 
Winke, P., & Goertler, S. (2008). Did we forget someone? Students’ computer access and literacy for 
CALL. CALICO Journal, 25(3), 482–509. 
Woody, W. D., Daniel, D. B., & Baker, C. A. (2010). E-books or textbooks: Students prefer textbooks. 
Computers & Education, 55(3), 945–948. 
Young, S., & Bruce, M. A. (2011). Classroom community and student engagement in online courses. 
MERLOT Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, 7(2), 219–230. Retrieved from 
http://jolt.merlot.org/vol7no2/young_0611.pdf 
About the Authors 
Dawn Bikowski, PhD, is the Director of the ELIP Academic and Global Communication Program in the 
Linguistics Department at Ohio University. Her research and teaching interests include technology and 
writing, technology and collaboration, and English for specific and academic purposes. 
E-mail: bikowski@ohio.edu 
J. Elliott Casal is a PhD student in Applied Linguistics at The Pennsylvania State University. His research 
and teaching interests include corpus linguistics, English for specific and academic purposes, and 
disciplinary writing practices. 
E-mail: jec368@psu.edu 
