Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2018, Volume 22, Issue 1 
pp. 42–51 
LANGUAGE TEACHING AND TECHNOLOGY FORUM  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Se Jeong Yang 
 
 
Language learners’ perceptions of having 
two interactional contexts in eTandem 
Se Jeong Yang, Bradley University 
Abstract 
The aim of this study was to gain insights into how language learners perceive two online interactional 
contexts and how these perceptions impact the learners’ participation in eTandem learning. This study 
incorporated pair work with group discussion as interactional contexts, connecting Korean language 
learners with English language learners. Pair work included online chatting and personal blog writing 
where each pair exchanged feedback on one another’s L2 writing. Group discussion included interaction 
among all the participants in a group blog where they discussed weekly topics. The study found that 
individual participants differently perceived the effectiveness of the two interactional contexts: some 
thought that both contexts were helpful together for developing L2 skills and for acquiring cultural 
knowledge, while others thought that these two contexts together were not as effective as expected. These 
perceptions affected not only the participant’s own participation in the project, but also others’ 
participation. This study offers pedagogical implications for ways in which researchers can further 
improve the design of eTandem learning. 
Keywords: Learners’ Attitudes, Sociocultural Theory, Telecollaboration 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English, Korean 
APA Citation: Yang, S. (2018). Language learners’ perceptions of having two interactional contexts in 
eTandem. Language Learning & Technology, 22(1), 42–51. https://dx.doi.org/10125/44577 
Introduction 
Grounded in a sociocultural approach (Gee, 2003; Vygotsky, 1978), this study attempted to explore 
language learners’ perceptions of online contexts in eTandem learning, one telecollaboration learning 
method that allows two native language speakers to exchange linguistic and cultural expertise for second 
language (L2) learning. In the sociocultural approach, eTandem learning is a promising learning method 
since it offers an interactive learning environment where individual learners’ knowledge can be shared. 
As an independent agent, an individual learner may have unique learning needs and preferred learning 
styles, which are foci of the sociocultural approach to learning. These individual differences can lead 
learners to perceive the effectiveness of learning environments, including online contexts, differently (Lee, 
2009; Thorne, 2003; Ware, 2005). As Hauck (2010) argues, individual learners’ perceptions of online 
contexts significantly contribute to the quality of their online communication. Individual learners’ views 
of online contexts are thus an important factor for successful learning. The current research aims to gain 
insights into L2 learners’ perceptions of two online contexts (i.e., pair work and group discussion) in 
eTandem learning. The study incorporated these two contexts in order to facilitate social interaction with 
other learners in eTandem learning. By exploring how language learners evaluate the two contexts, the 
study aspires to give guidelines on how to effectively provide a better online context for L2 learners. The 
study addresses the following questions: 
1. How do L2 learners perceive the usefulness of having both pair work and group discussion? 
2. How do L2 learners’ perceptions of the two contexts contribute to their level of participation in 
online activities? 
Se Jeong Yang 43 
 
Literature Review 
Sociocultural Approach to Learning 
The current study is grounded in a sociocultural approach, which views learning as an interactive and 
collaborative process (Gee, 2003; Vygotsky, 1978). Learners do not gain knowledge by processing 
information by itself, but rather through social interaction (Donato, 2000). In addition, learning is not a 
socio-cognitive product that can be applied to all individual learners uniformly, but a process where 
individual learners’ differences and agencies are taken into account as highly valued components 
(Kinginger, 2004). These differences are critical, because they can contribute to language learners’ 
perceptions of learning environments. Especially in online environments, language learners’ 
interpretations of the learning context can affect their communication. This claim conforms to the 
argument developed by Lamy and Hampel (2007): “It is not just the materials affordances of CMC that 
play a role in enhancing or limiting communication, but also how people see them and the practices that 
result from their different perspectives” (p. 43). 
According to Lamy and Hampel (2007), individual differences should be considered in language 
education, since individual learners’ different ideas about learning environments can significantly affect 
their learning. Drawing on the close relationship between learners’ perceptions and L2 learning, this 
research views successful online L2 learning as a combination of L2 learners’ perceptions of and 
engagement in online contexts. This understanding inspired me to design an eTandem study that focused 
on the ways in which participants perceived the online contexts in relation to their learning. 
eTandem Learning 
Electronic tandem, often called eTandem, is defined as online “language learning [in which] two learners 
of different native languages work together to help each other learn the other language” (Cziko, 2004, p. 
25). As the term tandem implies, the most common interactional context in eTandem studies is one-to-one 
pair work. The advantage of this interaction is that L2 learners can establish closer relationships through 
frequent interactions with their partners (Ushioda, 2000) and receive peer feedback (Kabata & Edasawa, 
2011; Ware & O’Dowd, 2008). For instance, Ware and O’Dowd (2008) conducted an eTandem study 
between Spanish learners and English learners. The participants liked their partners’ linguistic feedback 
that they felt was different from what they could receive in traditional classroom settings. One participant 
pointed out the following: “Maybe it’s more interesting by the net [online]. You are chatting so you are 
enjoying. If the teacher gives me a corrected essay, I just read it and that’s all” (p. 53). This quote 
suggests the importance of peer feedback based on a collaborative relationship with peers via online 
networks. 
Although pair work provides a space for authentic interaction with a partner, some eTandem studies have 
included an additional interactional context, group discussion, while creating more spaces for interaction 
between L2 learners (Lee, 2009; Vinagre, 2005). A unique feature of group discussion is that it allows L2 
learners to exchange ideas with multiple people while avoiding situations where a limited number of 
partners are the only reference to the target culture for L2 learners—situations that can result in narrow 
perceptions of the target culture and dominate L2 learners’ overall online language exchange experience 
(Schenker, 2012). 
For example, Lee (2009) conducted a study including pair work and group discussion that connected 
Spanish learners with English learners. Participants were particularly satisfied with the experience of 
discussing topics with the target language speakers because it helped develop their ideas about specific 
topics. One participant explicitly appreciated having multiple viewpoints on a topic, saying, “It was so 
interesting to hear different voices talking about a very important topic concerning global warming. I 
liked the way you presented your thoughts. I think it is difficult to collect different viewpoints within one 
debate” (p. 433). 
Lee (2009) explained that sharing ideas with others through blogging was not only good for learning 
44 Language Learning & Technology 
 
intercultural knowledge but also good for developing critical thinking. 
Method 
Participants 
The data in this article come from a larger study that focuses on the online interactions of eight pairs of 
adult L2 learners, aged 21 to 45. In the larger study, adult English language learners from Korea (ELLs) 
and Korean language learners from the US (KHLs1) studied the target language and its culture while 
interacting with one another. The study included a one-to-one partnership, the typical form of partnering 
in eTandem studies, combined with group discussions. The researcher paired each KHL with an ELL, 
based on the L2 proficiency of the participants and their preferred types of language partner based on an 
interview and the data gathered from a questionnaire. Five of the participants were college students, while 
the others were either full-time workers or housewives. Participants’ self-rated L2 proficiencies ranged 
from beginning to advanced levels in reading and writing. 
The current study followed a multiple case study design, allowing the researcher to reach “a very 
thorough analysis” in order to capture individuals’ perceptions and experiences of online contexts (Duff, 
2008, p. 43). The current study focuses on four participants, two KHLs and two ELLs (see Table 1), 
because they had contrasting perceptions of the two interactional contexts, which suggests that these cases 
can demonstrate a range of variation in perceptions among participants. 
Table 1. Demographic Information of Focal Participants 
Name Type Age Gender Occupation 
Younghee ELL 31 Female Housewife (who was previously a doctor) 
Sara KHL 32 Female Doctor 
Chul ELL 32 Male Post-doctorate researcher 
Diane KHL 33 Female Housewife (who was previously a designer) 
Note. Pseudonyms are used. 
Data Collection 
Prior to the online exchange, participants were first asked to fill out a questionnaire inquiring about their 
language proficiency, L2 learning experience, and preferences regarding language partner characteristics. 
The questionnaire was followed by the first face-to-face interview. After exchanging introductory e-mails 
with their partners in the first week, participants were asked to complete four weekly tasks from Week 2 
to Week 11 in order to help improve their L2 skills and cultural knowledge (for details, see Table 2). At 
the beginning of each week, the researcher posted the topic of the week and participants were asked to 
engage in the two interactional contexts: pair work and group discussion. 
After 11 weeks, the participants filled out a second questionnaire regarding their experience in the study, 
followed by the second face-to-face interview. Additionally, the researcher conducted online chat 
interviews with each participant biweekly in order to clarify participants’ writings in the blogs and chat 
scripts. Each chat interview lasted between a half hour and two hours. This setting also functioned as a 
communication tool between the researcher and the participants, helping the researcher receive feedback 
from the participants.  
Se Jeong Yang 45 
 
Table 2. Procedure and Tasks 
Timeline Procedure Task Type Task Description Tool 
Week 1 E-mail exchange Pair work Please exchange e-mails with your partner in 
either language. 
Gmail 
Weeks 2–
11 
Personal blog post Pair work Please write your thoughts and experiences 
about the weekly topic in your personal blog 
using your L2. 
Blogger 
 Online chat Pair work Please discuss the weekly topic based on the 
discussions in your personal blogs. You can 
ask additional questions or further discuss the 
topic. Please chat in one language for half of 
the chat session and in another language for 
the rest of the session, totaling a minimum of 
30 minutes (e.g., 15 minutes in English and 15 
minutes in Korean). 
Google 
Talk 
 Group discussion Group work Please leave a comment or post a new entry 
regarding the weekly topic in either language. 
Blogger 
 Reflective diary Individual 
work 
Please share your experiences with online 
learning in either language after you finish all 
three tasks. In order to fully express your 
emotions and experience, you are asked to 
write a minimum of 200 words. 
Gmail 
Data Analysis 
Participants’ writings (blog posts and chat scripts), pre-questionnaires, post-questionnaires, and 
interviews were analyzed. Additionally, member checking was used to increase the validity of the 
research. 
Most data, such as participants’ blog writings and chat scripts, were automatically generated and saved, 
and the researcher retrieved them later for analysis. However, the face-to-face and online interviews were 
transcribed and translated to English by the researcher. The data showed that the participants followed the 
instructions for each task, including adhering the language requirements for each. Regarding online chat 
sessions in particular, all the partners used both their first language (L1) and L2 equally, as was evidenced 
in the chat scripts. 
The researcher conducted an inductive qualitative analysis for the research questions, using the constant 
comparative method (Strauss & Corbin, 1998). Since the two research questions were related to one 
another, the researcher was constantly seeking themes that emerged from students’ writings in relation to 
the research questions. Once the researcher made a list of themes in the students’ writing data, the 
researcher grouped these by category and utilized the list of themes to code the interview data. These 
themes were repeatedly refined by collapsing related themes into single themes. For example, once all 
posts containing the specific viewpoints of a context were identified (the first research question), the 
participants’ online activities in relation to their participation were carefully analyzed (the second 
research question). During this process, important themes emerged, such as the usefulness of the two 
contexts, the degree of depth in feedback, and the repetitiveness of the two contexts. 
Results 
This section discusses four participants who possessed contrasting perceptions of the two interactional 
46 Language Learning & Technology 
 
contexts. These participants’ perceptions fell into two groups: one group viewed the two contexts as 
complementary and necessary, while the other group viewed the two contexts as non-complementary and 
unnecessary. 
Viewing the Two Interactional Contexts as Complementary 
Younghee (ELL) and Sara (KHL), who viewed the two interactional contexts as complementary, found 
that the pair work enabled them to develop L2 skills, while the group discussion played a critical role in 
developing ideas. These participants believed that the learning advantages of one context compensated for 
what was lacking in the other context. Although the two participants thought that the two contexts were 
advantageous, Sara and Younghee had slightly different ideas about what led to those advantages. 
Younghee attributed the different advantages to the number of interlocutors with whom she could interact 
in each context. Sara believed that the different advantages were derived from which language she could 
use in each context. 
Younghee thought that one-to-one interaction versus many-to-many interaction created different benefits 
in each context, as stated in an online interview (see Excerpt 1) 
Excerpt 1. 
Younghee: Since our pair work happens in one-to-one interaction, we can concentrate on one 
another’s saying easily. If I compare the pair work with the [group discussion board], there are a lot 
of conversations happening in the same space in the [group discussion board], which is almost 
overwhelming? Something like that -.-;;; (online interview; April 25, 2015; translated) 
In pair work, where she communicated with her partner, she could focus on language use. One reason 
may be that Younghee was able to receive her partner’s undivided attention on her English writing, 
because she was her partner’s only interlocutor. Younghee was “satisfied with [her partner’s] feedback” 
because she believed that her partner’s feedback could improve her “incorrect [L2] usage” (online 
interview; April 25, 2015; translated). In contrast, this specific benefit of the pair work was not present in 
the group discussion, because the participants’ attention was distributed among the group members due to 
the larger number of participants. 
At the same time, Younghee acknowledged that the group discussion could have been advantageous 
because it provided access to different viewpoints of the weekly topics (see Excerpt 2). 
Excerpt 2. 
Younghee: Because of the [group discussion board], [I] became aware of different views and 
opinions on weekly topics. This could be another aspect of being overwhelmed with so much 
information ㅋ It [group discussion board] has conflicting qualities. Without the [group discussion 
board], [my partner and I] might lose the purpose of the pair work. I might question why I am doing 
this in isolation from the larger group. (online interview; April 25, 2015; translated) 
Younghee recognized the benefits of interacting with multiple people, because she gained broader 
perspectives and was able to focus on the purpose of the activity. Based on her conversation with her 
partner, she was able to develop her ideas while communicating with other participants in the group 
discussion. 
As she came to recognize the benefits of each context, Younghee participated actively in both contexts as 
a regular contributor. She made comments on every post on the group discussion board, which was 
beyond the minimum requirement of one post per week. She also seemed to engage seriously in the pair 
work. She included photos, YouTube videos, and news articles in her personal blog writings. 
Sara, on the other hand, attributed the different advantages in the two contexts to which language she 
could use in each context. The pair work allowed her to develop L2 skills by requiring her to only use 
Se Jeong Yang 47 
 
her L2, while the group discussion helped her focus on developing ideas by allowing her to use her L1. 
In her comment in Excerpt 3, Sara first demonstrated how pair work helped her improve L2 skills. 
Excerpt 3. 
Sara: [My partner] has been very helpful. The most helpful thing is the correction of my blog. 
Because I’m already familiar with it so I learn my mistakes better. 
Researcher: Because I’m already familiar with it so I learn my mistakes better?? What do you mean? 
Sara: I mean since I already knew what I wanted to say I can focus on the grammatical mistakes. It’s 
hard to notice all the grammar rules if I’m reading something I can’t even understand. (online 
interview; April 24, 2015) 
Sara noted that she was able to focus primarily on grammatical feedback in the pair work because she 
was familiar with what she wrote. 
However, as an L2 learner of Korean, it was not easy for Sara to write in an L2. In her last online 
interview, she expressed that Korean writing “was one of the harder tasks because it was in Korean” 
(June 21, 2015). When she had difficulty in expressing her ideas in Korean, she deliberately wrote a 
“superficial answer” (see Excerpt 4). 
Excerpt 4. 
Sara: But sometimes as my thoughts took me deeper, I wanted to express them but couldn’t in a 
second language. So I tended to stick with somewhat more of a superficial answer. Because it was 
easier that way. (online interview; June 21, 2015) 
However, in the group discussion where she was able to communicate in either an L1 or L2, this struggle 
seemed to be mitigated. She described the group discussion as her favorite task in an online interview: “I 
liked [the group discussion] the most I think. Of course in English it’s easy. But I got to express myself 
and think about what I wanted to say on a more complex level” (June 21, 2015). Her choice of the words 
of course and easy suggest that when she was writing in an L1, she might have felt less anxiety about 
miscommunication and might therefore have been able to develop ideas in depth. When she began to use 
her L1, she felt that her writing contained more complex and fewer superficial ideas. She was able to 
express in an L1 what she could not express in an L2. In other words, the group discussion played a 
critical role in developing, as well as debriefing, what she thought and learned. 
As such, Sara thought that the pair work complemented the group discussion by allowing participants to 
see the productive potential of utilizing linguistic skills of both the L1 and the L2. She believed that both 
contexts were beneficial for her and she actively participated in these two contexts. She confessed that 
she spent several hours writing her personal blog since she wanted to make an interesting post. Many 
participants left comments on her writing and they often reflected on what Sara posted in their own 
writings, suggesting that Sara played a role as a facilitator of the group discussion. Thus, Sara’s 
perception of utilizing both interactional contexts affected not only her active participation in both 
contexts but also other participants’ participation. 
Thus, participants who positively perceived the two interactional contexts found that both contexts were 
useful. Together, the two contexts better afforded participants the opportunity to develop L2 skills and 
ideas than they could individually. 
Viewing the Two Interactional Contexts as Non-Complementary 
Some participants did not find it beneficial to engage in both interactional contexts. These participants 
preferred one context over the other and believed that either one would have been enough on its own. 
Chul (ELL) and Diane (KHL), especially, demonstrated specific negative views about the two contexts. 
48 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Since participants were asked to discuss each weekly topic in four tasks, Chul thought that he did not 
have enough new ideas to write about in each task: “I don’t have much to say regarding the same topic” 
(online interview; April 26, 2015, translated). He argued that it seemed unnecessary to have both pair 
work and group discussion, since both contexts required participants to write about the same topic and 
were too repetitive to him. Chul also expressed his concern regarding the time necessary to complete the 
four tasks (see Excerpt 5). 
Excerpt 5. 
Chul: Chatting, writings in the two blogs [personal blog and group discussion], reflective journal…I 
have to do at least these four tasks and I feel I have to devote too much time to these tasks every day. I 
am consistently thinking about this project more than I expected. 
Researcher: Do you mean that it is a positive experience to practice English everyday or it is a 
negative experience and feels burdensome? 
Chul: I think it feels like a burden. If I complete one task per day, it still takes four days. (online 
interview; April 26, 2015, translated) 
In the interview above, Chul complained that he had to spend more time doing the weekly tasks than he 
had thought he would have to. His view that the tasks were unnecessary and time-consuming led him not 
to engage actively in all the tasks, but rather to select and focus on what he thought would be the most 
useful for him. He thought that personal blog writing in the pair work included all the features he wanted 
without unnecessary interaction with many people. Thus, he engaged in personal blog writing the most, 
but he did not actively participate in the group discussion. Compared to his writing in the personal blog, 
his writing in the group discussion only covered superficial knowledge with less than five sentences per 
post. Chul confessed that he did not fully participate in the group discussion (see Excerpt 6). 
Excerpt 6. 
Chul: I did not read all the posts [in the group discussion board]. If I had a hard time deciding the 
direction of my writings, I just looked for some references, reading others’ posts. I also looked at 
other participants’ expressions. (online interview; July 10, 2015, translated) 
His selective reading of others’ posts and less-active participation in the group discussion seemed to be 
affected by his goal for participating in the current research, which was found in his reflective diary. In 
his journal, he mainly reflected on the L2 skills he learned. Thus, it seemed apparent that his goal was the 
development of L2 linguistic skills rather than the exchange or development of ideas by interacting with 
other participants. 
Diane displayed a similar negative view of having to participate in the two contexts at the same time. She 
did not interpret both contexts as complementary. She did not think there was a big difference between 
the group discussion and the individual writing activities (see Excerpt 7). 
Excerpt 7. 
Diane: I didn’t see much difference between writing my blog, writing a community blog and a diary. 
Some weeks, I felt some of the things I could’ve written were all interchangeable between the three 
tasks. (online interview; July 2, 2015) 
Excerpt 7 shows her evaluation of the three tasks as interchangeable to her. She did not specifically prefer 
one to the other, but her online engagement showed that she did not participate in the personal blog as 
much as she did in the group discussion. She did not feel the pair work was very useful to her, as revealed 
in an online interview. She minimized the helpfulness of her partner’s feedback, saying that “[it was] 
perhaps a little [helpful]” (July 2, 2015). Compared to most participants who found their partner’s 
feedback very helpful, her negative evaluation of her partner’s feedback was rather unusual. Like Chul, 
Se Jeong Yang 49 
 
Diane also held similar opinions regarding the effectiveness of utilizing the two interactional contexts at 
the same time. 
Thus, participants who evaluated the effectiveness of the two interactional contexts to be non-
complementary felt that the two contexts were repetitive and that they did not need to be included 
together. These negative views were reflected in these participants’ less-active participation, also 
affecting their overall gains. Chul and Diane did not feel that the two contexts helped their L2 
development and idea development. 
Discussion and Conclusion 
This study, which explored participants’ perceptions of having both pair work and group discussion in 
eTandem learning, found that the participants’ perceptions of the two interactional contexts were 
influenced by whether they felt that the contexts were helpful toward achieving their goals or not. 
Depending on individuals’ needs and preferences, participants’ perceptions of the online contexts can 
differ, significantly affecting not only their participation, but also other participants’ experiences. 
As previous eTandem studies have shown (Kabata & Edasawa, 2011; O’Dowd, 2005), Sara and 
Younghee found utilizing the two contexts helped them develop their L2 skills and cultural ideas. These 
benefits fit well into these learners’ aims of participating in the research, in that they believed that having 
the two contexts improved their L2 skills. The first group’s positive perceptions of including different 
contexts corresponds to the findings of the study by Yang and Chen (2014), who showed the advantages 
of multiple contexts in an E-pal technology-enhanced project. Similar to their findings, the cases of 
Younghee and Sara concretely demonstrated the multiple benefits of having different contexts for 
developing their language skills. On the other hand, Chul and Diane did not find benefits of having the 
two contexts, because they felt that the contexts were not helpful for reaching their goals for participating 
in the study. 
The negative perceptions of Chul and Diane presented challenges to this study because they affected not 
only the participation of Chul and Diane, but also other participants’ online language experience and the 
overall result of the study. In particular, less-active participants adversely affected regular contributors. 
Sara stated, “I wanted to participate more but I didn’t want to dominate the conversation…Actually I 
became a little shy too” (online interview; June 21, 2015). Sara explained that she noticed that not all 
members actively participated in the group discussion, making her feel like she dominated it. Sara’s case 
indicates that her participation was affected by the contributions of other participants. Indeed, by the end 
of the study, Sara’s participation became less active. 
This study contributes to online L2 research in several ways. First, it attempted to maximize the benefits 
of practice of eTandem learning by incorporating pair work and group discussion. Second, the results 
showed that individual learners possessed different opinions about online contexts. Their views on online 
contexts can affect their learning and the learning of others. This supports the need to take into account 
individuals’ aims and motivation in language learning—a practice that conforms to a sociocultural 
approach to learning. In this approach, individual learners are active agents who participate in creating 
knowledge with their own purposes (Vygotsky, 1978). This study is not meant to suggest the perfect 
model of eTandem learning, but rather one alternative to the traditional form of eTandem learning. The 
current study, which was situated in a specific context with a limited number of participants, presented 
only one type of eTandem learning. 
Building upon the findings, I provide some implications for instructional practices. First, I suggest that 
educators include multiple contexts, such as pair work and group discussion, in eTandem studies, possibly 
affording different benefits to L2 learners. Yet, researchers should be cautious to include too many tasks 
using multiple contexts. It could overwhelm participants, as seen in Chul’s case. Researchers might 
consider making it possible for participants to choose which tasks they want to complete based on their 
goals for learning. Second, I suggest that L2 researchers who study online contexts consider a qualitative 
50 Language Learning & Technology 
 
approach to explore participants’ learning. As the current study suggests, individual differences can 
significantly affect one’s own learning as well as others’ learning—something that is difficult to capture 
with a quantitative approach. It is hoped that this study has provided new insights into implementation of 
online research. Given the number of technological advances in the field of L2 education, a more careful 
approach to incorporate different online contexts is necessary. 
Notes 
1. KHLs in this study referred to students learning Korean as their heritage language. 
References 
Cziko, G. A. (2004). Electronic tandem language learning (eTandem): A third approach to second 
language learning for the 21st century. CALICO Journal, 22(1), 25–39. 
https://dx.doi.org/10.1558/cj.v22i1.25-39  
Donato, R. (2000). Sociocultural contributions to understanding the foreign and second language 
classroom. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 27–50). 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Duff, P. (2008). Case study research in applied linguistics. New York, NY: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Gee, J. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York, NY: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Hauck, M. (2010). Telecollaboration: At the interface between multimodal and intercultural 
communicative competence. In S. Guth & F. Helm (Eds.), Telecollaboration 2.0 (pp. 219–248). Bern, 
Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Kabata, K., & Edasawa, Y. (2011). Tandem language learning through a cross-cultural Keypal project. 
Language Learning & Technology, 15(1), 104–121. https://dx.doi.org/10125/44239  
Kinginger, C. (2004). Studying language development abroad in light of learners’ stories. Chicago, IL: 
American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages. 
Lamy, M.-N. & Hampel, R. (2007). Online communication in language teaching and learning. 
Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave McMillan. 
Lee, L. (2009). Promoting intercultural exchanges with blogs and podcasting: A study of Spanish 
American telecollaboration. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 22(5), 425–443. 
https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09588220903345184  
O’Dowd, R. (2005). Negotiating sociocultural and institutional context: The case of Spanish American 
telecollaboration. Language and Intercultural Communication, 5(1), 40–57. 
https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14708470508668882     
Schenker, T. (2012). Intercultural competence and cultural learning through telecollaboration. CALICO 
Journal, 29(3), 449–470. https://dx.doi.org/10.11139/cj.29.3.449-470 
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for 
developing grounded theory (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38–67. https://dx.doi.org/10125/25200  
Ushioda, E. (2000). Tandem language learning via e-mail: From motivation to autonomy. ReCALL, 12(2), 
121–128. 
Se Jeong Yang 51 
 
Vinagre, M. (2005). Fostering language learning via email: An English–Spanish exchange. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 18(5), 369–388. https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09588220500442749  
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
Ware, P. (2005). “Missed” communication in online communication: Tensions in a German–American 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 9(2), 64–89. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num2/ware/ 
Ware, P., & O’Dowd, R. (2008). Peer feedback on language form in telecollaboration. Language 
Learning & Technology, 12(1), 43–63. https://dx.doi.org/10125/44130  
Yang, S. C., & Chen, J. J. (2014). Fostering foreign language learning through technology enhanced 
intercultural projects. Language Learning & Technology, 18(1), 57–75. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2014/yangchen.pdf 
About the Author 
Se Jeong Yang is an assistant professor in Teacher Education at Bradley University. Her major research 
interest is multilingual students’ identities, cultures, and linguistic development. 
E-mail: syang2@fsmail.bradley.edu 
