Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2018, Volume 22, Issue 1 
pp. 137–156 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Avizia Y. Long, Sun-Young Shin, Kimberly Geeslin, & Erik W. Willis 
 
 
Does the test work? 
Evaluating a web-based language placement test 
Avizia Y. Long, Texas Tech University 
Sun-Young Shin, Indiana University 
Kimberly Geeslin, Indiana University 
Erik W. Willis, Indiana University 
Abstract 
In response to the need for examples of test validation from which everyday language programs can 
benefit, this paper reports on a study that used Bachman’s (2005) assessment use argument (AUA) 
framework to examine evidence to support claims made about the intended interpretations and uses of 
scores based on a new web-based Spanish language placement test. The test, which consisted of 100 
items distributed across five item types (sound discrimination, grammar, listening comprehension, 
reading comprehension, and vocabulary), was tested with 2,201 incoming first-year and transfer students 
at a large, Midwestern public university. Analyses of internal consistency and validity revealed the test to 
be reliable and valid with regard to its functionality, the content covered on the exam, and the consistency 
with which placement decisions could be made. Findings are discussed in light of the AUA model 
developed for the placement test, and practical suggestions for university-level language program 
instructors and testing administrators are outlined. 
Keywords: Assessment, Testing 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: Spanish 
APA Citation: Long, A. Y., Shin, S.-Y., Geeslin, K., & Willis, E. W. (2018). Does the test work? Evaluating 
a web-based language placement test. Language Learning & Technology, 22(1), 137–156. 
https://dx.doi.org/10125/44585 
Introduction 
Test developers, institutions of learning, and instructors alike are increasingly turning to the web as a 
medium for testing language skills. Web-based language testing offers several benefits, including 
automatic scoring and autonomy in testing location and time for test takers. These benefits have prompted 
the spread of the web as a tool for language testing from low-stakes testing situations—originally advised 
by Roever (2001)—to medium-stakes testing contexts (Shin, 2012). One such medium-stakes testing 
context that has witnessed an increased use of the web as a means for test delivery is the university-level 
foreign language (FL) placement exam. Particularly within the institutional context of the present study, 
there is a push to change the administration of FL placement exams from paper- to web-based formats, 
given the increased flexibility of delivering a web-based test to larger numbers of students. Despite the 
aforementioned benefits of using web-based tests for placement purposes, there has been little research 
thus far investigating the reliability and validity of online FL placement tests. Additionally, the move 
from paper- to web-based placement testing oftentimes implicates the assistance of individuals such as 
classroom instructors and language program administrators who may lack the necessary expertise in 
language testing and evaluation to assess the functionality of a placement test. This all-too-common 
situation has created a need for examples of test validation from which everyday FL programs can 
benefit. To that end, the primary goal of the present study is to offer an example method to evaluate a 
138 Language Learning & Technology 
 
web-based FL placement test geared toward everyday FL programs. Specifically, the present investigation 
shows how to use Bachman’s (2005) assessment use argument framework to examine evidence to support 
claims made about the intended interpretations and uses of scores based on a new web-based Spanish 
language placement test. In addition to contributing to the discussion of web-based language assessment 
for medium-stakes testing contexts, our example for evaluating the functionality and use of a FL 
placement test in a web-based setting that is offered is comprehensive and replicable. As will be shown, 
this method has quantitative aspects that do not require advanced knowledge of statistics, as well as 
qualitative components illustrating that statistics are not (and should not be) the only means for test 
evaluation. 
Background 
Web-Based Language Testing 
Web-based language testing (WBLT) uses the Internet as a platform for test development and delivery; 
test input and questions are written in the HTML located on a server and test takers respond to the test 
items using web browsers such as Internet Explorer, Firefox, Chrome, or Safari (Shin, 2012). Recently, 
WBLT has been embraced more by language researchers and teachers as a teaching and testing tool 
because it has the potential to greatly enhance logistical efficiency and flexibility (Ockey, 2009). Test 
developers can easily upload and update test contents, and test takers can take the test at the place and 
time of their convenience. Test takers’ responses on the test are scored immediately, and scores are 
reported to all stakeholders more quickly. Various item and test score statistics are available on demand, 
providing useful information for test developers and users to interpret test scores and revise the test when 
necessary. 
Additionally, WBLT has been known to lead to improved test measurement qualities including reliability 
and validity (Chapelle & Douglas, 2006). A large number of test takers’ responses on true/false and 
multiple-choice formats can be instantly scored without any errors. Even productive responses are scored 
consistently once reliable scoring algorithms are developed and applied to test takers’ responses 
(Bernstein, Van Moere, & Cheng, 2010; Carr & Xi, 2010). Further, inter- and intra-rater reliability in 
assessing test takers’ written or spoken responses are not a concern in WBLT using an automated scoring 
system (Williamson, Bejar, & Sax, 2004). Authenticity can also be enhanced because various test formats 
are possible, including interactive and dynamic features of test input and question types (Chapelle & 
Douglas, 2006; Huff & Sireci, 2001). For example, computer technology makes it possible to include 
visual input for online listening tests, more closely reflecting language use in real-world tasks (Ockey, 
2007; Wagner, 2010). Thus, WBLT is becoming more widely used in many high-stakes standardized 
language proficiency exams, such as the Test of English as a Foreign Language Internet-based Test 
(TOEFL iBT) and the Pearson Test of English Academic (PTE Academic), as well as in placement and 
screening tests used for medium-stakes decisions made in FL programs (Bardovi-Harlig & Shin, 2014; 
Elder & Randow, 2008). 
Placement Testing 
Previous research on placement testing has grown remarkably over the past several decades, reflecting the 
incorporation of languages other than English (e.g., Bernhardt, Rivera, & Kamil, 2004; Eda, Itomitsu, & 
Noda, 2008) and the discussion of several key issues and topics in the field of language testing. An 
important issue that has attracted the attention of language testing scholars is related to the nature of 
placement tests. As pointed out by Brown (1989), a central purpose of placement testing is to “[sort] 
students into relatively homogeneous language-ability groupings, sometimes within specific skill areas” 
(p. 65). Further, placement tests can be designed to spread out these groupings along a continuum from 
lower to higher scoring students or to distinguish students who have mastered specific learning objectives 
from those who have not (Green, 2012). The former type of test is called a norm-referenced test (NRT), in 
which a test taker’s score is compared to other individuals who take the same test, whereas the latter type 
Avizia Y. Long, Sun-Young Shin, Kimberly Geeslin, and Erik W. Willis 139 
 
of test is called a criterion-referenced test (CRT), in which scores are used to determine whether or not a 
test taker demonstrates mastery of a previously specified skill or content related to instruction. However, 
Brown (1989) points out that in actual use, aspects of both NRT and CRT are present in placement 
testing. Specifically, placement testing developers and administrators may want to determine what 
objectives have been learned or mastered while simultaneously spreading out students to identify ability 
or proficiency groups. In these cases, Brown (1989) calls for the use of norm- and criterion-based item 
analysis techniques for placement testing contexts, not only to determine how much the test spreads out 
students but also to examine the extent to which NRTs include content relevant to the given curriculum 
under study. It should also be noted that a NRT puts emphasis on discriminating among students relative 
to others, whereas a CRT is concerned with content mastery of a particular course (Brown & Hudson, 
2002). Similarly, it is important to notice that score reliability for a CRT is not estimated in the same way 
as it is for a NRT because a CRT tends to produce little variance in test scores (Bachman, 2004). Thus, a 
placement test featuring both orientations should demonstrate that the test could be judged against various 
test qualities such as reliability and validity before it can be implemented for decision-making purposes, 
such as course placement. 
An examination of previous language placement testing research demonstrates that issues of reliability 
and validity have received a fair amount of attention in the empirical literature. Example studies include 
those by Wall, Clapham, and Alderson (1994) and Fulcher (1997), in which not one but several 
approaches to assessing reliability (e.g., correlation coefficients, inter- and intra-rater reliability, Rasch 
data modeling, etc.) and validity (e.g., analyses of cut scores, principle components analysis, concurrent 
validity, content validity, feedback from students and instructors, etc.) are employed. These studies 
demonstrate the range of approaches that are appropriate for the development and assessment of language 
placement tests. Furthermore, these approaches have been widely adopted in more recent studies, which 
have served to strengthen methods of language placement testing development and evaluation (e.g., 
Bernhardt et al., 2004; Eda et al., 2008; Pardo-Ballester, 2010; Shin, 2008). 
It is important to point out that the present study is not the first to investigate the presumed practicality 
and efficiency of web-based language placement testing in a university-level FL program. Bernhardt et al. 
(2004) examined the process of using the web to deliver language placement tests to incoming and 
transfer students (i.e., not yet enrolled) at Stanford University, showing that web-based placement testing 
could be conducted in a reliable and valid manner. Additionally, their findings revealed that online testing 
was particularly beneficial for testing administrators and instructors who made more effective decisions 
when given the time to contemplate a student’s performance. For students, the convenience of taking the 
exam at a time and place of their choosing saved them an additional trip to campus. The present analysis 
improves and expands upon research such as Bernhardt et al. (2004) by gathering and presenting 
additional evidence in support of test validity—namely, content relevance, concurrent criterion 
relatedness, and consequences of test score uses. Furthermore, the current study shows the need for test 
validation procedures that are based on a logical framework of argumentation and supporting evidence to 
address the appropriateness of both score interpretations and uses (Carr, 2011). 
Test Validation Approaches 
Validity evidence for the appropriateness of interpretation and uses of a given test score has been 
traditionally examined through Messick’s validity framework (Messick, 1989). In this framework, 
Messick argues that evidence supporting different aspects of validity including content, concurrent, 
construct, and consequential validity should be viewed as a unitary concept that integrates both evidential 
and consequential basis for validation. However, given that his approach has not been considered useful 
for practical test development (Bachman, 2005), recent views of test validity and use bear on an 
argument-based approach in which multiple claims about score-based inferences and test uses are 
investigated in a logical manner (Kane, 1992, 2011; Toulmin, 2003). This notion of validity as argument 
allows us to test alternative interpretations and to reduce doubt surrounding the claims we make for the 
interpretation and use of the test scores (Fulcher & Davidson, 2007). Bachman (2005) further develops 
140 Language Learning & Technology 
 
this into assessment use arguments (AUAs) as a framework for building and supporting a case for test 
score interpretation and use. This approach combines the following two arguments into a single 
framework: (a) the validity argument, which refers to the logical link between test scores and intended 
score interpretation, and (b) the utilization argument, which is related to the coherent connection drawn 
between score interpretation and intended uses. Thus far, Bachman’s AUA has provided language testing 
researchers with a theoretical tool for explicitly establishing a logical structure for simultaneously 
justifying the interpretations made about test takers’ language abilities and decisions about them based on 
their given test scores. This framework has been found to be quite useful for language testers attempting 
to validate a test in that it provides useful guidance on how to collect and organize various information 
supporting score-based interpretations and uses. AUAs have thus been increasingly used in the field of 
language testing (e.g., Jia, 2013; Llosa, 2008; Shin, 2008; Wang, Choi, Schmidgall, & Bachman, 2012). 
The Present Study 
As demonstrated in our review thus far, WBLT has numerous benefits, leading university-level FL 
programs to adopt the web as a tool for language placement testing development and use. However, it is 
important for all individuals involved in this process to be aware of the nature of placement tests and the 
aspects of test quality to address when evaluating a placement test (i.e., reliability and validity). 
Furthermore, it is imperative that FL placement test designers and evaluators critically examine the claims 
that are made about the inferences drawn from test scores, as “the single most important consideration in 
both the development of language tests and the interpretation of their results is the purpose or purposes 
which the particular tests are intended to serve” (Bachman, 1990, p. 55). To date, studies examining the 
validity and use of placement tests have not offered models of validation geared toward everyday FL 
programs. To that end, the present study investigates the functionality and use of a web-based Spanish FL 
placement test to illustrate how to examine issues of reliability and validity. Specifically, Bachman’s 
(2005) AUA framework is adopted to exemplify the process of linking test scores and scored-based 
inferences and uses in a logical and accessible manner. The specific research questions guiding the 
present study are the following: 
1. To what extent is the web-based Spanish placement exam a reliable indicator of Spanish language 
knowledge for incoming university-level learners? 
2. To what extent is the web-based Spanish placement exam a valid indicator of Spanish language 
knowledge within the curricular context of the present study? 
3. To what extent can our framework for test validation and use be generalized to other university-
level FL contexts? 
Research of this kind is essential to illustrate how to gather and link evidence to support claims that are 
made on the basis of test scores, and such an example would be informative to language test developers in 
similar, large-scale, university-level FL programs in the United States. 
The Setting 
Within the institutional context of the current study, Spanish is the most popular choice for FL study 
among university undergraduate students. The academic department in which Spanish language is 
organized offers courses at all levels (elementary through graduate) and serves approximately 4,000 
students annually. Incoming students often have some knowledge of Spanish, having taken Spanish 
language or content courses in high school. Therefore (and similar to many postsecondary institutions 
throughout the United States), a placement test is administered to incoming students to match them (to the 
greatest extent possible) with the course that is most suitable for their current level of Spanish language 
knowledge. 
Prior to the development of the web-based placement test under examination in the present study, a paper-
based version of the Wisconsin Spanish Placement Test (University of Wisconsin Center for Placement 
Avizia Y. Long, Sun-Young Shin, Kimberly Geeslin, and Erik W. Willis 141 
 
Testing, 2011) was used to place students into lower-division courses of the Spanish language program. 
The paper-based test contained 60 multiple-choice items that assessed Spanish language grammar, 
vocabulary, and reading comprehension. It was originally administered to incoming and new transfer 
students during summer orientation visits on campus. It was scored by a testing center located on the 
campus of the institution in which the present study took place, and test results (with corresponding 
placement decisions) were made available to test administrators within one to three days. Placement 
decisions were based strictly on scores from the placement test, which placed students into one of the 
following courses: First Year Spanish, Second Year Spanish I, Second Year Spanish II, Spanish Grammar 
in Context, or Introduction to the Study of Hispanic Cultures. If students received a high enough score, 
they could be placed out of all of the courses previously mentioned, permitting them to enroll in other 
upper-division content courses taught in Spanish. 
The decision to move to an online format was first initiated by the university administrators, who 
determined that incoming students’ orientation campus visits could be used more effectively if all 
university placement tests were taken online prior to the campus visit. However, the movement to an 
online format raised copyright concerns with the paper-based test, which necessitated the creation of an 
exam without a preexisting copyright. The movement to an online format, however, afforded the 
opportunity to address certain limitations of the paper-based test. First, the paper-based test did not 
accurately reflect the breadth of content to which students are exposed in the language courses of the 
current departmental context. The paper-based test only tested grammar, vocabulary, and reading (with a 
focus on grammar), but the web-based test was improved to include skills that were assessed in the 
curriculum, such as listening comprehension. In addition, in the departmental context of the present study, 
it was important to make quick placement decisions and to inform students, teachers, and administrators 
of the results promptly, given the large number of students enrolling in Spanish language courses each 
semester. Taken together, a web-based language test provided greater, more authentic breadth of content; 
offered instant placement decisions; and permitted diverse, multimodal test inputs (Shin, 2012). As a 
result, a web-based test that was different from the paper-based test was developed and implemented to 
replace the previous paper-based test for placement decisions in the Spanish language program. 
The web-based placement test was designed to place incoming students into one of the six Spanish 
language courses outlined in Table 1. Given a high enough score, students could place out of these 
courses, making them eligible for enrollment in other upper-division courses that focused on topics 
related to culture, linguistics, and literature. The cutoff score for the web-based test was determined by 
the performance criteria and levels established using the previous paper-based test that students took on 
campus. We performed a statistical comparison (Kappa’s agreement index) to match as closely as 
possible the results from the web-based test to the results of the paper-based test, which best represented 
the placement norms previously established for course placement in the departmental context of the 
present study. 
Table 1. Spanish Language Courses for Placement Based on Web-Based Placement Test 
Curriculum Division Course Name 
 Elementary Spanish 
 Elementary Spanish II 
Lower-Division First Year Spanisha 
 Second Year Spanish I 
 Second Year Spanish II 
Upper-Division Spanish Grammar in Context 
aThis course is an accelerated course, covering all content included in Elementary Spanish and Elementary Spanish 
II within a single academic semester.  
142 Language Learning & Technology 
 
From Table 1, an observation that is relevant to understanding the context of test use is that the test was 
designed to assess knowledge of language. Consequently, the majority of the courses in which students 
were placed fell into the lower-division bracket. Although topics related to culture were included in each 
of these courses, attention was given to developing and refining knowledge of structural aspects of the 
language as this knowledge was viewed as the essential preparation for the academic writing required in 
more advanced, upper-division courses. 
The Web-Based Test 
The test was delivered via the web to incoming students. Specifically, incoming students took the test on 
their own (at home using their computers) before arriving at the institution for their first academic 
semester of study. The web-based test was not adaptive, meaning that subsequent items were not 
presented to test takers from a bank of items depending on their response to the previous item. To 
facilitate comprehension of the demands of the assessment, all instructions were provided in English. 
Students were permitted to take the test one time only, after which their responses were recorded and 
scored electronically. The test was constructed using HTML by technology support staff at the institution 
of the present study. Additionally, all listening files included on the test were recorded directly onto a 
computer using a USBpre external sound card and a Shure wh10a microphone. 
The test contained 100 items across a total of five sections: sound discrimination (k = 5, where k is 
number of items), grammar (k = 65), listening comprehension (k = 13), reading comprehension (k = 7), 
and vocabulary (k = 10). In what follows, a detailed description of each section with sample (not actual) 
test items is provided. 
Sound Discrimination 
The first section required test takers to listen to a phrase in Spanish that contained a word targeting a 
specific sound segment. The word always occurred in phrase-initial position, but targeted segments 
occurred in either word-initial or word-medial position. Each word was a real word in Spanish, spoken by 
a native speaker of Spanish reading at a normal, conversational rate of speech. The items of this section 
took a multiple-choice format with three response options (see Figure 1 for a sample item). Test takers 
could listen to each phrase up to two times. 
 
Figure 1. Sample sound discrimination item 
Grammar 
The second section required test takers to observe a picture, read a contextualized phrase, or read a cloze 
passage and then select the response that best described the picture or completed the phrase or passage 
provided (see Figure 2). The items of this section also took a multiple-choice format, with two, three, or 
four response options. With regard to the content of this section, items covered a wide range of 
grammatical structures known to present an acquisitional challenge to predominantly English-speaking 
learners (see Geeslin, 2013). Some of these structures included: the copula contrast (i.e., ser vs. estar), 
aspect (i.e., preterit vs. imperfect), mood selection (i.e., subjunctive vs. indicative), verbal morphology 
across tenses (e.g., present, future, conditional, etc.), grammatical gender and number agreement, clitic 
Avizia Y. Long, Sun-Young Shin, Kimberly Geeslin, and Erik W. Willis 143 
 
pronouns (e.g., lo, le, les), and imperatives (e.g., dime), among others.1 These structures were taught in 
the curriculum designed for the lower-division courses. 
 
Figure 2. Sample grammar items 
Listening Comprehension 
The third section contained three listening passages of varying lengths: the first, 31 s; the second, 18 s; 
and the third, 60 s. These passages dealt with a monologic description of people, a telephone message, 
and a news-related report, respectively. Test takers were instructed to listen to the passage and select the 
best response to complete each corresponding set of items provided. Each item took either a multiple-
choice or true/false response format; multiple-choice items always provided four response options. The 
first passage contained a set of 5 corresponding items, the second passage 3 items, and the third passage 5 
items. No visual input was provided in this section of the test. 
Reading Comprehension 
The fourth section contained two reading texts of varying lengths: the first was 99 words long and the 
second was 408 words long. These passages dealt with lifestyle and history, respectively, and were 
accompanied by a set of items that varied in number to reflect the length of each passage (two and five 
items, respectively). Test takers were instructed to read the passage and answer each item provided based 
on the content of its corresponding reading passage. Each item had a multiple-choice format with four 
response options. 
Vocabulary 
The final section required test takers to complete phrases that prompted the selection of an appropriate 
synonym or antonym (see Figure 3). The vocabulary items were selected from Davies’ (2006) A 
frequency dictionary of Spanish: Core vocabulary for learners. Specifically, five words were selected 
from the last 10 words of each block of 100 words (there are 5,000 words total in the dictionary). With 
regard to the types of words selected, this section targeted mostly adjectives, followed by nouns and 
nonfinite verbs. These items took a multiple-choice format with four response options. 
 
Figure 3. Sample vocabulary items 
144 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Method for Test Evaluation 
Participants and Procedure 
For the present study, the web-based placement exam was evaluated based on the performance of 2,201 
incoming first-year and transfer students. All students reported having 0 to 4 years of classroom Spanish 
instruction at the time of the test. Although the majority of students reported English as their native 
language (n = 2,111), there were some students who reported a non-English native language (Spanish, n = 
28; Other, n = 39).2 
As part of the validation framework developed for the present study, 1,622 of the 2,201 incoming first-
year and transfer students who took the web-based test also took the paper-based test that was being used 
in the department to place students into lower-division courses of the Spanish language program. This 
subset of the participants completed the paper-based test during the summer orientation session before 
their enrollment into courses for the following fall semester.  
AUA Model for the Validity of the Spanish Placement Exam 
Bachman’s (2005) AUA framework was adopted to articulate the uses of and inferences drawn from the 
web-based Spanish language placement test described. Using Bachman’s model, the validity and 
utilization arguments pertaining to each score-based inference and use of the web-based Spanish 
placement exam were articulated, as shown in Figure 4 and Figure 5, respectively.3 These arguments 
consisted of warrants to support each claim made, as well as rebuttals that could weaken the warrants 
stated for the Spanish language placement exam. Additionally, each argument outlined the type of 
evidence collected to serve as backing or rebuttal data. 
The desired claim based on our interpretations of students’ scores (Figure 4) on the placement test was 
that the exam is a reliable and valid indicator of Spanish language ability for university-level classroom 
learners. To support this claim, we addressed whether or not students’ performance on the test was 
consistent (Warrant 1) by examining statistical estimates of internal consistency (Backing 1). A potential 
weakness of this warrant was if there were several items that individually influenced the statistical 
estimates of internal consistency to a great extent (Rebuttal 1). Therefore, we identified any such items 
and examined the extent to which they influenced statistical estimates of reliability of the test (Rebuttal 
data 1). 
To provide further support for the score-based interpretation claim, we addressed the extent to which the 
content of the placement test reflected the content present in the courses in which students could be 
placed (Warrant 2) by matching test items with the corresponding course content (Backing). However, a 
potential rebuttal was that the content of the placement test was limited in comparison to the content of 
the courses in which students were being placed (Rebuttal 2). As a result, we identified additional 
evidence to demonstrate that the content of the exam matched the content of the courses in which students 
could enroll. In this case, we compared the content of the placement test to the content reflected in course 
syllabi and textbooks (Rebuttal data 2). 
Avizia Y. Long, Sun-Young Shin, Kimberly Geeslin, and Erik W. Willis 145 
 
 
Figure 4. Test validity argument for the Spanish language placement exam 
Next is the utilization argument, which refers to the link that is made between the score-based 
interpretation claim and use of the test (see Figure 5). In making this link, the desired claim was that the 
placement exam placed students into Spanish courses that were appropriate for their knowledge of 
Spanish as a FL. Although there were several approaches to validating this claim, we chose to compare 
the placement decisions of scores based on the new, web-based placement test of the present study with 
the placement decisions of scores based on the previous, paper-based test used in the present testing 
context (Warrant 3). The rationale for this method of validation was that placement decisions made based 
on the scores of the previous, paper-based test yielded a low rate of misplacement in the current 
departmental context each academic year (Way & McClarty, 2012). Thus, agreement between the 
placement decisions made based on the scores gained by students completing both tests provided validity 
for the use of the web-based Spanish language placement exam as a tool for determining which Spanish 
course would be appropriate for enrollment by test takers. Our backings for this warrant included 
statistical estimates of the extent to which scores on the new test correlated with scores on the previous 
test (Backing 1) as well as the extent of agreement between placement decisions made based on the scores 
of the new test versus those based on scores of the previous test (Backing 2). However, a potential source 
of weakening of this argument would be a relatively high rate of course withdrawals or replacements 
based on the scores generated by the new placement test (Rebuttal 3). Therefore, we examined the 
146 Language Learning & Technology 
 
number and nature of reported withdrawals and replacements resulting from placement decisions based 
on the web-based test scores (Rebuttal data 3). 
 
Figure 5. Test utilization argument for Spanish language placement exam 
Test Scoring and Data Analysis 
Students’ responses to each item of the web-based Spanish placement test were scored electronically. A 
correct response received 1 point, whereas an incorrect response received 0 points, for a maximum 
possible score of 100. No partial credit was given in the scoring of students’ responses to each test item. 
Students’ test scores were computed as the sum of all correct responses to each item of the test. 
Cronbach’s alpha was examined as the statistical measure of internal consistency (Cronbach, 1951) for 
the test scores of the 2,201 test takers. Reliability coefficients were also examined to identify items that 
may have influenced the internal consistency of the test to a greater degree. Specifically, we examined 
Cronbach’s alpha for each item of the test if it were to be removed from the test. 
Following each analysis of internal consistency just described, two analyses of validity were conducted. 
The first examined test content in relation to curriculum content, and the second examined the nature of 
placement decisions generated by the scores of the new, web-based test. Regarding the assessment of 
content validity, we manually examined the content of the textbooks for each course students could be 
Avizia Y. Long, Sun-Young Shin, Kimberly Geeslin, and Erik W. Willis 147 
 
placed into. The assigned texts for each course (at the time of the present study) that we examined were 
Vistazos: Un curso breve (VanPatten, Lee, Ballman, & Farley, 2010) for First Year Spanish; ¡Anda! 
Curso Intermedio (Heining-Boynton, Leloup, & Cowell, 2010a) for Second Year Spanish I; ¡Anda! 
Curso Intermedio Volume II (Heining-Boynton, Leloup, & Cowell, 2010b) for Second Year Spanish II; 
and Spanish grammar in review (Holton, Hadlich, & Gómez-Estrada, 2001), Lazos: Gramática y 
vocabulario a través de la literatura (Frantzen, 2009), and Spanish grammar: A quick reference (Wren, 
2005) for Spanish Grammar in Context. With regard to the second method of test score validation, we 
compared performance and placement decisions based on the new, web-based Spanish placement test 
with those of the previous, paper-based test used in the institutional context of the current study. Both the 
scores and placement decisions of a subset of 1,622 students who took the paper-based test and the web-
based test were examined by means of correlation analysis (Pearson r) and Kappa’s agreement index 
(Cohen, 1968), respectively. Kappa’s agreement index provided a statistical measure of the degree of 
dependability of the two testing procedures, which differed from reliability in that the consistency of 
absolute decisions (i.e., placing a student in one course and not another) was under examination (Carr, 
2011; Kane & Brennan, 1980). 
Results 
This section is organized to address each warrant outlined in the AUA model developed for the web-
based Spanish placement test. Thus, we report the findings first for reliability (Warrant 1), followed by 
content validity (Warrant 2) and validity of placement decisions (Warrant 3). 
Warrant 1: Reliability 
The analysis of internal consistency revealed the entire test (k = 100) to be very reliable, α = .92 (N = 
2,201). As indicated in our validation framework, there may have been items that greatly influenced 
estimates of reliability. To address this rebuttal, we examined reliability coefficients to identify those 
items that may have had a greater influence on the overall internal consistency of the test relative to other 
test items. With regard to this measure, we found that no single item greatly influenced estimates of the 
test’s internal consistency. Specifically, hypothetically removing any item of the test did not result in 
change of the test’s overall reliability by more than .002. This finding suggests that the test was internally 
consistent. 
Examining the findings for reliability by test section, in contrast, it was revealed that only the grammar 
section (k = 65) was reliable, α = .88. The other sections were not found to be as internally consistent as 
the grammar subsection, possibly due to the low number of test items in each of these subsections: sound 
discrimination, α = .29 (k = 5); listening comprehension, α = .57 (k = 13); reading comprehension, α = .50 
(k = 7); and vocabulary, α = .62 (k = 10). 
Warrant 2: Content Validity 
The analysis of content validity revealed that the content of the test reflected the content incorporated in 
the course materials and curriculum within the departmental context of the present study. Specifically, the 
test sections (i.e., grammar, listening comprehension, vocabulary, etc.) were very representative of the 
skill sets on which students received practice and instruction. For example, the specific sounds targeted in 
the sound discrimination section were the same sounds that received attention in students’ electronic 
workbook that was to be completed outside of class. With regard to grammar, the target structures 
included in this section of the test received some focus in terms of instruction and assessment in at least 
two of the six courses into which students could be placed (see Table 1). For example, the copula contrast 
was a structure in the grammar section of the test that received instruction and assessment in Elementary 
Spanish, First Year Spanish, and Spanish Grammar in Context. Aspect received instruction and 
assessment in Elementary Spanish II, First Year Spanish, and Spanish Grammar in Context. 
For listening comprehension, the types of listening passages found in the test were generally 
148 Language Learning & Technology 
 
representative of passage types found in course materials. Although a combination of monologic and 
dialogic tasks could be found in the course materials, a greater proportion of monologic tasks was evident 
in the classroom materials and assessment, suggesting that the placement test closely reflected classroom 
materials in terms of listening passage types. Further, the content of the listening passages accurately 
reflected the content of listening passages encountered in course materials, which included (but was not 
limited to) descriptions of people, places, and things; narrations of past events; telephone messages; radio 
announcements; and dialogues between coworkers and friends. 
With regard to reading comprehension, the test similarly reflected content present in course materials. For 
reading comprehension, an important observation was that the variable length of reading passages was 
representative of the variable lengths of reading passages that could be encountered in course materials. 
Reading passages in course textbooks ranged from as few as five lines to well over 100 lines in upper-
level courses (e.g., Second Year Spanish II and Spanish Grammar in Context). Reading passages in 
assessments, in contrast, tended to range between 15 and 25 lines, which was more similar to passage 
lengths in the placement test. With regard to reading passage content, students were exposed to a variety 
of topics in courses: daily life, health, Spanish-speaking cultures, history of Spanish-speaking countries, 
notable people and places in the Spanish-speaking world, and several pieces of fiction, to name just a few. 
Two of the preceding topics (i.e., lifestyle and history) were used in the placement test. 
Lastly, for vocabulary, the words included on the test were also present in the materials of several courses 
into which students could be placed. For example, vocabulary related to describing people and places 
(very generally) was present in both course materials and the placement test. In addition, the way in 
which vocabulary was tested in the test was very similar to the method for testing vocabulary in 
courses—namely, contextualized sentences that students had to complete using a list of vocabulary words 
(provided in a word bank or in multiple choice format). 
A potential rebuttal against the warrant that the test was valid in terms of content was that the content of 
the test was not fully representative of course materials or curriculum input. To that end, we examined the 
syllabus and textbooks for each course in terms of stated objectives and content covered for each class 
meeting (for a detailed summary of the objectives and content presented in each course syllabus and 
textbook, see Appendix). Upon examination of the course objectives and content for each course, we 
found that the placement test was comprehensive in its inclusion of linguistic structures and topics, but 
not topics related to culture. Specifically, the range of topics related to culture in test items and the 
reading and listening passage was not as extensive as that observed upon in-depth review of course 
content. Nevertheless, we do not believe that this lack of range of culture topics negatively impacts the 
validity of the test in terms of content given that, albeit minimally, a consideration of culture is reflected 
in the placement exam. Thus, it appears that, overall, test content matches content provided in course 
materials and, in many cases, curriculum-based assessment. 
Warrant 3: Validity of Placement Decisions 
A paper-based assessment was used previously to place incoming and transfer students into the courses 
offered by the department. To address the claim that the web-based placement test placed students into 
Spanish courses that were appropriate for their knowledge of Spanish as a FL, we compared the 
placement decisions of scores based on the new, web-based test with those of scores based on the 
previous, paper-based test. To investigate this comparison, we asked (a) whether or not the scores for the 
web-based test correlated with those of the paper-based test for each student and (b) how consistent 
placement into the levels determined by the web-based test were with placement by the paper-based test. 
With regard to the first investigation, we calculated correlations between the scores of the web-based test 
and the paper-based test completed by the subset of 1,622 students who took both tests. The Pearson 
product-moment correlation coefficient (r) was .73, indicating that the scores calculated for each student 
on the web-based test and the scores on the paper-based test were highly correlated. For the second 
investigation, we examined Kappa measures of agreement between placement decisions made based on 
the scores of the new, web-based test as compared to placement decisions made based on the previous, 
Avizia Y. Long, Sun-Young Shin, Kimberly Geeslin, and Erik W. Willis 149 
 
paper-based test (again by the same subset of 1,622 students who took both tests). Depending on the 
score, students could be placed into one of the six courses outlined in Table 1. For the previous, paper-
based test, students could be placed into Introduction to Hispanic Cultures, a different upper-division 
course, in addition to the six courses listed in Table 1. For the purposes of this analysis, we examined 
agreement measures between placement decisions for equivalent courses (i.e., courses with the same 
objectives and content: First Year Spanish, Second Year Spanish I, Second Year Spanish II, and Spanish 
Grammar in Context). The kappa coefficient was .85 (a value of 1.0 indicates perfect agreement), 
indicating considerably strong agreement between placement decisions made based on the scores of each 
test (Fleiss, 1981). 
A potential rebuttal for the warrant that the web-based test placed students into courses in a manner 
similar to the previous test was that we encountered a high rate of course withdrawals or replacements 
based on the scores generated by the new placement test. In response to this rebuttal, we examined the 
distribution and rates of withdrawal and replacement that occurred during the fall semester following our 
study (see Table 2). 
Table 2. Distribution and Rates of Withdrawal and Replacement 
Course N Withdrawals and Replacements % 
First Year Spanish 57 2.6 
Second Year Spanish I 78 3.5 
Second Year Spanish II 89 4.0 
Note. Percentages were based on the number of withdrawals and replacements divided by the number of students 
enrolled in each class level. 
Rates of withdrawal and replacement for each course listed in Table 2 are relatively low. On a more 
practical level, however, the raw number of withdrawals and replacements may suggest that the web-
based test is in need of further examination. It is important to point out here that withdrawal rates do not 
necessarily reflect misplacement. However, we cannot ignore the possibility that a student was not placed 
into the most appropriate course for his or her level of Spanish language knowledge, but did not choose to 
withdraw from the course until later in the semester.4 
To provide further insight into the withdrawal and replacement rates observed in Table 2, we consulted 
with administrators of the web-based placement test and the Spanish language program in which the test 
was used. Administrators reported that, in general, many students requested to be moved from Second 
Year Spanish II to Second Year Spanish I in particular because they found the course to be 
overwhelming. Within the departmental context of the present study, incoming students often come from 
high schools in which Spanish language instruction involves a strong focus on grammar or vocabulary 
and may not necessarily contain a strong communicative component or actual use of Spanish in the 
classroom. It appears that students’ familiarity with grammar, which constitutes a noticeable bulk of the 
web-based test, results in test scores that place them into courses (such as Second Year Spanish II or even 
Spanish Grammar in Context) that require not only extensive knowledge of grammar and vocabulary, but 
also the ability to use such knowledge for communicative purposes in the classroom. 
Discussion 
Every year, language instructors and language program administrators face the task of developing, 
administering, and assessing web-based placement tests for the purpose of enrolling incoming and 
transfer students into courses that are suitable for their knowledge of the language being tested. However, 
it is also likely that these individuals lack a systematic method or procedure for undertaking a task such as 
the one outlined in the present study. In response to the need for a concise, accessible example of test 
validation from which everyday FL programs can benefit, this paper reported the findings of a study that 
150 Language Learning & Technology 
 
used Bachman’s (2005) AUA framework to examine the reliability and validity of a web-based Spanish 
placement test. 
To address the first research question of our study, we found that the web-based test was reliable, as 
demonstrated by means of statistical estimates of internal consistency (Cronbach’s alpha and examination 
of reliability coefficients for each test item). In response to our second research question, we found that 
the web-based test was valid in terms of content and the placement decisions being made based on test 
scores. Nevertheless, there are areas in which the test validity could be strengthened. For example, test 
content could be modified to reflect the range of cultural topics observed in the course materials and 
syllabi of the target enrollment classes. Additionally, test developers could consider how performance 
demonstrated on the placement exam translates to use of the assessed language knowledge in Spanish 
language classrooms. Related to this point, it may be that the cut-offs for placement into the two Second 
Year Spanish courses need to be adjusted to address the needs of high-scoring students who have 
extensive knowledge of Spanish and grammar but may not actually be able to use such knowledge for 
communicative ends. 
In keeping with the central contribution of our study and in response to the final research question guiding 
this investigation, we believe that the nuts and bolts of our method for test validation can be used in other 
university-level FL contexts. Particularly for large-scale FL programs in which administrators or 
coordinators need to make fairly quick decisions about which course to place students into, this report 
illustrates how to outline, substantiate, and provide evidence for the reliability, validity, and use of a 
placement test. Specifically, using our study as an example, first it must be demonstrated that the test 
consistently produces similar results, which can be shown by examining simple statistical measures such 
as Cronbach’s alpha. Once the test has been determined to be reliable, it must be demonstrated that, as a 
measure, it is valid for its intended uses. Validity can be determined in a number of ways (for other 
methods not employed in the present study, see Wall et al., 1994; Fulcher, 1997), of which we examined 
content validity—a qualitative technique. Finally, it is important to demonstrate that actual use of the test 
scores is appropriate. In this study, we examined the validity of placement decisions, a technique that may 
not be an option for other FL contexts.5 In FL programs in which a previous placement test is not 
available (or is not in place), an alternative technique could be the yes/no Angoff method (Hsieh, 2013) 
that allows instructors—who oftentimes have a good sense of whether or not a given student belongs in a 
course—to establish several cut-off points in a single test by indicating at what point (in a test with items 
arranged from easiest to hardest) a borderline student would be able to answer a test item correctly.6 
Another point of discussion that is important to raise here is the pedagogical impact of designing and 
implementing a web-based test. Perhaps the most notable impact in the departmental context of the 
present study is the ability to keep test and course content more closely matched over time. The web-
based test offers the flexibility to update test content as minor adjustments to curriculum are made over 
time. Additionally, in a society that has been witness to an ever-increasing use of computer- and web-
based technologies, using an online test has the potential to deliver input and content in a manner that not 
only is familiar to language learners, but also mirrors the use of technology that learners are exposed to in 
the classroom. For instance, within the institutional context of the present study, instructors are 
increasingly moving to a web-based format for the design and delivery of course examinations. This 
pedagogical practice is one that has likely been influenced by current placement testing practices, which 
has proven to be an accessible and flexible means for test delivery. 
Conclusion 
This study has provided an examination of the evidence to support claims made about the intended 
interpretations and uses of scores based on a new web-based Spanish language placement test. 
Specifically, we employed an argument-based approach (Bachman, 2005) to objectively and logically link 
students’ scores on the test to actual placement in Spanish FL courses based on those scores. In doing so, 
we offer an accessible, replicable example for test validation to the many researchers and educators 
Avizia Y. Long, Sun-Young Shin, Kimberly Geeslin, and Erik W. Willis 151 
 
involved in the process of creating and assessing FL placement tests in similar institutions across the 
United States. The following three important limitations of our study should be considered. First, 
although a more thorough discussion of test development fell outside the scope of this study, this aspect 
of language placement testing should not be ignored when assessing test reliability and validity. 
Administrators and instructors who adapt our method for placement testing assessment should examine 
test development carefully—specifically, the procedure for setting cut-off scores, the relationship between 
any previous tests and the current test under development, and analyses of test scores (overall and by 
subsections, if applicable)—as a necessary prerequisite to investigating test reliability and validity (for an 
overview, see Bachman & Palmer, 1996). Second, issues of security are equally crucial to consider in the 
design and assessment of an online language test, particularly in medium- to high-stakes testing settings.7 
Administrators and instructors must consider this issue in the logistics of testing administration and 
address all potential concerns in the design, development, and use of online placement tests.8 Third, it is 
important to note that Bachman’s (2005) AUA model is quite exhaustive, covering a wide range of 
aspects of validity claims. Thus, there are other types of warrants and required backing and rebuttals not 
addressed in this study. For example, warrants and claims related to construct validity and relevance, 
utility, intended consequences, and sufficiency in the assessment utilization argument are not made or 
investigated. Such validity evidence should be further collected to support the claims about the intended 
test score interpretations and uses particularly for a high-stakes testing context in future studies. 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to acknowledge the student participants without whom this study would not have been 
possible. We also wish to thank Stephanie Dickinson for her assistance with statistics in an earlier version 
of this manuscript. Finally, we are grateful to the members of the SLRF 2013 audience and the Language 
Assessment Lab at Indiana University for their insightful comments and suggestions. All remaining errors 
are our own. 
Notes 
1. The items in the grammar section of the placement test were not evenly distributed by structure type 
(i.e., there was not an even number of copula, mood, aspect, etc. items). 
2. 23 students did not report their native language. 
3. As pointed out by an anonymous reviewer, Bachman and Palmer (2010) broke down AUA 
components into four different claims (assessment records, interpretation, decisions, and 
consequences), but our study is based on Bachman’s original AUA framework (Bachman, 2005). 
Note that there are no substantial differences between the two models, and his original one (Bachman, 
2005) has been more widely used, which makes this study more comparable with other studies using 
the AUA model for test validation. 
4. As pointed out by an anonymous reviewer, comparisons drawn between withdrawal or replacement 
rates for the paper- and web-based tests can be stronger with additional statistical support. Future 
studies should strive to incorporate statistical comparisons where possible. 
5. Additionally, as pointed out by an anonymous reviewer, it is important to address qualitative-based 
placement decisions (e.g., in the case of students who indicate that they have been misplaced and 
wish to be placed into a different course) in a reliable manner. Although we would like to provide a 
systematic decision procedure for such cases, this procedure may not be feasible across institutional 
settings, and it is likely that cases of replacement will need to be addressed on a case-by-case basis. 
However, a high number of misplacements may suggest the need for further evaluation (or 
reevaluation) of placement decisions based on tests scores (i.e., the quantitative-based method). 
6. The yes/no Angoff method is not without its limitations (for a review, see Cizek & Bunch, 2007); 
152 Language Learning & Technology 
 
however, it is logical and practical, and it has been shown to be used with confidence (Hsieh, 2013). 
7. Concerns about security are related to test reliability and validity, as pointed out by an anonymous 
reviewer. In our particular institutional context, students do not automatically receive credit for past 
Spanish courses. Thus, it is not in students’ best interest to cheat, as doing so would place them in a 
level beyond their ability. This is one method for dealing with the difficulty and cost of creating a 
secure exam, but security nonetheless should factor into the evaluation of a web-based placement test. 
8. An additional limitation of this study pointed out by an anonymous reviewer is the lack of interviews 
with administrators or students regarding withdrawals from courses in which students were placed. 
This is an excellent suggestion that we recommend testing administrators incorporate into their testing 
evaluation practices. 
References 
Bachman, L. F. (1990). Fundamental considerations in language testing. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press. 
Bachman, L. F. (2004). Statistical analysis for language assessment. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Bachman, L. F. (2005). Building and supporting a case for test use. Language Assessment Quarterly, 
2(1), 1–34. 
Bachman, L. F., & Palmer, A. S. (1996). Language testing in practice: Designing and developing useful 
language tests. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.  
Bachman, L. F., & Palmer, A. S. (2010). Language assessment in practice: Developing language 
assessments and justifying their use in the real world. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Shin, S.-Y. (2014). Expanding traditional testing measures with tasks from L2 
pragmatics research. Iranian Journal of Language Testing, 4, 26–49. 
Bernhardt, E. B., Rivera, R. J., & Kamil, M. L. (2004). The practicality and efficiency of web-based 
placement testing for college-level language programs. Foreign Language Annals, 37(3), 356–365. 
Bernstein, J., Van Moere, A., & Cheng, J. (2010). Validating automated speaking tests. Language 
Testing, 27, 355–377. 
Brown, J. D. (1989). Improving ESL placement tests using two perspectives. TESOL Quarterly, 23(1), 
65–83. 
Brown, J. D., & Hudson, T. (2002). Criterion-referenced language testing. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Carr, N. T. (2011). Designing and analyzing language tests. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Carr, N. T., & Xi, X. (2010). Automated scoring of short-answer reading items: Implications for 
constructs. Language Assessment Quarterly, 7, 205–218. 
Chapelle, C. A., & Douglas, D. (2006). Assessing language through computer technology. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Cizek, G. J., & Bunch, M. B. (2007). Standard setting: A guide to establishing and evaluating 
performance standards on tests. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Cohen, J. (1968). Weighted kappa: Nominal scale agreement with provision for scaled disagreement or 
partial credit. Psychological Bulletin, 70(4), 213–220. 
Avizia Y. Long, Sun-Young Shin, Kimberly Geeslin, and Erik W. Willis 153 
 
Cronbach, L. J. (1951). Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests. Psychometrika, 16(3), 297–
334. 
Davies, M. (2006). A frequency dictionary of Spanish: Core vocabulary for learners. New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Eda, S., Itomitsu, M., & Noda, M. (2008). The Japanese skills test as an on-demand placement test: 
Validity comparisons and reliability. Foreign Language Annals, 41(2), 218–236. 
Elder, C., & Randow, J. V. (2008). Exploring the utility of a web-based English language screening tool. 
Language Assessment Quarterly, 5, 173–194. 
Fleiss, J. L. (1981). Statistical methods for rates and proportions (2nd ed.). New York, NY: John Wiley. 
Frantzen, D. (2009). Lazos: Gramática y vocabulario a través de la literatura. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall. 
Fulcher, G. (1997). An English language placement test: Issues in reliability and validity. Language 
Testing, 14(2), 113–138. 
Fulcher, G., & Davidson, F. (2007). Language testing and assessment: An advanced resource book. New 
York, NY: Routledge. 
Geeslin, K. L. (Ed.). (2013). The handbook of Spanish second language acquisition. Malden, MA: Wiley. 
Green, A. (2012). Placement testing. In C. Coombe, B. O’Sullivan, P. Davidson, & S. Stoynoff (Eds.), 
The Cambridge guide to language assessment (pp. 164–170). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Heining-Boynton, A. L., Leloup, J. W., & Cowell, G. S. (2010a). ¡Anda! Curso intermedio. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Heining-Boynton, A. L., Leloup, J. W., & Cowell, G. S. (2010b). ¡Anda! Curso intermedio Volume II. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Holton, J. S., Hadlich, R. L., & Gómez-Estrada, N. (2001). Spanish grammar in review (3rd ed.). Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Hsieh, M. (2013). Comparing yes/no Angoff and Bookmark standard setting methods in the context of 
English assessment. Language Assessment Quarterly, 10, 331–350. 
Huff, K. L., & Sireci, S. G. (2001). Validity issues in computer-based testing. Educational Measurement: 
Issues and Practices, 20, 16–25. 
Jia, Y. (2013). Justifying the use of a second language oral test as an exit test in Hong Kong: An 
application of assessment use argument framework (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA. 
Kane, M. T. (1992). An argument-based approach to validity. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 527–535. 
Kane, M. T. (2011). Validating score interpretations and uses: Messick Lecture, Language Testing 
Research Colloquium, Cambridge, April 2010. Language Testing, 29(1), 3–17. 
Kane, M. T., & Brennan, R. L. (1980). Agreement coefficients as indices of dependability for domain-
referenced tests. Applied Psychological Measurement, 4, 105–126. 
Kline, P. (2000). The handbook of psychological testing (2nd ed.). London, UK: Routledge. 
Llosa, L. (2008). Building and supporting a validity argument for a standards-based classroom assessment 
of English proficiency based on teacher judgments. Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice, 
27(3), 32–42. 
154 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Messick, S. (1989). Validity. In R. L. Linn (Ed.), Educational measurement (3rd ed., pp. 13–103). New 
York, NY: American Council on Education and Macmillan Publishing Company. 
Ockey, G. J. (2007). Construct implications of including still image or video in computer-based listening 
tests. Language Testing, 24, 517–537. 
Ockey, G. J. (2009). Developments and challenges in the use of computer-based testing for assessing 
second language ability. Modern Language Journal, 93, 836–847. 
Pardo-Ballester, C. (2010). The validity argument of a web-based Spanish listening exam: Test usefulness 
evaluation. Language Assessment Quarterly, 7, 137–159. 
Roever, C. (2001). Web-based language testing. Language Learning & Technology, 5(2), 84–94. 
https://dx.doi.org/10125/25129  
Shin, S.-Y. (2008). Examining the construct validity of a web-based academic listening test: An 
investigation of the effects of constructed response formats in a listening test. The Spaan Fellowship 
Working Papers in Second or Foreign Language, 6, 95–129. 
Shin, S.-Y. (2012). Web-based language testing. In C. Coombe, B. O’Sullivan, P. Davidson, & S. 
Stoynoff (Eds.), The Cambridge guide to language assessment (pp. 274–279). Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Toulmin, S. E. (2003). The uses of argument (2nd ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
University of Wisconsin Center for Placement Testing. (2011). Spanish placement test. Retrieved from 
http://testing.wisc.edu/centerpages/spanishtest.html 
VanPatten, B., Lee, J. F., Ballman, T. L., & Farley, A. P. (2010). Vistazos: Un curso breve (3rd ed.). 
Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill. 
Wagner, E. (2010). The effect of the use of video texts on ESL listening test-taker performance. 
Language Testing, 27, 493–513. 
Wall, D., Clapham, C., & Alderson, J. C. (1994). Evaluating a placement test. Language Testing, 11(3), 
321–344. 
Wang, H., Choi, I., Schmidgall, J., & Bachman, L. F. (2012). Review of Pearson Test of English 
Academic: Building an assessment use argument. Language Testing, 29(4), 603–619. 
Way, W. D., & McClarty, K. L. (2012). Standard setting for computer-based assessments. In G. J. Cizek 
(Ed.), Setting performance standards (2nd ed., pp. 451–466). New York, NY: Taylor & Francis. 
Williamson, D. M., Bejar, I. I., & Sax, A. (2004). Automated tools for subject matter expert evaluation of 
automated scoring. Applied Measurement in Education, 17, 323–357. 
Wren, D. (2005). Spanish grammar: A quick reference (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Pearson Education.  
Avizia Y. Long, Sun-Young Shin, Kimberly Geeslin, and Erik W. Willis 155 
 
Appendix. Summary of Course Objectives and Content for First Year Spanish, 
Second Year Spanish I, Second Year Spanish II, and Spanish Grammar in Context 
Course 
Summary of Course 
Objectives Summary of Content for All Class Meetings 
First Year 
Spanisha 
Describe, narrate, ask, and 
answer questions related to 
everyday topics in Spanish; 
comprehend main idea and 
some supporting details in 
spoken Spanish related to 
authentic situations in daily 
life; write short texts on 
familiar topics; recognize 
cross-cultural differences and 
appreciate perspectives and 
peoples of the Spanish-
speaking world 
Topics: self-introduction; school and studying; daily 
routines; weather; family; age; describing and 
comparing people; food and eating habits; health; 
culture-specific examples of topics previously listed 
 
Linguistic structures: ser (to be); hay (there is, there 
are); present tense; hobbies and activities; preterit; 
estar (to be) + adjectives; direct and indirect object 
pronouns; comparatives and superlatives; 
reflexives; passive constructions; gustar-type verbs 
(to be pleasing) 
Second Year 
Spanish I 
Improve basic communicative 
competence in Spanish, 
including listening, speaking, 
reading, and writing; provide 
practical vocabulary and 
communicative situations; 
move students to higher 
proficiency levels; focus on 
contemporary Spanish-
speaking culture; increase 
awareness of cross-cultural 
differences of perspectives and 
peoples of the Spanish-
speaking world 
Topics: descriptions of people and personality; 
pastimes; objects and activities in and around the 
home; celebrations and events; traveling; culture-
specific examples of topics previously listed 
 
Linguistic structures: gustar-type verbs; preterit; 
present perfect; present subjunctive; formal and 
informal imperatives; definite and indefinite 
articles; estar + past participles; preterit vs. 
imperfect; past perfect; relative pronouns 
Second Year 
Spanish II 
Improve basic communicative 
competence in Spanish, 
including listening, speaking, 
reading, and writing; provide 
practical vocabulary and 
communicative situations; 
move students to higher 
proficiency levels; focus on 
contemporary Spanish-
speaking culture; increase 
awareness of cross-cultural 
differences of perspectives and 
peoples of the Spanish-
speaking world 
Topics: environment; professional settings and the 
workplace; art; objects and living things of the 
world; health; culture-specific examples of topics 
previously listed 
 
Linguistic structures: ser and estar; subjunctive; 
progressive tenses; future tense; conditional tense; 
demonstrative adjectives; if clauses; prepositions; 
imperfect subjunctive; past perfect subjunctive; 
reflexive verbs; reciprocal and passive constructions 
156 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Spanish Grammar 
in Context 
Strengthen comprehension and 
application of challenging 
grammatical structures within a 
meaningful language context 
Topics: expressing likes and preferences; 
describing; narrating in the past; plans and dreams 
for the future; talking about probability in the past 
and present; expressing desires, expectations, and 
emotional reactions; talking about the passing of 
time; argumentative discourse 
 
Linguistic structures: descriptive adjectives and 
their placement; ser vs. estar vs. haber (to exist); 
preterit vs. imperfect of saber (to know), conocer 
(to know), and other verbs; subjunctive vs. 
indicative in all clause types; uses of the future and 
the conditional tenses; subjunctive and sequence of 
tenses; expressions of time with hacer (to make, to 
do); por vs. para; passive constructions; if clauses 
aBecause this course covers all objectives and content of Elementary Spanish and Elementary Spanish II, the 
objectives and content of those two courses are not provided here. 
About the Authors 
Avizia Y. Long (PhD, Indiana University) is Visiting Assistant Professor of Spanish at Texas Tech 
University. Her research interests include (L2) variation, L2 phonetics and phonology, and pronunciation 
in task-based language teaching. She is co-author of Sociolinguistics and Second Language Acquisition: 
Learning to Use Language in Context (Routledge, 2014). 
E-mail: avizia.long@ttu.edu 
Sun-Young Shin is Associate Professor in the Department of Second Language Studies at Indiana 
University. His research interests include test bias, standard setting, and rater behaviors. His work has 
been published in Language Testing, Language Teaching Research, Assessing Writing, and ReCALL. 
E-mail: shin36@indiana.edu 
Kimberly L. Geeslin (PhD, University of Arizona) is Professor at Indiana University. She co-authored 
Sociolinguistics and Second Language Acquisition (Routledge, 2014) and edited The Handbook of 
Spanish Second Language Acquisition (Wiley-Blackwell, 2013). Her research appears in Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, Language Learning, Hispania, Spanish in Context, Linguistics, and SHLL. 
E-mail: kgeeslin@indiana.edu 
Erik W. Willis is Associate Professor of Hispanic Linguistics at Indiana University. His research 
investigates Spanish phonetics and phonology from a laboratory approach and uses acoustic measures to 
characterize the sounds and systems in question. His research primarily investigates variation in the 
Spanish system, but also includes learner populations. 
E-mail: ewwillis@indiana.edu 
