Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2018, Volume 22, Issue 3 
pp. 45–64 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Stéphanie Roussel & Jean-Philippe Galan 
 
 
Can clicker use support learning in a dual-focused 
second language German course? 
Stéphanie Roussel, University of Bordeaux 
Jean-Philippe Galan, University of Bordeaux 
Abstract 
This study investigated clicker-use impact in a legal German lecture, given to 65 French students of Law 
in which the learning focus was both language and content. 36 participants who attended the entire course 
were tested. Upon their introductory session, students took a preliminary two-fold multiple-choice 
questionnaire involving 16 questions on legal terminology and 16 on course content. Throughout the 10-
week semester, the lecturer administered all questions during regular courses. Each weekly session was 
conducted alternately with or without clickers. Students answered half of the questions about language and 
content using clickers, whereas the remaining half involved standard conditions with volunteers raising 
their hands to answer. At the end of their term, students took the same initial questionnaire as a post-test. 
A quantitative analysis was performed to assess (a) the enhancement of the acquisition of legal terminology 
and course content through clicker use and (b) the impact of learners’ pre-test scores on learning gains 
regarding terminology and content with or without clickers. The clicker group outperformed the non-clicker 
group with regard to a post-test concerning legal terminology. The findings demonstrate that clicker use 
alleviates the cognitive load induced by learning both new terminology and content. 
Keywords: Assessment, Testing, Language for Special Purposes 
Language(s) Learned in This Study: German 
APA Citation: Roussel, S., & Galan, J.-P. (2018). Can clicker use support learning in a dual-focused 
second language German course? Language Learning & Technology, 22(3), 45–64. 
https://doi.org/10125/44656 
Introduction 
An ever-increasing number of studies on clicker use demonstrates the impact of individual voting system 
technology within a wide range of learning contexts (Blasco-Arcas, Buil, Hernandez-Ortega, & Sese, 2013; 
Chien, Chang, & Chang, 2016; Lantz & Stawiski, 2014). Clickers come in the shape of individual, small 
box-like devices handed out to students prior to the lecture course. Each device is electronically connected 
to the lecturer’s computer system. Course material is delivered using a slide show involving interactive 
multiple-choice (MC) questions. Meanwhile, the lecturer receives immediate computer access to a graphic 
rendering of the students’ answers, thus allowing for immediate feedback and discussion with the students 
based on their answers. Hence, the lecturer is able to provide them with additional key information 
whenever needed, so as to spare them from any possible course-content misappropriation. Substantial 
research into the effect of this device on learning has been carried out over the past decade in several fields, 
such as educational psychology (Brady, Seli, & Rosenthal, 2013), nursing (Patterson, Kilpatrick, & 
Woebkenberg, 2010), social sciences (Blasco-Arcas et al. 2013), and management (Rana, Dwivedi, & Al-
Khowaiter, 2016). However, few papers dedicated to the use of electronic voting systems have concentrated 
on second language learning (Cutrim Schmid, 2008). 
The present study focused on language and content learning in the context of a German second language 
lecture course attended by 65 first-year French Law students. Students enrolled in higher-level education 
programs are increasingly required to attend second language courses within their major field of studies 
46 Language Learning & Technology 
 
(Haswell & Lee, 2013), law being a case in point. The lecture, which was given by one of the authors of 
the present study, involved the following two goals: (a) to foster and improve the mastery of legal 
terminology and (b) to enhance comprehensive understanding of German legal institutions with regard to 
their specific historical and cultural settings. Given the number of students attending the course, and 
considering its dual-focus pedagogical approach, we chose to integrate technology into our instructional 
design. Our goal was thus to determine whether the use of clickers could enhance the learning of both 
language and content. Consequently, the course was designed as a series of 30-minute oral lectures on legal 
matters (fundamental rights, basic law, constitutional court decisions). To facilitate understanding of both 
language and content, students took a legal terminology MC test prior to each lecture in order to alleviate 
cognitive load due to their lack of knowledge regarding the specific legal terminology that was to be used 
in the subsequent presentation. At the end of the lecturer's presentation, the students took an additional MC 
test to evaluate and promote their understanding of the legal content of the presentation and to promote top-
down listening comprehension processes. Every other session, students answered questions through clicker 
use. Consequently, over the 10-week semester, five sessions were conducted with clickers and five sessions 
without, alternating. To measure learning gains concerning both language and content, both with and 
without clickers, all the participants took the same MC test involving 32 questions about legal terminology 
and content at the beginning (pre-test) and at the end (post-test) of the 10-week semester. 
Prior to presenting protocol and results, we wish to review the literature concerning second language 
learning with technology and the use of clickers and to delineate the theoretical foundations on which we 
base the following research hypotheses: (a) The use of clickers is likely to improve learners’ upgraded 
understanding and memorization of both specific terminology and cultural content. (b) The efficiency of 
clickers depends on the learners’ initial levels and on the nature of the questions raised, be they content- or 
terminology-related. Since such key pedagogical issues have seldom been considered in relation to 
implemented clicker use, we contend that a German second language lecture course provides an appropriate 
experimental field to further probe such research issues. Indeed, the fact that teachers have to design MC 
questions, which are at the same time adapted to their learning objectives and tailored to audience electronic 
response systems, is seen as one of the most difficult challenges teachers face whenever they choose to use 
this device (Kay & LeSage, 2009). 
Literature Review 
Supporting Language Learning With Technology 
Supporting language and learning with technology remains congruent with numerous publications to date 
(Chun, 2016). Within the scope of our French higher-level educational environment, languages are 
consistently included as an integral part of students’ curricula, even though they may follow different tracks 
such as sciences or law, for instance. However, the relevance of implementing language major lecture 
courses addressed to a sizeable number of students (about 50 for German and sometimes over 100 for 
English as a second language) remains a subject of debate (Brudermann & Poteaux, 2015), insofar as it is 
hardly prone to fostering interactive practice per se—a key feature in terms of efficient language learning. 
Moreover, the number of students tends to prove somewhat inhibiting in terms of individual practice 
allowing for active production of answers—known as the generation effect. It is indeed noteworthy that 
generating an answer fosters active memory enhancement, rather than simply choosing one of a given set 
of options (Lutz, Briggs, & Cain, 2003). 
We fully endorse the need for adjustments to lecture courses relying on integrated clicker use and for 
evaluation of their induced learning benefits. In one of her latest publications, Chun (2016) underscores the 
crucial issue that needs to be addressed: “under what conditions and for whom” (p. 98) is technology-based 
instruction effective? In keeping with recent papers, we claim that technology-based adjustments to German 
lecture courses are both relevant and highly valuable insofar as appropriate technological tools are selected 
“to achieve sound pedagogical processes and outcomes” (Felix, 2003, p. 9). We therefore implemented a 
clicker-use practice, since earlier generations of students failed to grasp the intricacies of the German legal 
Stéphanie Roussel and Jean-Philippe Galan 47 
 
system offered to them in German for two reasons: (a) the German system was new to the students as well 
as complex in its workings, and (b) the learners lacked mastery of its distinctive legal idioms. 
Clicker Use Applied to Standard Lecture Courses and Language Lectures 
Numerous schools of arts and sciences have implemented clicker use to promote student–lecturer 
interactive learning processes. With reference to the latest statistical findings, Chien et al. (2016) underscore 
that “tens of thousands of courses worldwide are now being conducted with the addition of clickers” (p. 2). 
In a literature review on classroom response systems, Fies and Marshall (2006) observe that the exploration 
of this technology deserves to be more rigorous and that audience response systems “promote learning 
when coupled with appropriate pedagogical methodology” (p. 106). Since their literature review, several 
well-designed studies have substantiated the effectiveness of such an audience response system (e.g., 
Blasco-Arcas et al., 2013; Lantz & Stawiski, 2014; Morling, McAuliffe, Cohen, & D’Lorenzo, 2008; 
Patterson et al., 2010). However, in their meta-analysis, Chien et al. (2016) also call for extended empirical 
studies measuring students’ learning gains, reaching beyond the scope of self-reported measures. 
Lamine and Petit (2014) analyzed the impact of electronic voting devices in lecture courses conducted in 
Physics. They probed teaching-learning concept acquisition as well as students’ cognitive involvement. 
Moreover, they ran a cross-analysis of learners’ performances among different pools of students while the 
same course was being taught with and without clickers. They measured the normalized learning gains of 
students’ performances between the pre-test and the post-test. In the present study, we adopted the same 
method to measure learning gains. Lamine and Petit observed that “teacher–learner as well as peer-to-peer 
interactions enhance effective in-depth material acquisition” (p. 144, translated). Such results are congruent 
with the constructivist approach, whereby learners must actively learn new material and relate it to 
previously acquired knowledge (Lantz & Stawiski, 2014). Moreover, another study by Kay and LeSage 
(2009) substantiated earlier conclusions about the effectiveness of clickers. The authors reported 
incremental benefits drawn from extensive clicker use, namely high course attendance rates, improved 
concentration, greater course involvement, peer interaction, a collaborative approach to knowledge 
expansion, optimized exam performances, and acquisition enhancement. Overall, clicker use has been 
shown to improve student cognition. Some researchers have even hypothesized that meta-cognition (i.e., 
learning task self-regulation processes during the lecture course) can also be influenced by the use of this 
technology (Mayer et al., 2009). 
Researchers in psychology have demonstrated additional benefits of testing students frequently (Roediger, 
Putnam, & Smith, 2011). Among other advantages, students who take regular tests are likely to display 
easier memory-retrieval processes, a feature that leads to better performance on later tests: 
Quizzes also enable students to discover gaps in their knowledge and focus study efforts on difficult 
material; furthermore, when students study after taking a test, they learn more from the study episode 
than if they had not taken the test. (Roediger et al., 2011, p. 2) 
As underscored above, few studies concerning clicker use have been carried out in the field of second 
language learning. Cutrim Schmid’s (2008) paper is particularly interesting in the context of the present 
research, even though it focuses on learning English as a foreign language rather than German. She used a 
variety of questions “to support a wide range of classroom activities … to find out what students already 
know about the theme … or foster their curiosity about a certain topic” (p. 344). In her case, clickers were 
also used to launch discussions and stimulate debate or to evaluate students’ level of understanding before 
implementing pedagogical decisions. In keeping with investigations conducted in other fields, she 
concluded that the voting system was “an important pedagogical tool which allowed the students to check 
their performance and their standing amongst peers” (p. 132). She further stressed the need for extended 
research to assess the pedagogical value of clickers in language courses. Insofar as we chose to probe 
clicker-use-dependent question-design requirements, our aim was therefore to show that both content and 
language could be taught efficiently by using clickers. 
48 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Theoretical Framework 
Simultaneous Second Language and Content Learning 
Legal German lectures for native students of French Law aim to provide learners with specific cultural 
knowledge about the German legal institutions and system while simultaneously fostering specific legal 
language competencies. Learners are expected to grasp the main features of the German political and legal 
establishment, acquire a thorough appreciation of major cross-cultural differences (i.e., German vs. French), 
master legal terminology, and exhibit aural and oral comprehension skills while developing extended 
cultural knowledge. With the consent of Law School language faculty, we left out advanced-level language 
practical workshops as they provide scope for further improvement in the second- and third-year programs 
based on the teaching of other language competencies such as oral and writing skills. As previously stated, 
the participants to the present study were first-year students. 
Furthermore, content and language integrated learning (CLIL) is to be differentiated from language for 
specific purposes (LSP). In theory, the distinction seems straightforward enough: CLIL is defined as a dual-
focused educational approach whereby additional language is dedicated to learning and teaching both 
content and language (Mehisto, Marsh, & Frigols, 2008). In contrast, LSP lays greater emphasis on 
language per se, as it focuses on students’ linguistic needs. Yet, with respect to earlier findings, we believe 
that, under educational conditions such as ours, “this distinction is considerably obscured by the fact that 
learners, who are relatively proficient in the target language, are also pre-service and lacking in subject 
knowledge” (Poręcka, 2011, p. 1). Moreover, we contend that students “have a strong and fully 
understandable expectation for a highly contextualized and cognitively demanding language instruction, 
which would contain a considerable subject content component related to … legal systems” (Poręcka, 2011, 
p. 1). 
Consequently, content-based language instruction exceeds merely stockpiling specific language and 
content learning. Indeed, both components are interwoven and inseparable insofar as “an additional or 
foreign language, for both the teachers and the learners, is used as the medium for instruction” (Pérez-Vidal 
& Roquet, 2015, p. 81). However, for pedagogical and experimental reasons we adopted a shortcut, namely 
the distinction between legal terminology and cultural content learning, respectively, in order to design test 
protocols accordingly: questions concerning legal terminology (10 minutes) presented to the students prior 
to the teacher’s short (30 minutes) course content delivery, and questions on course content right after the 
lecture (10 minutes). Moreover, such a practical split-protocol further complied with the following 
observation by Haswell and Lee (2013): 
The difficulties second-language learners have in lecture situations stem from the fact that they are not 
simply burdened with content, they are also dealing with several tasks that require linguistic and 
cognitive skills to interpret lecture contents, and choose what to record and what to ignore—all of this 
done throughout a real-time monologue (Thompson, 2003). (p. 17) 
A Cognitive Challenge 
In keeping with cognitive load theory (Paas & Sweller, 2014; Sweller, Ayres, & Kalyuga, 2011), we argue 
that simultaneously learning two sets of “secondary knowledge” (Kyun, Kalyuga, & Sweller, 2013, p. 387) 
areas (i.e., foreign language and domain-specific content knowledge) is prone to overloading working 
memory (Geary, 2008; Roussel, Joulia, Tricot, & Sweller, 2017). We wish to highlight the relevance of a 
clicker-based teaching practice to promote both language and content acquisition. Cognitive load may 
hence be alleviated by eliminating extraneous load through pedagogical engineering while preserving 
intrinsic load (i.e., learning goals). We therefore contend that technology—and notably clicker use—is 
likely to alleviate the overall cognitive load induced by simultaneous processing of both language and 
content acquisition. 
To solve the pedagogical issue of learning new specific legal terms with optimal efficiency, we refer to 
Mayer’s (2014) multimedia principle. Mayer claims that people succeed in achieving in-depth knowledge 
Stéphanie Roussel and Jean-Philippe Galan 49 
 
acquisition from the oral and visual forms combined, rather than from either the visual or oral form alone. 
We therefore infer that graphically displaying the breakdown of students’ answers helps them to retain the 
correct meaning of a given legal term, while enabling them to appreciate both its oral and written features 
and to visually memorize the correct answer. One of the principles of Mayer’s theory is the redundancy 
principle. If students have enough time to process a visual presentation and if a related oral form of the 
answer is difficult for the learner to understand (as with foreign language learning), the visual text should 
help learners construct the meaning of legal terms. We thus argue that the use of clickers can promote 
student–teacher interactivity (see Blasco-Arcas et al., 2013) while backing up the multimodal presentation 
of course items. Provided there is no evidence of any redundancy in terms of information displayed through 
several means (Kalyuga & Sweller, 2014) and as long as the technology (i.e., the clicker device) is easy to 
use and does not overload working memory, there is a potential learning gain. However, when computer-
based devices require intricate strategic decision-making of the learners, they are likely to overload the 
cognitive resources used for learning (Roussel, 2011). We wish to highlight such potential problems within 
the scope of our teaching–learning double track research: the use of voting devices is primarily aimed at 
easing the dual tasks of simultaneous legal terminology and German course content acquisition. Hence, we 
suppose that clicker use will enhance learning gain among students. 
Inasmuch as our pool of law students was expected to process an oral German lecture on distinctive German 
legal matters, the issue of the cognitive load was brought up, due to the fact that low-level listening 
processes do not occur automatically enough. As previously evidenced (Vandergrift & Goh, 2012), the 
development of second language listening comprehension skills involves both bottom-up processes (i.e., 
direct manipulation of language, such as segmentation or mental translation) and top-down processes (i.e., 
activation of prior knowledge and integration of new information in long-term memory) to build meaning. 
In order to achieve successful understanding of a talk delivered in a second language as a prerequisite for 
learning, bottom-up processes have to occur automatically because of the limited capacity of working 
memory (Baddeley, 2002). If bottom-up processes require considerable attention to process small units of 
meaning, the activation of top-down processes is likely to be impaired. This may, in turn, considerably alter 
the construction of meaning. In other words, our claim implies that second language listeners who do not 
process the lecturer's talk swiftly enough are unable to process meaningful information units in working 
memory; nor can they adequately activate efficient top-down processes. Hence, we formulated the first 
hypothesis that clicker use will lead to higher learning gain than no clicker use (H1). We also wanted to 
investigate if clicker use would lead to higher learning gains with reference to legal terminology acquisition 
(H1.1) and to effective course content appropriation through the process of constructing global meaning 
(H1.2). 
According to Sweller and Chandler (1994), “a heavy cognitive load is imposed when dealing with material 
that has a high level of element interactivity” (p. 185). In other words, it is easier to learn separate 
information items (e.g., specific legal terms) than to learn a substantial amount of interrelated elements (i.e., 
content of the course). Chen, Kalyuga, and Sweller (2015) also suggest that the active production of answers 
(i.e., the generation effect) is applicable for low-element interactivity materials, whereas the worked 
example effect occurs for complex, high-element interactivity materials that impose a heavy working 
memory load. Hence, we hypothesize that the impact of clickers will be affected by the nature of the 
question focus areas (i.e., language- or content-related). We contend, therefore, that focus areas (i.e., 
terminology or content) will moderate clicker-use impact (H2). Since learning individual language items is 
likely less demanding than learning highly interactive content material, we further speculate about the added 
benefits to be drawn from clicker use for legal terminology questions (H2.1) as opposed to content (H2.2). 
Differences in listening strategies between higher-skilled and lower-skilled learners have also been widely 
investigated (Chamot & Küpper, 1989; Field, 2001; Vandergrift, 2003). Studies have shown that less-
skilled students resort to cognitive strategies that rely more on top-down processes than their counterparts, 
who tend to use listening meta-cognitive strategies. Skilled learners “focused on important upcoming 
content (selective attention) while continuing to use relevant information (elaboration) to help them 
understand, confirming and, if necessary, revising their predictions (monitoring) as they went along” 
50 Language Learning & Technology 
 
(Vandergrift, 2003, p. 466). Therefore, we argue that students’ pre-test results will account for level 
discrepancies, a point we chose to address under the following hypotheses: Students’ initial level 
(preliminary test score) will exert a distinctive impact over learning processes, either with or without 
clickers (H3), and likewise, over learning terminology and content, either with or without clickers (H3.1). 
The Study 
Research Hypotheses 
We chose to differentiate two distinctive question-focus areas: (a) MC questions dedicated to legal 
terminology whereby students were presented with four alternative legal definitions to choose from (see 
Table 1) and (b) MC questions focusing on course content (see Table 2). The items related to legal 
terminology were disclosed prior to the teacher’s presentations to allow for easier processing of the course 
material. The items related to legal content were presented after the lecture to assess and encourage proper 
understanding. The course involved ten 2-hour long sessions (each lesson lasted 50 minutes). Every other 
session, students used voting clickers, whereas in all other sessions questions were presented as an integral 
part of the lecturer’s slideshow; students were then free to volunteer answers orally. 
Since our aim was to improve students’ knowledge of legal terminology and course material acquisition, 
our hypotheses were as follows: 
H1: Clicker use will lead to higher learning gain than no clicker use. 
H1.1: Clicker use will lead to higher learning gain on questions relating to legal terminology than no 
clicker use. 
H1.2: Clicker use will lead to higher learning gain on content-related questions than no clicker use. 
H2: Question focus area (i.e., terminology vs. content) will moderate clicker-use impact. 
H2.1: Clicker use will lead to better gain of legal terminology than of content. 
H2.2: Terminology and content learning gain will level off without clicker use. 
H3: Students’ initial level of knowledge (preliminary test score) will exert a distinctive impact over 
learning processes, whether with or without clickers. 
H3.1: Students’ initial level (preliminary test score) will exert a distinctive impact over terminology 
and content acquisition, whether with or without clickers. 
Context 
Among 65 Law School students and German language learners (Levels B1–C1 according to the Common 
European framework of reference for languages; Council of Europe, 2001) who had signed up for the 
lecture course, 36 attended the entire course over a full semester. During the first lecture, they were required 
to take a preliminary MC questionnaire including all 16 questions on specific legal semantics (Table 1) and 
16 questions on the cultural course content (Table 2) to be covered subsequently (i.e., during the 10 weeks 
of lecture; see Appendix A). 
Students further took a questionnaire akin to standard technology acceptance model (TAM; Davis, 1989) 
intended to appraise pedagogical relevance as well as electronic clicker ease of use. Its goal was mainly to 
assess whether clicker use would generate any cognitive cost for the learners. 
  
Stéphanie Roussel and Jean-Philippe Galan 51 
 
Table 1. Example of a Legal Terminology-Related Question 
Question in German Translation in English 
Die Sukzessivadoption ist: 
a) die Adoption eines Kindes, das der andere 
Partner bereits adoptiert hat 
b) die Adoption mehrerer Kinder 
c) die Adoption des leiblichen Kindes des Partners 
d) die Adoption eines Kindes im Ausland 
Successive adoption is: 
a) the adoption of a child who has already been 
taken on by the other partner 
b) the adoption of several children 
c) the adoption of the partner's biological child 
d) The adoption of a child in another land 
Table 2. Example of a Content-related Question 
Question in German Translation in English 
Welche Gerichtsbarkeit ist in Deutschland für 
Konflikte über Elterngeld zuständig? 
a) Die Arbeitsgerichtsbarkeit 
b) Die Sozialgerichtsbarkeit 
c) Die ordentliche Gerichtsbarkeit 
d) Die Verwaltungsgerichtsbarkeit 
Which jurisdiction is responsible for conflicts 
over parental allowance in Germany? 
a) The labor jurisdiction 
b) The social jurisdiction 
c) The ordinary jurisdiction 
d) The administrative jurisdiction 
As stated above, all of the questions were addressed by the lecturer throughout the entire semester. Every 
other session, students used voting clickers, whereas in all remaining sessions they were given the 
opportunity to answer orally in keeping with standard lecture course conditions. Questions were designed 
to both ease and check learners’ language as well as their structural grasp of the legal establishment and 
relevant proceedings covered throughout the lecture course. The final exam consisted of a post-test in which 
students were required to answer the same questions about legal terminology and content raised in the pre-
test taken 5 months earlier: the post-test was exactly the same MC test as the pre-test. This was done to 
preclude any novelty effect bias (see Chien et al., 2016). 
Methods 
Following Hake (1998) and Lamine and Petit (2014), we measured knowledge acquisition by assessing 
normalized gain (g) as follows: g = (%Post - %Pre) ÷ (100 - %Pre) where %Pre and %Post represent the 
percentage of correct answers displayed in the pre- and post-tests, respectively. The numerator represents 
the gross gain figure whereas the denominator precludes any bias induced by initial level differences. 
Hence, the normalized gain measures “the course material acquisition portion relative to pre-course lack of 
knowledge” (Lamine & Petit, 2014, p. 134). 
As stated above, the same students participated in both experimental modalities, providing us with paired 
samples and allowing a mean comparison. Each question from the post-test was addressed to all students 
one week with and one week without clickers, alternately. Such a protocol enabled us to avoid any item 
exposure bias. Chien et al. (2016), referring to Anthis (2011), emphasize that “the positive results of clicker-
integrated instruction may be merely caused by unequal exposure to test items between experimental (i.e., 
clicker-integrated instruction) and control (i.e., conventional lectures) groups” (Chien et al., 2016, p. 4). 
Results 
Preliminary Tests 
Prior to exploring our hypotheses, we wished to ensure the reliability of our test and also ensure that the 
findings were not affected by the experimental conditions. Internal reliability was computed with a Split-
52 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Half Spearman-Brown procedure. Results (r = .66; p < .000) showed the good reliability of our MC test. A 
means statistical test (paired samples t-test) conducted on pre-test scores of the questions to be addressed 
with clickers (W)1 and without clicker (N) did not show any significant difference between scores in 
experimental cells (MW = 8.31, SDW = 2.82; MN = 8.92, SDN = 2.93; difference: 0.61; t = 1.56; p > .05). We 
further investigate whether clicker ease-of-use had an effect on learning gain efficiency. Using clickers 
could indeed generate some additional cognitive load induced by the mere handling of such an electronic 
device and hence affect acquisition processing. The TAM model (see Appendix B) could therefore be used 
in such a setting. Using this model, criteria such as usefulness and ease-of-use perceptions were applied in 
a French-speaking setting involving the implementation of computer resources within university-level 
curricula (Galan, Giraud, & Meyer-Waarden, 2013). Such criteria had been successfully tested previously 
in order to assess their reliability in a context like ours: results yielded heretofore substantiate their 
relevance.2 A multiple regression analysis demonstrated that the sense of perceived ease-of-use and 
usefulness exerted no impact over learning gain among clicker-based answers. It is indeed noteworthy that 
with only 3.80% explained variance, there appeared to be correlation neither between ease-of-use and 
acquisition gain (p > .05), nor between perceived clicker usefulness and acquisition gain (p > .05). The 
findings demonstrated that even though a given learner may be responsive to clicker usefulness or ease-of-
use, he or she learned neither more nor less than a student who would be adverse to it. Learners were 
requested to evaluate clicker ease-of-use: scores exhibited high-ranking results (i.e., 4.81 out of 5.00). Thus, 
one may legitimately infer that conditions for clicker use induced no additional cognitive cost. 
Validation of Hypotheses Probing 
H1. Clicker Use Will Lead to Higher Learning Gain Than No Clicker Use 
The test scores were analyzed using a series of means comparison analyses of learning gains yielded with 
clicker use versus without, considering the distinctive question fields (legal terminology-related and 
content-related). Findings are presented in Table 3. Analyses reveal a narrower distribution of the data 
relative to means of the gain (g) achieved in the context of clicker use throughout the entire set of questions 
raised, whether legal terminology- or content-oriented. Answers provided through clicker use appear less 
prone to individual variations. 
Table 3. Acquisition Gain With Clickers Versus Without Clickers 
 W  N  Difference 
 M SD  M SD  t df p 
Questions (entire set) 46.70% 0.36  18.84% 0.46  3.64 35 .001*** 
Legal terminology-related 
questions 
59.35% 0.53  15.60% 0.86  3.12 35 .004** 
Content-related questions 37.81% 0.38  13.48% 0.72  1.76 35 .086 
**p ˂ 0.01, ***p < 0.001 
As regards the entire set of questions, figures for clicker-based gain far exceeded results obtained without 
clicker use (H1): W = 46.70%, N = 18.84%, resulting in a p < .001 significant difference. These results 
confirmed our hypothesis about acquisition gain due to clicker use. Likewise, congruent evidence was 
found regarding legal terminology acquisition (H1.1): W = 59.35% gain, N = 15.60% gain. This resulted 
in a p < .01 significant difference. However, with reference to content-oriented questions, results revealed 
higher gains with clicker use (H1.2): W = 37.81% gain, N = 13.48%. Still, there was no significant 
difference (p > .05). Thus, our results supported hypotheses H1 and H1.1; hypothesis H1.2 was rejected. 
Even though the data provided clear-cut evidence of overall clicker-use efficiency, optimal gains were 
obtained with legal terminology acquisition, whereas content learning gain was not as great. Whether the 
discrepancy in legal terminology and content gain was significant is addressed in our next section. 
Stéphanie Roussel and Jean-Philippe Galan 53 
 
H2. Question Focus Area Will Moderate Clicker-Use Impact 
Since our investigation used paired samples, we compared mean gains. Under clicker-use conditions (H2.1), 
terminology acquisition gain (59.35%) exceeded content gain (37.81%), resulting in a p < .05 significant 
difference. Whenever clickers were not used (H2.2), legal terminology acquisition gain (15.60%) and 
content gain (13.48%) were not significantly different (p > .05). Hence, hypothesis H2 was confirmed. Our 
findings also showed that question focus area moderated clicker-use impact. Indeed, the gains in 
terminology were superior to the gains in content when clickers were used and these same gains were 
comparable when the clickers are not used. 
H3. Initial Level of Knowledge Will Exert a Distinctive Impact Over Learning Processes 
Our remaining hypotheses focus on the importance of students’ initial level of knowledge as reflected in 
their pre-test scores. Our aim was to assess whether clicker use promoted incremented content learning gain 
over legal terminology acquisition when the initial level of knowledge rested within the lower-range 
segment. We established two separate groups on the basis of pre-test score means: Group 1 (G1) pre-test 
mean results revealed 13.31 correct answers out of 32 MC questions, whereas Group 2 (G2) produced 21.58 
correct answers out 32 questions. We duplicated our cross-analyses conducted in the context of hypotheses 
H1 and H2, within each group. Data are presented in Table 4. 
Table 4. Learning Gain Cross-Analyses With and Without Clickers per Level 
  W  N  Difference 
  M SD  M SD  t df p 
Questions (entire set) G1 50.09% 0.26  29.81% 0.30  3.65 18 .002** 
G2 42.92% 0.46  6.58% 0.58  2.43 16 .027* 
Legal terminology-related 
questions 
G1 60.35% 0.39  33.51% 0.41  2.64 18 .017* 
G2 58.24% 0.66  4.41% 1.10  2.30 16 .035* 
Content-related questions G1 41.99% 0.30  23.71% 0.38  2.10 18 .049* 
G2 33.14% 0.46  2.06% 0.97  1.11 16 .281 
*p ˂ 0.05, **p < 0.01 
Findings revealed a significant discrepancy between legal terminology acquisition results per level of 
knowledge and content learning. In the case of legal terminology acquisition, performances with clickers 
revealed an incremented gain over those without clickers across the entire pool of students within each 
level. As regards content acquisition, however, there was a distinct gap between G1 and G2 performances. 
G1 subjects had enhanced post-test performances with clicker use compared to those without, whereas 
clickers had no impact on G2 results. Thus, our hypothesis H3 was not totally supported by our data. Table 
5 addresses the specific issue of content and legal terminology discrepancy (H3.1). 
There was no evidence whatsoever of any acquisition gap between legal terminology and content learning 
based on students’ initial levels of knowledge. Both G1 and G2 members displayed similar across-the-board 
performances.  
54 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Table 5. Cross-Analyses of Legal Terminology and Content Acquisition Gains per Level 
  Legal Terminology  Content  Difference 
  M SD  M SD  t df p 
With Clickers G1 60.35% 0.39  41.99% 0.30  1.81 18 .086 
G2 58.24% 0.66  33.14% 0.46  1.46 16 .163 
Without Clickers G1 33.51% 0.41  23.71% 0.38  0.85 18 .404 
G2 4.41% 1.17  2.06% 0.97  0.18 16 .854 
Discussion 
Although the research was carefully prepared, this study had some unavoidable limitations and 
shortcomings. First, because German was studied by a minority of French students and because our 65 law 
students did not all attend every session, the research could be conducted on only 36 participants. For further 
research, we suggest using the same design and protocol with more participants. Second, the fact that 
clickers were used alternatively throughout the semester implied that the course material, and consequently 
the questions, were concerned with different legal matters. However, we tested the effect of the focus areas 
of the questions (related to language or to the content) independently from the topic and found that the 
calculation of normalized learning gains was likely to compensate for this limitation. Third, we were fully 
aware of the fact that, concerning MC questions, it was, of course, easier to recognize an answer among 
four items than it was to generate one. However, this problem was inherent to the clicker-technology; the 
aim of questions addressed to the students was to help them, not to confront them with additional 
difficulties. 
Despite these limitations, our research provides first-hand evidence that clicker use promotes the acquisition 
of legal terminology in German as a second language. Indeed, using voting systems significantly improved 
learners’ scores obtained on legal terminology questions, as shown by the comparison of pre- and post-test 
means. As regards course content acquisition, however, the findings are not significant, probably because 
the sample was too small. With regard to the impact of learners’ initial level of knowledge on performances 
recorded with or without clickers, less-skilled students exhibited higher scores on the content section of the 
MC post-test whenever they relied on clickers throughout the course. Conversely, clicker use had no impact 
on higher-skilled individuals for content learning. This finding provided further legitimate grounds for 
implementing electronic voting devices across-the-board, even though better students could do without 
while learning content. 
We therefore contend that the acquisition of legal terminology is less cognitively demanding than content 
learning. As underscored by Sweller and Chandler (1994), “the cognitive load associated with learning 
some vocabulary is low because the elements of the material to be learned do not interact with each other” 
(p. 188). In other words, every single legal term may be learned separately and isolated from the rest. Hence, 
clickers help alleviate the cognitive load induced by words unknown to all the students. 
Regarding the learning of course content, the broad spectrum of information to be absorbed (i.e., 
terminology plus distinctive features of the German legal establishment) set a substantial working-memory 
challenge since all items were interwoven. Course content appropriation requires acquiring knowledge 
through the simultaneous processing of a sizeable amount of information along with its intrinsic 
interconnectedness. The content of the lecture can be considered as a material that involves a high level of 
interactivity between the elements that compose it. Clicker use thus offers valuable help to less-skilled 
students with respect to both terminology acquisition and adequate processing of complex, interconnected 
information pertaining to course content. Clickers offer less-skilled students easier understanding of course 
material during the semester while also securing improved exam content retention (post-test). Clearly, 
clickers do indeed alleviate the cognitive load induced by unknown terminology, which otherwise might 
Stéphanie Roussel and Jean-Philippe Galan 55 
 
prove a real hindrance toward efficient course content appropriation. Higher-skilled learners seem to benefit 
from legal terminology questions but also seem to be able to process high-element interactive content 
without the help of content-related questions. 
In summary, clicker use enhanced learning, as well as long-term retention of low interactive material (e.g., 
isolated legal terminology) in this group of students. The results indicate that clicker use reduced the 
cognitive load of the lower-ability group in the process of effective course content acquisition. We 
endeavored to scrutinize a posteriori, and without nurturing prior assumptions, any existing correlation 
between final terminology and content scores. Analyses revealed a significant correlation as follows: (r 
= .614) or 37.7% common variance (p < .001). Therefore, enhanced terminology scores matched enhanced 
course content understanding performances. In other words, whenever legal terminology test scores 
exhibited a 1-point increase, course content test scores displayed a 0.42-point increase. Moreover, there 
was no evidence of any discrepancy whatsoever between the two levels of learners. In addition, we found 
less data dispersion around gain means under the clicker-use condition (involving terminology and content 
learning) than the without condition. Since MC questions relying on clicker use were less prone to 
individual variations, they tended to even out the differences between higher-skilled students. Such an 
outcome provided additional support for our hypothesis because clicker use induced a noticeable attention 
gain in class. It may help bridge the performance gap between higher-skilled and less-skilled learners. Our 
findings are congruent with those of other authors (Mayer et al., 2009; Roediger et al., 2011) who found 
that testing and questioning provide motivational leverage, which in turn enhances students’ attention and, 
consequently, optimizes their learning performance. Hence, implementing across-the-board clicker use 
helps to optimize interactive teacher–learner processes within our German language teaching setting, 
thereby precluding any possible course content misappropriation by the students. 
Conclusion 
The findings of the present study demonstrate the value of clicker technology in the setting of language 
courses designed for specific purposes and having a dual focus. The use of clickers enhanced our students’ 
effective grasp and retention of specific terminology and fostered their assimilation of complex content. In 
a second language class for specific purposes, unknown terminology and high-element interactive course 
content is likely to overload learner’s working memory. We consequently believe that an instructional 
design that includes clicker use can help alleviate cognitive load and allow learners to meet the cognitively 
demanding learning challenge involved in such courses. In keeping with Cutrim Schmid’s (2008) 
recommendation, we endorse the claim that clicker-based foreign language teaching and learning deserve 
extended investigation with a view to “opening possibilities for a deeper evaluation of the impact of the 
technology on language teaching practices and language learning processes” (p. 355). 
Acknowledgements 
The authors are very grateful to the students who participated in this study and also to their colleagues 
Daniel Gaonac’h and Ray Cook for their helpful comments on an earlier version of the text. They would 
also like to thank the editors of the journal and the anonymous reviewers for their careful reading of the 
manuscript and their suggestions. 
Notes 
1. We used the following codes: with clicker (W) and no clicker used (N). 
2. Perceived usefulness: Cronbach ɑ = .894, explained variance = 70.95%; perceived ease-of-use: 
Cronbach ɑ = .906; explained variance = 78.79%. 
56 Language Learning & Technology 
 
References 
Anthis, K. (2011). Is it the clicker or is it the question? Untangling the effects of student response system 
use. Teaching of Psychology, 38(3), 189–193. 
Baddeley, A. D. (2002). Is working memory still working? European Psychologist, 7(2), 85–97. 
Blasco-Arcas, L., Buil, I., Hernández-Ortega, B., & Sese, F. J. (2013). Using clickers in class. The role of 
interactivity, active collaborative learning, and engagement in learning performance. Computers & 
Education, 62, 102–110. 
Brady, M., Seli, H., & Rosenthal, J. (2013). “Clickers” and metacognition: A quasi-experimental 
comparative study about metacognitive self-regulation and use of electronic feedback devices. 
Computers & Education, 65, 56–63. 
Brudermann, C., & Poteaux, N. (2015). Langues pour étudiants spécialistes d’autres disciplines: De 
l’amphithéâtre à l’autonomie d’apprentissage. Distances et médiations des savoirs, 9. Retrieved from 
http://dms.revues.org/1003 
Chamot, A. U., & Küpper, L. (1989). Learning strategies in foreign language instruction. Foreign 
Language Annals, 22(1), 13–24. 
Chen, O., Kalyuga, S., & Sweller, J. (2015). The worked example effect, the generation effect, and 
element interactivity. Journal of Educational Psychology, 107(3), 689–704. 
Chien, Y. T., Chang, Y. H., & Chang, C. Y. (2016). Do we click in the right way? A meta-analytic review 
of clicker-integrated instruction. Educational Research Review, 17, 1–18. 
Chun, D. M. (2016). The role of technology in SLA research. Language Learning & Technology, 20(2), 
98–115. 
Council of Europe. (2001). Common European framework of reference for languages: Learning, 
teaching, assessment. Cambridge, UK: Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge. 
Cutrim Schmid, E. (2008). Using a voting system in conjunction with interactive whiteboard technology 
to enhance learning in the English language classroom. Computers & Education, 50(1), 338–356. 
Davis, F. D. (1989), Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of information 
technology. MIS Quarterly, 13(3), 319–340. 
Felix, U. (Ed.). (2003). Language learning online: Towards best practice. Lisse, Netherlands: Swets & 
Zeitlinger. 
Field, J. (2001). Finding one’s way in the fog: Listening strategies and second-language learners. Modern 
English Teacher, 9(1), 29–34. 
Fies, C., & Marshall, J. (2006). Classroom response systems: A review of the literature. Journal of 
Science Education and Technology, 15(1), 101–109. 
Galan J.-P., Giraud M., & Meyer-Waarden L. (2013). A theoretical extension of the technology 
acceptance model (TAM) to explain the adoption and the usage of new digital services. Paper 
presented at the 42nd Annual Conference of the European Marketing Academy, Istanbul, Turkey. 
Geary, D. (2008). An evolutionarily informed education science. Educational Psychologist, 43(4), 179–
195. 
Hake, R. R. (1998). Interactive-engagement vs. traditional methods: A six-thousand-student survey of 
mechanics test data for introductory physics courses. American Journal of Physics, 66(1), 64–74. 
Haswell, C. G., & Lee, R. A. (2013). A comparative study of listening comprehension and organization of 
lecture notes in intermediate English classes. Polyglossia, 24, 16–25. 
Stéphanie Roussel and Jean-Philippe Galan 57 
 
Kalyuga, S., & Sweller, J. (2014). The redundancy principle in multimedia learning. In E. Mayer (Ed.), 
The Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning, (2nd ed., pp. 247–262). New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Kay, R. H., & LeSage, A. (2009). Examining the benefits and challenges of using audience response 
systems: A review of the literature. Computers & Education, 53(3), 819–827. 
Kyun, S., Kalyuga, S., & Sweller, J. (2013). The effect of worked examples when learning to write essays 
in English literature. The Journal of Experimental Education, 81(3), 385–408. 
Lamine, B., & Petit, L. (2014) Les boîtiers de réponses pour un apprentissage interactif en amphithéâtre. 
Une expérience d’accompagnement et d’évaluation par la recherche. In G. Lameul & C. Loisy (Eds.), 
La pédagogie universitaire à l'heure du numérique: Questionnement et éclairage de la recherche (pp. 
129–146). Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium: de Boeck. 
Lantz, M. E., & Stawiski, A. (2014). Effectiveness of clickers: Effect of feedback and the timing of 
questions on learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 31, 280–286. 
Lutz, J., Briggs, A., & Cain, K. (2003). An examination of the value of the generation effect for learning 
new material. Journal of General Psychology, 130(2), 171–188. 
Mayer, R. E. (Ed.). (2014). The Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning (2nd ed.). New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Mayer, R. E., Stull, A., DeLeeuw, K., Almeroth, K., Bimber, B., Chun, D., Bulger, M., Campbell, J., 
Knight, A., & Zhang, H. (2009). Clickers in college classrooms: Fostering learning with questioning 
methods in large lecture classes. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 34(1), 51–57. 
Mehisto, P., Marsh, D., & Frigols, M. J. (2008). Uncovering CLIL: Content and language integrated 
learning in bilingual and multilingual education. Oxford, UK: Macmillan. 
Morling, B., McAuliffe, M., Cohen, L., & D’Lorenzo, T. M. (2008). Efficacy of personal response 
systems (‘clickers’) in large, introductory Psychology classes. Teaching of Psychology, 35(1), 45–50. 
Paas, F., & Sweller, J. (2014). Implications of cognitive load theory for multimedia learning. In R. E. 
Mayer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning (2nd ed., pp. 27–43). New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Patterson, B., Kilpatrick, J., & Woebkenberg, E. (2010). Evidence for teaching practice: The impact of 
clickers in a large classroom environment. Nurse Education Today, 30(7), 603–607. 
Pérez-Vidal, C., & Roquet, H. (2015). The linguistic impact of a CLIL Science programme: An analysis 
measuring relative gains. System, 54, 80–90. 
Poręcka, B. (2011). The LSP–CLIL interface in the university context. Paper presented at the ICT for 
Language Learning International Conference, Florence, Italy. Retrieved from 
https://conference.pixel-online.net/conferences/ICT4LL2011/common/download/Paper_pdf/CLIL13-
422-FP-Porecka-ICT4LL2011.pdf 
Rana, N., Dwivedi, Y., & Al-Khowaiter, W. (2016). A review of literature on the use of clickers in the 
business and management discipline. The International Journal of Management Education, 14(2), 
74–91. 
Roediger, H. L., Putnam, A. L., & Smith, M. A. (2011). Ten benefits of testing and their applications to 
educational practice. In J. Mestre & B. Ross (Eds.), Psychology of learning and motivation: 
Cognition in education (pp. 1–36). Oxford, UK: Elsevier. 
Roussel, S. (2011). A computer assisted method to track listening strategies in second language learning. 
ReCALL, 23(2), 98–116. 
58 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Roussel, S., Joulia, D., Tricot, A., & Sweller, J. (2017). Simultaneous learning of subject content and a 
foreign language should not ignore human cognitive architecture: A cognitive load theory approach. 
Learning and Instruction, 52, 69–79. 
Sweller, J., & Chandler, P. (1994). Why some material is difficult to learn. Cognition and Instruction, 
12(3), 185–233. 
Sweller, J., Ayres, P., & Kalyuga, S. (2011). Cognitive load theory. New York, NY: Springer. 
Thompson, S. E. (2003). Text-structuring meta-discourse, intonation, and the signaling of organisation in 
academic lectures. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2(1), 5–20. 
Vandergrift, L. (2003). Orchestrating strategy use: Toward a model of the skilled second language 
listener. Language Learning, 53, 463–496. 
Vandergrift, L., & Goh, C. (2012). Teaching and learning second language listening. Metacognition in 
action. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Appendix A. MC Questions in German With Translation Into English 
The questions written in blue were the questions addressed with clickers. The questions written in black 
were those addressed without clickers. TERM indicates terminology-related questions. 
Question in German Translation in English 
Das Recht auf das Fernmeldegeheimnis (TERM) 
a) Das Recht Informationen auszutauschen, ohne 
ausspioniert zu werden 
b) Geheime Kommunikationen der Polizei 
c) Vertrauliche Kommunikationen 
d) Das Amtsgeheimnis 
The right to the secrecy of 
telecommunications (TERM) 
a) The right to exchange information without 
being spied on 
b) Secret communications of the police  
c) Confidential communications 
d) Professional secrecy 
Die Unverletzlichkeit der Wohnung (TERM) 
a) Die Sicherheit der Wohnung 
b) Das Verbot, in eine private Wohnung ohne 
Erlaubnis einzudringen 
c) Die Privatsphäre 
d) Das Recht auf Privatleben 
The inviolability of the home (TERM) 
a) Security of the home 
b) Prohibition on entering a private home 
without permission 
c) Personal privacy 
d) The right to a private life 
Die Verfassungsbeschwerde (TERM) 
a) Die Verfassung 
b) Die Revision der Verfassung 
c) Das Recht, sich an das höchste 
Verfassungsgericht zu wenden 
d) Die Verfassungsmäßigkeit eines Gesetzes 
The constitutional complaint (TERM) 
a) The constitution 
b) A constitutional amendment 
c) The right to appeal to the highest 
constitutional court 
d) The constitutionality of a law 
Stéphanie Roussel and Jean-Philippe Galan 59 
 
Das Recht auf informationelle Selbstbestimmung 
(TERM) 
a) Das Recht jede persönliche Information online zu 
stellen 
b) Das Recht Informationen online zu stellen 
c) Das Recht selbst zu entscheiden welche 
persönlichen Informationen online gestellt 
warden 
d) Das Recht persönliche Daten eines Drittens 
online zu stellen 
The right to informational self-determination 
(TERM) 
a) The right to put all personal information 
online 
b) The right to put information online 
c) The right to decide for oneself which 
personal information can be put online 
d) The right to put a third party’s personal data 
online 
Was ist die Online-Durchsuchung? 
a) Ein Gesetz, das die Grundrechte im Internet 
garantiert 
b) Ein Gesetz, das es der Polizei erlaubt, in privaten 
Computern Informationen zu suchen 
c) Eine polizeiliche Methode, die es erlaubt, alle 
Menschen auszuspionieren 
d) Ein Urteil des Bundesverfassungsgericht, das die 
Privatsphäre garantiert 
What are online searches? 
a) A law that guarantees fundamental rights on 
the Internet 
b) A law that allows the police to search for 
information on private computers 
c) A police method that allows them to spy on 
all people 
d) A Federal Constitutional Court ruling that 
guarantees personal privacy 
Welches dieser Argumente spricht gegen die 
Online Durchsuchung? 
a) Die Polizei braucht die Online-Durchsuchung zur 
Bekämpfung des internationalen Terrorismus und 
der organisierten Kriminalität 
b) Sie stellt einen massiven Eingriff in die 
Privatsphäre dar 
c) Die Online-Ermittler müssen die selben 
Möglichkeiten haben, wie die kriminellen Hacker 
d) Die Mehrheit der Menschen (99,9 Prozent) 
werden von dieser Maßnahme überhaupt nicht 
betroffen sein 
Which of these is an argument against the 
use of online searches? 
a) The police need online searches to fight 
international terrorism and organized crime 
b) They represent a serious invasion of 
personal privacy 
c) Online investigators must have the same 
possibilities as criminal hackers 
d) The majority of people (99.9%) will not be 
affected at all by this measure 
Welches dieser Argumente spricht für die Online 
Durchsuchung? 
a) Ein von Ermittlern geöffneter Privat-PC zeigt 
auch die persönlichen Daten 
b) Die Behörden können Computer komplett 
fernsteuern 
c) Online-Durchsuchung erlaubt das Verändern von 
Dateien auf dem Computer 
d) Die Polizei muss ihre Methoden modernisieren 
Which of these is an argument for the use of 
online searches? 
a) A private PC opened by investigators also 
shows personal data 
b) Authorities can have full remote control of 
computers 
c) Online-searches allow the modification of 
files on a computer 
d) The police must modernize their methods 
60 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Welches dieser Grundrechte verletzt die Online-
Durchsuchung nicht? 
a) Das Recht auf Unverletzlichkeit der Wohnung 
b) Das Recht auf informationelle Selbstbestimmung 
c) Das Fernmeldegeheimnis 
d) Das Recht auf Meinungsfreiheit 
Which of these fundamental rights is not 
violated by online searches? 
a) The right to inviolability of the home 
b) The right to informational self-
determination 
c) The right to secrecy of telecommunications 
d) The right to freedom of expression 
Der Verteidigungsminister (TERM) ist für die 
a) Justiz zuständig 
b) Armee zuständig 
c) Umwelt zuständig 
d) Bildung zuständig 
The defense minister (TERM) responsible for 
a) Justice 
b) Military Affairs 
c) Environment 
d) Education 
Ein gekapertes Flugzeug (TERM) 
a) Ein entführtes Flugzeug 
b) Ein abgeschossenes Flugzeug 
c) Ein verlorenes Flugzeug 
d) Ein verschwundenes Flugzeug 
A captured airplane (TERM) 
a) A hijacked airplane 
b) A shot-down airplane 
c) A lost airplane 
d) A missing airplane 
Ein Flugzeug abschießen (TERM) 
a) Ein Flugzeug entführen 
b) Auf ein Flugzeug mit einer Waffe schießen 
c) Ein Flugzeug kontrollieren 
d) Ein Flugzeug identifizieren 
To shoot an airplane down (TERM) 
a) To hijack an airplane 
b) To fire at an airplane with a weapon 
c) To control an airplane 
d) To identify an airplane 
Der übergesetzliche Notstand (TERM) 
a) Ein Notfall, der nicht gesetzlich geregelt ist 
b) Ein Notfall, der gesetzlich geregelt ist 
c) Ein Notfall 
d) Ein Notfall, um ein Gesetz zu verändern 
A so-called emergency beyond law (TERM) 
a) An emergency that is not ruled by law 
b) An emergency that is ruled by law 
c) An emergency 
d) An emergency to modify a law 
Terroristen wollen ein gekapertes Flugzeug voller 
Passagiere in ein AKW oder ein Stadion steuern. 
Darf der Staat den Jet abschießen lassen. Darf er 
Leben opfern, um Leben zu retten? 
a) Ja, um das Leben der Personen im Stadion oder in 
der Umgebung des AKWs zu retten 
b) Nein, der Staat darf die Personen im Flugzeug 
nicht töten, das verstößt gegen die 
Menschenwürde 
c) Es ist eine zu schwierige Frage um einfach ja 
oder nein zu antworten 
d) In Deutschland kann der Kanzler allein solche 
Entscheidungen treffen 
Terrorists want to steer a captured aircraft 
full of passengers into a nuclear power 
station or a stadium. Can the State have the 
aircraft shot down? Can it sacrifice lives to 
save lives? 
a) Yes, to save the lives of the people in the 
stadium or in the surrounding area of the 
nuclear power station 
b) No, the government is not allowed to kill 
the people in the aircraft, as this violates 
human dignity 
c) It is too difficult a question to simply 
answer yes or no 
d) In Germany only the Chancellor can make 
such decisions 
Stéphanie Roussel and Jean-Philippe Galan 61 
 
Welches Grundrecht der Passagiere ist in dieser 
Situation besonders in Gefahr? 
a) Die Glaubensfreiheit 
b) Die Menschenwürde 
c) Die Religionsfreiheit 
d) Die Meinungsfreiheit 
Which fundamental right of the passengers is 
particularly in danger in this situation? 
a) Freedom of worship 
b) Human dignity 
c) Freedom of religion 
d) Freedom of expression 
Zwei dieser Argumente sprechen für einen 
sofortigen Abschuss des Flugzeuges? Welche? 
a) Die Menschen am Boden (im Stadion, in der 
Nähe des AKWs) müssen gerettet werden 
b) Der Staat darf die Terroristen nicht töten 
c) Über unseren Tod darf der Verteidigungsminister 
(der Staat) nicht entscheiden können 
d) Der übergesetzliche Notstand 
Two of these arguments plead in favor of the 
immediate shooting down of the aircraft. 
Which ones? 
a) The people on the ground (in the stadium, 
near the nuclear power station) must be 
saved 
b) The State is not allowed to kill terrorists 
c) The defense minister (the State) is not 
allowed to decide upon our death 
d) The so-called emergency beyond law 
Zwei dieser Argumente sprechen gegen einen 
sofortigen Abschuss des Flugzeuges? 
a) Es gibt weniger Menschen im Flugzeug als am 
Boden (im Stadion)  
b) Es gibt immer eine Chance, dass das Leben der 
Passagiere gerettet wird 
c) Der Staat muss das Leben aller Bürger schützen 
d) Der übergesetzliche Notstand 
Two of these arguments speak against the 
immediate shooting down of the aircraft. 
Which ones? 
a) There are fewer people in the aircraft than 
on the ground (in the stadium) 
b) There is always a chance that the 
passengers’ lives will be saved 
c) The State must protect the lives of all 
citizens 
d) The so-called emergency beyond law 
Das Elterngeld (TERM) 
a) Das Geld, das die Kinder von den Eltern 
bekommen 
b) Das Geld, das die Kinder von den Großeltern 
bekommen 
c) Das Geld, das Eltern bekommen, wenn sie Kinder 
haben 
d) Das Geld, das die Eltern nur dann bekommen, 
wenn sie mehrere Kinder haben 
Parental allowance (TERM) 
a) Money that children receive from their 
parents 
b) Money that children receive from their 
grandparents 
c) Money that parents receive when they have 
children 
d) Money that parents receive only when they 
have several children 
Die Vereinbarkeit von Beruf und Familie (TERM) 
a) Die Möglichkeit zu Hause zu arbeiten 
b) Die Schwierigkeit Karriere und Kinder zu haben 
c) Die Unmöglichkeit Karriere und Kinder zu haben 
d) Die Möglichkeit gleichzeitig Karriere und Kinder 
zu haben 
The compatibility of work and family 
(TERM) 
a) The possibility of working at home 
b) The difficulty of having both a career and 
children 
c) The impossibility of having both a career 
and children 
d) The possibility of having a career and 
children at the same time 
62 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Die Elternzeit (TERM) 
a) Eine Zeit zur Betreuung und Erziehung seines 
Kindes  
b) Eine Urlaubszeit 
c) Mutterschaftsurlaub 
d) Vaterschaftsurlaub 
Parental leave (TERM) 
a) A time for the care and upbringing of a 
child 
b) Holiday time 
c) Maternity leave 
d) Paternity leave 
Die Sozialleistungen (TERM) 
a) Familienleistungen 
b) Finanzielle Hilfe zur Verwirklichung sozialer 
Gerechtigkeit 
c) Familienkasse 
d) Sozialversicherung 
Social benefits (TERM) 
a) Family allowances 
b) Financial support with the aim of achieving 
social justice 
c) Family benefits office 
d) Social security 
Welche Gerichtsbarkeit ist in Deutschland für 
Konflikte über Elterngeld zuständig? 
a) Die Arbeitsgerichtsbarkeit 
b) Die Sozialgerichtsbarkeit 
c) Die ordentliche Gerichtsbarkeit 
d) Die Verwaltungsgerichtsbarkeit 
 Which jurisdiction in Germany is 
responsible for conflicts over parental 
allowance? 
a) Labor jurisdiction 
b) Social jurisdiction 
c) Ordinary jurisdiction 
d) Administrative jurisdiction 
“In Deutschland wird bis zu 14 Monate lang 
(inklusiv 2 Vätermonate) Elterngeld gezahlt.” 
Welche Verteilung ist also unmöglich: 
a) 12 Monate für die Mutter, 2 für den Vater 
b) 7 Monate für die Mutter, 7 für den Vater 
c) 14 Monate für die Mutter allein 
d) 10 Monate für den Vater, 4 für die Mutter 
“In Germany, parental allowance is paid for 
up to 14 months, including 2 months 
paternity leave.” Which distribution is not 
possible? 
a) 12 months for the mother, 2 for the father 
b) 7 months for the mother, 7 for the father 
c) 14 months for the mother alone 
d) 10 months for the father, 4 for the mother 
Mit diesem Gesetz regelt der Staat die 
Organisation der Familie. Ist es: 
a) Verfassungskonform: es ist die Rolle des Staates 
b) Verfassungswidrig: es ist ein Eingriff in die 
Privatsphäre 
c) Eine Frage, die mit der Verfassung nichts zu tun 
hat 
Under this law, the State regulates the 
organization of the family. Is this: 
a) Constitutional: it is the role of the State 
b) Unconstitutional: it is an invasion of 
privacy 
c) An issue which has nothing to do with the 
constitution 
Was ist kein Ziel des Elterngelds? 
a) Die Väter dazu zu bringen, sich mehr um die 
Kinder zu kümmern 
b) Den Frauen zu helfen, Kinder und Karriere zu 
vereinbaren 
c) Die Wirtschaft neu zu beleben 
d) Die Geburtenrate zu erhöhen 
What is not an aim of parental allowance? 
a) To encourage fathers to care more for their 
children 
b) To help women to combine children and 
career 
c) To revitalize the economy 
d) To increase the birth rate 
Stéphanie Roussel and Jean-Philippe Galan 63 
 
Das Bundesverfassungsgericht (TERM) 
a) Das Gericht, das die Mörder verurteilt 
b) Das Gericht, das das Grundgesetz schützt 
c) Ein Amtsgericht 
d) Ein Landgericht 
The Federal Constitutional Court (TERM) 
a) The court that sentences murderers 
b) The court that protects the basic law 
c) A local court 
d) A district court 
Die Gleichstellung der Homosexuellen Paare 
(TERM) 
a) Die Diskriminierung gegen homosexuelle Paare  
b) Die Gleichberechtigung 
c) Die Gleichheit 
d) Die Gleichbehandlung der homosexuellen Paare 
The legal equality of treatment of 
homosexual couples (TERM) 
a) Discrimination against homosexual couples. 
b) Equal rights 
c) Equality 
d) Equal treatment of homosexual couples 
Ein leibliches Kind (TERM) 
a) Ein adoptiertes Kind 
b) Ein biologisches Kind 
c) Ein eheliches Kind 
A natural child 
a) An adopted child 
b) A biological child 
c) A legitimate child 
Die Sukzessivadoption ist (TERM) 
a) Die Adoption eines Kindes, das der andere 
Partner bereits adoptiert hat 
b) Die Adoption mehrerer Kinder 
c) Die Adoption des leiblichen Kindes des Partners 
d) Die Adoption eines Kindes im Ausland 
Successive adoption is: (TERM) 
a) The adoption of a child who has already 
been taken on by the other partner 
b) The adoption of several children 
c) The adoption of the partner's natural child 
d) The adoption of a child in another country 
Die Lebenspartnerschaft ist 
a) Die Homoehe in Deutschland 
b) Die Zivilehe in Deutschland 
c) Die Verpartnerung zweier Menschen gleichen 
Geschlechts 
Civil partnership is 
a) Homosexual marriage in Germany 
b) Civil marriage in Germany 
c) The partnership of two people of the same 
sex 
Dass die Sukzessivadoption für homosexuelle 
Paare nicht möglich war, hat das 
Bundesverfassungsgericht für… 
a) Das Bundeverfassungsgericht ist dafür nicht 
zuständig  
b) Verfassungsmäßig erklärt 
c) Verfassungswidrig erklärt  
d) Nichtig erklärt 
According to the Federal Constitutional 
Court, the impossibility of successive 
adoption for homosexual couples is: 
a) Not the responsibility of the Federal 
Constitutional Court 
b) Constitutional 
c) Unconstitutional 
d) Invalid 
“Die Kinder würden von der sukzessiven 
Adoption profitieren, da beide Elternteile 
unterhaltspflichtig würden” bedeutet 
a) Zwei Erwachsene sind für das Kind zuständig 
b) Zwei Erwachsene sind für das Kind finanziell 
zuständig 
c) Zwei Erwachsene sind für das Kind moralisch 
zuständig 
d) Zwei Erwachsene sind affektiv für das Kind 
zuständig 
“The children would benefit from successive 
adoption since both parents would be obliged 
to support them” means…  
a) Two adults are responsible for the child 
b) Two adults are financially responsible for 
the child 
c) Two adults are morally responsible for the 
child 
d) Two adults are affectively responsible for 
the child 
64 Language Learning & Technology 
 
“Sollte ein Elternteil sterben, hat das andere eine 
Rechtssicherheit, dass es als Vormund des Kindes 
bestellt wird.” 
a) Wenn ein Elternteil stirbt, kann die Frage der 
Betreuung des Kindes einfacher geregelt werden 
b) Wenn ein Elternteil stirbt, geht das Erbe an das 
Kind 
c) Wenn ein Elternteil stirbt, hat der überlebende 
Partner kein Recht auf das Kind 
d) Wenn ein Elternteil stirbt, hat das Kind keine 
Familie mehr 
“Should one parent die, the other will have 
the legal certainty of being appointed 
guardian of the child.” 
a) If one parents dies, the question of care of 
the child can be settled more easily 
b) If one parents dies, his/her inheritance goes 
to the child 
c) If one parent dies, the surviving partner has 
no right to the child 
d) If one parent dies, the child no longer has 
any family 
Appendix B. Psychometric Measurements of Perceived Ease of Use and 
Usefulness 
1. Strongly disagree 
2. Disagree 
3. Neither agree nor disagree 
4. Agree 
5. Strongly agree 
Perceived Usefulness  
Using clickers improves my performance in learning German  1 2 3 4 5 
Using clickers in learning German increases my productivity  1 2 3 4 5 
Using clickers enhances my effectiveness in learning German  1 2 3 4 5 
I find clickers useful in learning German  1 2 3 4 5 
Perceived Ease of Use  
Interacting with clickers does not require a lot of mental effort  1 2 3 4 5 
I find clickers easy to use  1 2 3 4 5 
I find it easy to get clickers to do what I want them to do  1 2 3 4 5 
About the Authors 
Stéphanie Roussel is an assistant professor at the University of Bordeaux. She teaches German as a second 
language for Law and Economics students and is involved in second language teacher training. Her research 
interests include listening comprehension, LSP, cognitive load theory, and computer-assisted language 
learning. 
E-mail: stephanie.roussel@u-bordeaux.fr 
Jean-Philippe Galan is a full professor at IAE Bordeaux University School of Management where he 
supervises the development of teaching innovations. He teaches data analysis, market studies, research 
methods, and communication. His research concerns data analysis, online data collection, methodology, 
innovation adoption, and consumer research. 
E-mail: jean-philippe.galan@u-bordeaux.fr 
