Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2018, Volume 22, Issue 3 
pp. i–iii 
ANNOUNCEMENTS AND NEWS  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Announcements and news from our sponsors 
 
Announcements 
We are pleased to announce that the first round of the IRIS Replication Award is now open. This is an 
award for an outstanding replication study in the field of second language research using materials held in 
IRIS. Submissions for the first round of consideration will close on November 30, 2018. We encourage 
researchers to carry out rigorous replication research in the field and to apply for this award. 
Copy Editor Acknowledgements for Volume 22, Issue 3 
The editorial staff would like to thank the copy editors that edited the manuscripts appearing in this issue. 
We appreciate their dedication and service while helping to prepare these manuscripts for publication. 
Margherita Berti (The University of Arizona) 
Penny Causarano (University of Mary Washington) 
Bryan R. Drost (Kent State University) 
Edie Furniss (University of Pittsburgh) 
Jacob Hakim (University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa) 
Ashley Landes (American College of Education) 
Erik Norlin (The Ohio State University) 
John Stanko (The University of Kansas) 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center 
University of Hawai‘i Center for Language and Technology 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center 
(NFLRC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its many 
activities. 
6th International Conference on Language Documentation & Conservation (ICLDC): 
Connecting Communities, Languages, & Technology 
February 28–March 3, 2019, Honolulu, HI 
The 6th International Conference on Language Documentation & Conservation (ICLDC), Connecting 
Communities, Languages, & Technology, will be held at the Hawaiʻi Imin International Conference Center 
ii Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
on the campus of the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa. The 6th ICLDC is hosted by the Department of 
Linguistics and the National Foreign Language Resource Center at the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa and 
is generously supported with funding from the National Science Foundation. 
The conference program will feature three keynote talks, talk story sessions, workshops, papers, and 
posters. New for 2019 is the technology showcase, a networking opportunity that will bring together 
technology developers and language community members. An optional Hilo field study (on the island of 
Hawaiʻi) to visit Hawaiian language revitalization programs in action will take place immediately after the 
conference (March 4–5, 2019). 
Over the past two decades, endangered language documentation and conservation has (re)emerged as a 
distinct subfield of linguistics with its own methodology and theoretical underpinnings. This reemergence 
has occurred in parallel with a dramatic technological evolution that has put advanced computing tools in 
the hands of language documenters and those striving to reclaim and maintain endangered languages. 
Moreover, technology is also changing traditional user roles, blurring the lines between linguist, speaker, 
and activist by providing increased access to information. Digital tools have the power to greatly accelerate 
the language work, but the digital realm also brings new challenges for endangered languages, which 
sometimes struggle to thrive in a digitally-mediated world. 
At ICLDC 2019, we propose to initiate a dialogue that will lead to improved connections between 
communities, languages, and technologies. We specifically aim to bring together three groups which have 
not always worked closely together: linguists, language communities, and technology developers. 
Join the NFLRC Listserv 
To get announcements and reminders on NFLRC news, publications, professional development events, and 
more, please subscribe to the official announcements email list for the National Foreign Language Resource 
Center at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa. We may occasionally post announcements of other news and 
events of interest to our listserv subscribers, but in general, posts will be kept to a minimum. 
If you prefer social media, you could instead join our 4,000+ fans on Facebook or 900+ followers on 
Twitter. All key announcements will be posted there as well. 
  
News iii 
 
 
NFLRC Publications 
Korean for Professionals, Volume 3 
 
The Korean Language Flagship Center aims to produce professionals who 
can function in Korean in their chosen fields. After two years of intensive 
Korean language training customized to their fields, graduates of this program 
are expected to take their place among the next generation of global 
professionals as Korea specialists, commanding professional-level 
proficiency in Korean. Successful completion of the program and 
demonstration of the ability to use Korean at a professional level (ILR 3, 
ACTFL Superior) lead to the Master of Arts degree in Korean for 
Professionals. This monograph series is a compilation of the students’ 
research on critical and controversial issues in Korea or Korea–US relations. 
This volume is the third in the series. 
ScholarSpace 
 
NFLRC maintains a large searchable archive of free language research and 
teaching materials which currently contains over 350 items. These items 
include foreign language teaching materials (in print, audio, and video), 
language acquisition research papers, and collections of conference materials. 
 
Save the trees! Check out our other two online, open-access journals 
 
 
 
 
Language Documentation & Conservation (LD&C) is 
a refereed, open-access journal sponsored by the 
NFLRC and published by University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to 
language documentation and conservation, as well as 
book reviews, hardware and software reviews, and 
notes from the field. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed 
international journal of issues in foreign 
language reading and literacy, published twice 
yearly on the World Wide Web and sponsored 
by the NFLRC and the College of Languages, 
Linguistics, and Literature at the University of 
Hawai‘i at Mānoa. 
 
View all NFLRC Publications 
