Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2018, Volume 22, Issue 1 
pp. 65–68 
BOOK REVIEW  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Ayşe Merzifonluoğlu & Talip Gonulal 
 
 
Review of Digital language learning and teaching: 
Research, theory, and practice 
Ayşe Merzifonluoğlu, Erzincan University 
Talip Gonulal, Erzincan University 
 
Digital language learning and teaching: Research, theory, 
and practice 
Carrier, M., Damerow, R. M., & Bailey, K. M. (Eds.) 
2017 
ISBN: 978-1138696815 
US $49.95 
264 pp. 
Routledge 
New York, NY  
There is no doubt that technology now provides more accessible ways to reach a vibrant hub of 
knowledge and learning resources than ever before. Indeed, the introduction of technology in language 
education has created new and great opportunities for language learners and teachers. Two worth 
mentioning are providing real language use in class and creating more interactive classroom environments 
(Stanley, 2013). With recent technological advancements, the article- and book-length treatment on the 
integration of technology in language education has also increased at an exponential rate over the last 
years. Contributing to this trend, Digital language learning and teaching: Research, theory, and practice, 
co-edited by Carrier, Damerow, and Bailey, provides language educators and practitioners with a 
snapshot of contemporary research in the application of digital technology in language education, in 
particularly English language teaching contexts. This edited book, organized into a preface, an 
introduction, and 19 chapters, is grouped into two main parts: Part I, The research perspective (the first 
10 chapters after the introduction) and Part II, The pedagogical perspective (the last nine chapters). Part I 
presents the findings of some of the doctoral research funded by Doctoral Dissertation Grants from The 
International Research Foundation, while Part II, written by more seasoned researchers with remarkable 
experience in the use of technology in language education, places a focus on key advancement in digital 
language learning, teaching, and assessment. 
The introduction, by Carrier, starts with the definition of digital learning, followed by the potential 
benefits to language learners and educators and the methods and theories of digital learning. Taking an 
all-embracing approach, Carrier defines digital learning as “the application of technology to the learning 
and teaching process” no matter whether “a specific practice is part of a CALL, TELL, generic edtech, or 
digital learning repertoire” (pp. 1–2). In looking at the affordances of technology, the author lists different 
categories of digital technology: (a) input technologies (e.g., interactive whiteboards, projectors, virtual 
reality headsets), (b) interactive technologies (e.g., online quizzes, videoconferencing), and (c) portable 
technologies (e.g., tablets, voting devices, and head-mounted displays). Further, Carrier makes several 
feasible suggestions for policymakers, so that digital language learning can be more fruitful. 
Part I, including Chapters 2–11, reports on a variety of research studies such as quasi-experiential studies, 
66 Language Learning & Technology 
 
case studies, and corpus studies related, to a greater or lesser extent, to digital learning conducted by 
novice researchers who have just embarked on their academic careers. This part follows the format of a 
typical research article (e.g., the motivation for the research, the research questions guiding the study, the 
data collection and analysis, the findings and the implications). In Chapter 2, Chuang explains whether an 
online grammar practice application (i.e., GrammarTalk) can be effective for Chinese English for 
academic purposes students to master English grammar rules, particularly the English article system. 
Although Chinese students seemed to have positive attitudes toward using an online grammar practice 
program, the effects on English article development were not statistically significant, probably due to the 
short treatment phase. In Chapter 3, subscribing to the concept of nexus of practice, de Groot analyzes a 
group of Thai teacher trainees’ digitally-mediated learning practices outside the English language 
classrooms and the affordances of such practices in their classroom learning performance. The results 
indicate that Thai teacher trainees get involved in a variety of digitally-mediated learning practices that, in 
turn, allow them to be more exposed to the target language in more communicative ways. The fourth 
chapter by Fitzgerald, Marín, Wu, and Witten emphasizes the use and importance of a data-driven 
learning approach in English for specific academic purposes (ESAP) classrooms. Using a new corpus-
based tool (i.e., FLAX), the authors illustrate how contemporary corpus technology can be a useful tool to 
provide ESAP learners with authentic and salient lexico-grammatical features, particularly academic 
texts. Chapter 5 by Li and Chiu reports on an attitudinal study that focuses on Chinese doctoral students’ 
attitudes and beliefs regarding the implementation of blended learning (BL) in an academic English 
writing course. The evidence suggests that BL is predominantly preferred by Chinese English as a foreign 
language (EFL) learners over face-to-face or fully-online teaching. 
Turning to the flipped classroom, in Chapter 6, Mehring probes Japanese students’ attitudes toward using 
digital technologies such as Moodle, PowerPoint, and LINE outside the EFL classroom applications and 
programs. The results show that flipped classrooms can make students more active in the learning process 
by creating a more flexible language learning environment. In Chapter 7, Olesova and Richardson 
compare the effectiveness of text-based and audio-supported feedback types using the instructors’ 
background information and students’ levels of proficiency (i.e., high- and low-level) as moderating 
variables. Overall, the feedback, be it text-based or audio-supported, did not significantly differ in terms 
of developing higher-order thinking whereas instructors’ background and students’ language proficiency 
levels played a significant role on students’ reaching higher level of thinking. In Chapter 8 by Ronan, a 
digital learning platform called STEPS is used for strengthening content writing abilities of English 
language learners (ELLs). Even though this is a small-scale study with four participants, it provides some 
invaluable insights on how digital tools can help improve ELLs’ literacy skills through self-directed 
learning. In Chapter 9, Rubadeau examines a group of teacher educators’ (TEs) limited interactive 
whiteboards (IWB) use behaviors by focusing on the possible reasons behind such ill-practice. The results 
of this case study show that TE’s lack of knowledge, issues pertinent to effective use of IWB, and peer 
and administrator pressure are among the most frequent reasons for avoiding digital tools in learning 
environment. Chapter 10, by Stranger-Johannessen, touches upon a slightly different aspect of the use of 
digital technology in an under-developed country with limited opportunities. More specifically, the author 
describes how utilizing African culture-based digital stories in classrooms can lead to the development of 
not only language skills but also overall literacy skills. However, the author also draws attention to the 
common challenges regarding the employment of digital technology in such settings, including teachers’ 
limited computer literacy and insufficient technological infrastructure. Similarly, in Chapter 11, 
Vinogradova details how a group of learners get involved in the production of digital story in an academic 
ESL course where a pedagogy of multiliteracies (e.g., overt instruction, situated practice) is incorporated. 
The findings shed light on the way that digital stories can serve as communicative tools. 
In the first chapter of Part II, which centers mostly on the pedagogical aspects of digital language 
learning, Peachey provides a broad overview of synchronous online teaching and the available online 
teaching tools (e.g., text chat, IWB). The author also discusses the challenges that teachers and students 
may encounter when using such tools, makes some informed suggestions regarding effective online 
Ayşe Merzifonluoğlu and Talip Gonulal 67 
 
learning assessment, and finally ends the chapter by stressing the importance of teachers’ personal 
development in using such technologies. Chapter 13 by Robinson and Harrison approaches digital 
language learning tools from a design perspective and introduces the concepts of learner experience (LX) 
and user experience (UX). The authors stress that when designing language learning products, developers 
need to pay close attention to each of the four components of LX (i.e., pedagogy, content, UX, and 
interaction). Several directed suggestions are also made for educational technology companies to improve 
the quality of digital language learning products. Chapter 14, by Sharma, explains BL in detail, covering 
different definitions and dimensions of BL (e.g., wide or narrow BL), models of BL (e.g., hybrid model), 
crucial elements of an effective BL course (i.e., appropriateness, complementarity, attitude, and training), 
as well as the future of BL (e.g., introduction of mobile learning and adaptive learning). In the following 
chapter, Stannard examines feedback on written works with a different viewpoint in terms of form and 
conveyance. The author describes how recent digital learning software such as JING, Screencast-o-Matic, 
and Snaglt can allow language educators to present more directed and effective feedback, which in turn 
may result in a clearer understanding. In Chapter 16, Stanley addresses the use of videoconferencing with 
primary school students in Uruguay as part of remote teaching practice. Despite some issues, such as poor 
internet connections, psychological distance that the remote teaching causes, and students’ low level of 
readiness for remote teaching, using videoconferencing programs as pedagogical tools can benefit 
language learners with limited learning opportunities in remote places. Chapter 17, by Saville, addresses 
digital assessment with a special focus on learning-oriented assessment (LOA). The author stresses the 
need for a change from paper-based assessment to more computer-based LOA, so that more rapid, 
directed, and individualized feedback can be given to students. Given the fast developing advances in 
digital language learning, the author strongly suggests that digital assessment be part of language 
teachers’ repertoire. 
Chapter 18 by Carrier and Nye highlights that future teachers should be armed with the necessary 
knowledge and skills to effectively exploit digital technologies in language classrooms, because as Fullan 
and Quinn (2015) note, “pedagogy is the driver, technology is the accelerator” (p. 82). After describing 
recent pedagogical approaches (e.g., BL, mobile learning, adaptive learning, and personalized 
classrooms), the authors touch upon more recent digital learning channels, such as massive open online 
courses, personal response system, and self-paced learning applications (e.g., Duolingo, Busuu), and 
accentuate the need for digital training for language educators. In Chapter 19, Lloyd, Rogerson, and Stead 
introduce a novel and relatively more sophisticated learning tool (i.e., virtual reality, VR) referring to the 
successful implementation of VR in medical education. After stating several advantages, such as 
providing opportunities to utilize a variety of tasks which are otherwise hard to implement in a real 
classroom environment, making students more motivated and active, and enabling contextualized and 
collaborative learning, they provide a list of available VR technologies such as virtual and augmented 
reality hybrids, simulators, and telepresence. This book ends with a prediction by Hockly and Dudeney 
regarding the future of digital learning technologies by 2020 and a discussion over the reflections of such 
new technologies on language learning settings. According to the authors, some of the digital learning 
models (e.g., BL, machine learning, adaptive learning, and flipped learning) will be more widespread than 
ever. 
Overall, this edited book explores the current state of the implementation of digital learning technologies 
in English language classrooms in diverse contexts throughout the world. The book models good practice 
in that it combines not only established researchers’ but also future professoriates’ research on digital 
language learning. The chapters are bite-sized and thus easy to read. However, readers should be aware 
that some of the studies presented in Part I were conducted 8–10 years ago, and therefore the focus of the 
studies and the related findings might be a bit outdated. In addition, of these not-so-recent studies, a few 
are not strictly related to digital language learning. Although the book attempts to take a broader 
perspective in terms of topics covered, those who want to learn more about mobile-assisted language 
learning or games in language learning might want to refer to other resources (e.g., Pegrum, 2014; Skyes 
& Reinhardt, 2012). Most books on digital language learning, let alone this book, focus mostly on English 
68 Language Learning & Technology 
 
language learners and teachers. As such, scant attention is given to languages other than English. Further 
scholarly work addressing other languages is definitely needed. 
In summary, this edited volume, as the title suggests, provides useful insights on digital language learning 
and teaching gleaned from research, theory, and practice, which undoubtedly makes an important 
contribution to online language learning pedagogy. The book can be a handy resource for those who are 
interested in a quick overview of the application of digital language learning over the last 10 years. 
Applied linguists and language educators who want to engage more deeply with current state of the art as 
well as the potential future advances in digital language learning can also refer to this book, particularly 
Part II. 
References 
Pegrum, M. (2014). Mobile learning: Languages, literacies, and cultures. London, UK: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Stanley, G. (2013). Language learning with technology: Ideas for integrating technology in the 
classroom. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Sykes, J., & Reinhardt, J. (2012). Language at play: Digital games in second and foreign language 
teaching and learning. New York, NY: Pearson. 
About the Authors 
Ayşe Merzifonluoğlu is a Research Assistant in the English Language Teaching program at Erzincan 
University, Turkey. Her research interests include technology integration in EFL environments, self-
directed language learning, and adult language learners. 
E-mail: ayse.merzifonluoglu@erzincan.edu.tr 
Talip Gonulal is an Assistant Professor of Applied Linguistics at Erzincan University, Turkey. His 
research interests include quantitative research methods, classroom humor and its effects on English 
language learning, and technology-enhanced language learning. 
E-mail: talip.gonulal@erzincan.edu.tr 
