Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2018, Volume 22, Issue 3 
pp. 159–175 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Jennica Grimshaw & Walcir Cardoso 
 
 
Activate space rats! Fluency development in a 
mobile game-assisted environment 
Jennica Grimshaw, Concordia University 
Walcir Cardoso, Concordia University 
Abstract 
Activities that promote fluency development or the automatization of speech are often ignored in second 
language classes because they do not teach new things; instead, they focus on speeding up language use 
(Nation & Newton, 2008). Anxiety also decreases chances for fluency development, as learners are less 
willing to produce output (Gregersen & MacIntyre, 2014), consequently hindering language development 
(Swain, 2000). One way of minimizing the impact of these limitations is to motivate students to speak 
intelligibly and fluently, preferably beyond the constraints of the language classroom. In this study, we 
investigated the pedagogical use of Spaceteam ESL, a mobile game that requires intelligible and fluent 
computer-mediated oral exchanges among players. Participants (N = 20) were low-intermediate English 
as a second language (ESL) students divided into two groups: the treatment group, which played Spaceteam 
ESL as a 15-minute warm-up activity for six weeks, and the control group, which engaged in comparable 
non-gaming activities. Pre-tests, post-tests, and delayed post-tests measured changes in oral fluency (i.e., 
syllables produced per minute and judges’ ratings) and interviews addressed factors related to anxiety and 
willingness to communicate (WTC). Findings indicated that learners who played Spaceteam ESL 
outperformed the control group in judges’ ratings for oral fluency and that the gameplay might positively 
influence anxiety and WTC. 
Keywords: Mobile Learning, Game-Based Practice, Pronunciation 
Language(s) Learned in This Study: English 
APA Citation: Grimshaw, J., & Cardoso, W. (2018). Activate space rats! Fluency development in a 
mobile game-assisted environment. Language Learning & Technology, 22(3), 159–175. 
https://doi.org/10125/44662 
Introduction 
Promoting fluency development in second language (L2) learners “is important at all levels of proficiency” 
(Nation & Newton, 2008, p. x), as it motivates learners to speed up and automatize language use. However, 
activities that promote fluency development are often excluded from language classrooms, possibly due to 
time constraints or the fact that they involve repeating structures that students have already acquired and, 
consequently, do not teach anything new (Nation & Newton, 2008). The development of L2 fluency may 
be further hindered by language learning anxiety or a low level of willingness to communicate (WTC) in 
learners (Horwitz, Horwitz, & Cope, 1986). To address these issues, this article investigates the use of a 
digital collaborative mobile game, Spaceteam ESL, for L2 learning. To play the game, players must engage 
in real-time computer-mediated interaction with other players, during which they must intelligibly produce 
and carry out time-sensitive oral instructions to navigate a spaceship. 
A 4-week pilot study was conducted in which the game was used as a warm-up activity in an English 
conversation class (Grimshaw, Cardoso, & Waddington, 2015). The study showed promising results: 
participants indicated that they felt more energized after playing the game and, as one participant stated, it 
helped to open their mouths, preparing their vocal tract articulators for use in their conversation class. Their 
teacher also noted that a positive mood carried over from gaming sessions, “creating an overall pleasant 
160 Language Learning & Technology 
 
atmosphere” (p. 105). Participants also commented that they felt more comfortable and familiar with 
classmates after gameplay, and the instructor reported that students were more active in class. The results 
of this pilot study suggest that the game may help to reduce language anxiety and increase WTC in students. 
As low levels of anxiety and higher levels of WTC encourage fluency development, the current study 
further addresses how these issues may be influenced by Spaceteam ESL and how the game’s other features 
may contribute to L2 fluency development. 
The current study used a mixed-methods approach for data collection and analysis, in which quantitative 
data were used to examine the influence of Spaceteam ESL on fluency development, while qualitative 
interviews explored student perceptions of the game as a pedagogical tool. We hypothesized that the 
combination of in-game interaction and peer feedback would provide students with the necessary 
scaffolding to develop pronunciation skills (Chapelle, 2003), with a focus on fluency, while also reducing 
anxiety and raising WTC. 
Literature Review 
Fluency Development 
The development of oral fluency is largely concerned with temporal aspects of speech such as rate and 
pause length (Derwing, Munro, Thomson, & Rossiter, 2009). Nation and Newton (2008) summarize the 
features of fluency as language use that involves real-time processing and “does not require a great deal of 
attention and effort” (p. 151). According to the authors, the ideal language course should include a balance 
of (1) meaning-focused input, (2) meaning-focused output, (3) intentional attention to aspects and features 
of language (focus on form), and (4) fluency development activities in order for students to develop 
language skills. The fourth strand, fluency development activities, involves the use and practice of what 
students already know across “the four skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing” (Nation & 
Newton, 2008, p. 2) with the explicit purpose of speeding up production and encouraging automaticity. As 
such, fluency development activities should only include previously acquired language structures and 
vocabulary to encourage automatization. Because of the repeat and recycle nature of these activities, 
language teachers prefer to use classroom time to teach new vocabulary or other language features rather 
than spending time on automatization. 
While aural perception and non-verbal aspects are both important components in overall fluency (Götz, 
2013), production (or output) plays a vital role in oral fluency development. According to Swain (2000), 
learners produce output to test their hypotheses about the language, to learn from error, and to see how the 
target language functions. Without producing output, language learners cannot practice language, nor can 
they automatize their language skills. Producing output and interacting with other speakers is therefore vital 
for oral fluency development as learners experiment with pronunciation, vocabulary, and oral grammar, 
among other language features. 
L2 learners who do not have the opportunity to develop fluency in class may experience a further reduction 
in output production when faced with additional barriers such as speaking anxiety or a low WTC. If learners 
are unable to produce output, they cannot fully engage in language development (Gregersen & MacIntyre, 
2014). These two important issues are addressed in the following section. 
Anxiety and WTC 
According to Dörnyei (2005), trait anxiety expresses a “predisposition to become anxious” in a variety of 
situations, whereas state anxiety is a “moment-to-moment experience of anxiety as an emotional reaction 
to the current situation” (p. 198). These anxieties have the potential to negatively impact acquisition in 
language learners (Baran-Łucarz, 2014; Dörnyei, 2005; Gregersen & MacIntyre, 2014; Horwitz et al., 
1986). However, while trait anxiety is difficult to control, state anxiety can be more easily addressed in the 
L2 classroom due to its ephemeral nature (Gregersen & MacIntyre, 2014). 
It has been shown that anxiety can have a negative impact on student WTC (Dörnyei, 2005; Gregersen & 
Jennica Grimshaw and Walcir Cardoso 161 
 
MacIntyre, 2014; MacIntyre, Dörnyei, Clément, & Noels, 1998), particularly when students experience 
pronunciation anxiety (Baran-Łucarz, 2014). Contrary to popular belief, WTC does not simply transfer 
from a learner’s first language (L1) to his or her L2 (MacIntyre et al., 1998). For instance, a student who 
has a high WTC in their L1 may not experience the same level of WTC in their L2. Low WTC in the L2 is 
commonly caused by the reduced rate of self-confidence experienced by students in the classroom 
(MacIntyre et al., 1998). In particular, students who experience pronunciation anxiety often feel as though 
they have a bad accent, resulting in embarrassment when speaking and therefore lowering their WTC 
(Baran-Łucarz, 2014). Similarly, students with communication apprehension experience a sort of 
performance anxiety when speaking or listening in their L2 (Horwitz et al., 1986). This apprehension also 
contributes to a reduced WTC, as students do not wish to perform in front of peers. 
As anxiety and feelings of apprehension lower WTC, students are less likely to engage in language 
production (Gregersen & MacIntyre, 2014). Without opportunities for language output, students cannot 
advance their language skills (Nation & Newton, 2008; Swain, 2000). Two methods that have been 
suggested to help reduce anxiety in L2 learners or increase their WTC are outlined below in relation to the 
scope and goals of this study. 
Methods to Reduce Anxiety and Increase WTC 
There have been a variety of techniques proposed in the literature to reduce communication anxiety and 
increase WTC. These include, but are not limited to, the following: introducing relaxation techniques and 
explicitly addressing anxiety in the classroom (Gregersen & MacIntyre, 2014), identifying sources of 
anxiety (Baran-Łucarz, 2014), engaging in teamwork activities (Dörnyei & Kormos, 2000), and using 
technology as a medium of communication (AbuSeileek, 2012; Arnold, 2007; Baralt & Gurzynski-Weiss, 
2011; Reinders & Wattana, 2014). The latter two methods are present in Spaceteam ESL gameplay and are 
further described in this section. 
Teamwork 
Group cohesiveness may increase verbal performance in students, encouraging them to participate in 
conversations and discourse and thus increasing WTC. Dörnyei and Kormos (2000) suggest that 
“individuals [who] spend extended time together, pursuing shared goal-directed behaviour in a context with 
well-defined boundaries” (p. 279) are more likely to feel as though they belong to a group and are therefore 
more likely to communicate within the group—they experience a positive level of WTC. Through 
teamwork, participants may also become familiar with their teammates, and as the degree of acquaintance 
with an individual can positively impact WTC (MacIntyre et al., 1998), cooperation may help to increase 
student WTC. 
A study conducted by AbuSeileek (2012) combined teamwork with computer-mediated communication 
(CMC) to examine whether positive interdependence (in which group members work together to complete 
a task) or individual accountability (in which group members are responsible for completing their own 
individual tasks to achieve a common goal) had an impact on students’ communication skills. The results 
suggested that participants in the individual accountability group significantly outperformed those in the 
positive interdependence group: individual accountability participants felt more responsible for their own 
role in their team’s success and were therefore more willing to communicate and participate in the task. 
This task type might also have contributed to feelings of group solidarity, playing a role in increasing levels 
of comfort in the classroom, raising learner WTC, and lowering communication anxiety. 
Computer-Assisted Language Learning and Computer-Mediated Communication 
Recent efforts to incorporate digital technologies into language education have shown that tasks relating to 
computer-assisted language learning (CALL) can be pedagogically beneficial; however, they must be 
carefully regulated. CALL tasks should ideally provide opportunities for input exposure, interaction, and 
output production to be considered well-rounded language learning activities (Chapelle, 2003). Research 
has shown that properly structured CALL resources may not only help to improve grammar, vocabulary, 
162 Language Learning & Technology 
 
and pronunciation (Chapelle, 2003), but may also increase student motivation (e.g., Ducate & Lomicka, 
2009). Similarly, various forms of CMC have the potential to decrease learner anxiety (Arnold, 2007; Baralt 
& Gurzynski-Weiss, 2011) and increase WTC (Reinders & Wattana, 2014). 
In the studies conducted by Arnold (2007) and Baralt and Gurzynski-Weiss (2011), students engaged in 
either CMC or FTF communication. In both studies, CMC was introduced in an attempt to reduce 
communication anxiety. Participants in CMC groups either communicated via chat-rooms (Arnold, 2007) 
or social media (i.e., Facebook or MySpace; Baralt & Gurzynski-Weiss, 2011). Participants in FTF groups 
completed similar tasks, but interacted with each other directly. Although neither Arnold (2007) nor Baralt 
and Gurzynski-Weiss (2011) found significant differences between CMC and FTF groups, both studies 
shed light on the potential of CMC. For example, while the CMC groups showed decreased nervousness 
and increased self-confidence, one of the participants in the study by Baralt and Gurzynski-Weiss pointed 
out that the CMC tasks lacked the necessary pronunciation practice that builds confidence in language 
learning. Another participant made a similar observation: she “felt that she was not really forced to address 
or correct her mistakes in the CMC modality as much as she was in the FTF modality” (p. 215). While 
written CMC can provide students with extra time to carefully consider their output, it does not give them 
the chance to communicate orally. CMC should therefore also ideally provide the opportunity for oral 
production with some form of feedback. 
Although Reinders and Wattana (2014) suggest that an online CMC gaming environment may increase 
learner WTC, the gameplay described in the study is not practical to implement in a typical L2 classroom. 
The massively multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPGs) adopted in their study often require a 
strong and reliable Internet connection (a non-existent feature for many public institutions) and access to 
desktop computers. Arranging lab time, planning activities, and connecting students is time-consuming, 
taking up valuable class time. The ideal tool for students and teachers would therefore be something that is 
easily accessible and involves short, but effective, opportunities for communication. Mobile-assisted 
language learning (MALL) may offer a solution to this problem. 
Mobile-Assisted Language Learning and Gaming 
With the increasing popularity of smartphones and other mobiles devices, MALL may offer a more 
accessible alternative to desktop computer-based CMC (Ogata & Yano, 2003; Stockwell, 2007). Despite 
the use of mobile devices for L2 learning showing promising results (e.g., Grimshaw et al., 2015; Stockwell, 
2007) and the many language applications, or apps, for mobile devices available for download around the 
world, little research has been conducted into the use of mobile gaming as a tool for language development. 
Gaming has been used for a variety of purposes in L2 learning. It has been used, for example, to aid with 
L2 writing (e.g., Allen, Crossley, Snow, & McNamara, 2014) and oral proficiency (e.g., Kim, 2014; Lan, 
2014) and to increase WTC in students (e.g., Reinders & Wattana, 2014). Commercial games that involve 
multiplayer interaction, such as World of Warcraft and Second Life, have also found a place in L2 practice 
(Godwin-Jones, 2014), as these games create an immersive language environment accessible from 
anywhere with a reliable internet connection. With the high volume of English-language multiplayer games 
currently on the market, students often choose to play these games on their own time with little intent, if 
any, to learn language from the experience (Chik, 2014). 
While non-mobile digital games have been used successfully in L2 education, they are not readily 
accessible in most classroom environments. Mobile devices “[increase] learners’ capability to physically 
move their own learning environment with them” (Ogata & Yano, 2003, p. 2), unlike desktop computers 
needed for platforms such as the MMORPG in the study by Reinders and Wattana (2014). Instead, “mobile 
devices can connect to Internet with wireless communication technologies, and enable learning at anytime 
and anywhere” (Ogata & Yano, 2003, p. 2). MALL also has the “potential […] for creating advanced, 
immersive games that do not require a room full of computers” (Godwin-Jones, 2014, p. 10), offering a 
more accessible alternative to traditional digital gaming and thus mitigating the problems of portability and 
accessibility. 
Jennica Grimshaw and Walcir Cardoso 163 
 
Mobile Gaming as a Means to Promote Fluency Development, Reduce Speaking Anxiety, 
and Increase WTC 
As mentioned earlier, Nation and Newton (2008) suggest that L2 activities should include a balance of all 
four strands for effective L2 learning, including fluency development. Fluency development activities 
involve putting into practice previously acquired language features (e.g., known vocabulary and 
pronunciation) in a fast but comprehensive manner (e.g., speed speaking and listening without a language 
focus in mind). To date, little research has investigated the use of mobile devices and digital gaming in oral 
fluency development. While Papadima-Sophocleous (2015) examined the use of iPads in the development 
of reading fluency, results cannot be generalized to other aspects of fluency outlined by Götz (2013), such 
as spontaneous production, perception, and non-verbal fluency. 
The current study uses Spaceteam ESL, a game that is portable and easily accessible, to examine its role in 
oral fluency development. The study combines the abovementioned features of the game (e.g., 
communication mediated by technology, recycling and practice of known vocabulary, time-sensitive 
interaction) to examine the effectiveness of accessible, easy-to-implement gameplay, and its potential to 
create a fun and non-threatening learning environment (e.g., via teamwork and CMC) for students to 
practice the target language. It was anticipated that, by creating a safe atmosphere via gameplay, the 
participants might experience a lower level of speaking anxiety and an increased level of WTC, thus 
producing more output—a necessary part of fluency development. 
Spaceteam ESL: The Current Study 
Spaceteam ESL is a free interactive gaming app played on mobile devices. The game was developed by 
Cardoso and Waddington of Concordia University and was based on the original Spaceteam mobile game 
created by Sleeping Beast Games (Smith, 2012). In the game, players in teams of two or more must share 
instructions with each other to achieve an end goal: piloting a spaceship. Each team member is presented 
with a unique panel of buttons and dials and is provided with a unique set of instructions. Each member’s 
instructions correspond with a knob, button, or dial on one of the other team member’s panels. In order to 
complete the series of tasks, players must interact orally with team members to communicate instructions. 
Teams have a limited amount of time to communicate and carry out these instructions. An illustration of 
the interface of Spaceteam ESL is provided in Figure 1 (the left-hand screenshot was taken from a mobile 
phone, whereas the right-hand screenshot was taken from a tablet). 
  
Figure 1. Screenshots of Spaceteam ESL, as seen by two different players on the same team. 
The instructions that players had to convey in Spaceteam ESL were randomly generated following verb + 
164 Language Learning & Technology 
 
modifier/noun + prepositional phrase/noun combinations using vocabulary from most-frequently-used 
word lists (e.g., Save brown space chicken, Set blue program to 1, with the latter example illustrated in 
Figure 1). This allowed for practice using more familiar words, a requirement of fluency development 
activities. As game levels increased, so did the complexity of the vocabulary (in terms of word-level 
frequency and pronunciation difficulty). Players therefore had to be fluent (i.e., both intelligible and fast in 
speaking), so that their teammates could successfully receive and interpret the instructions within a pre-
specified timeframe (usually a few seconds, depending on the level of difficulty). 
Players had to work together as a team to succeed in the game, and each player was individually accountable 
for carrying out his or her actions to ensure the team’s success. However, actions by individuals remained 
anonymous as the players did not know which team member completed which action, therefore potentially 
removing some performance anxiety (as suggested in AbuSeileek, 2012). The format of the game also 
allowed players to interact via CMC. While players were present in the same room, playing the game via a 
mobile device helped to remove the pressures of FTF communication and provided opportunities for oral 
production with peer feedback. The most common form of peer feedback observed in the pilot study 
appeared in the form of recasts. For example, if a misunderstanding occurred, the student-interlocutor often 
repeated a mispronounced word to confirm whether it was the intended one, such as shut down instead of 
shoot down. The written commands on the screen provided additional clues to the student-interlocutors for 
interpreting their teammates’ commands. The student-interlocutors could then provide peer feedback based 
on what was heard and read. The command-giver could then, ideally, recognize and repeat the correct form, 
as the vocabulary should already have been familiar to them. 
Spaceteam ESL fulfilled the requirements of a fluency development activity as outlined by Nation and 
Newton (2008), as it encouraged players to interact through a meaningful activity (working together to pilot 
a spaceship) and to speed up language use. The main goal of the game was focused “on receiving or 
conveying meaning” and, at the same time, on providing learners with “a large amount of input or output” 
practice (p. 7). As Spaceteam ESL did not explicitly target new or specific language features, the game 
fulfilled another requirement of the fourth strand of fluency development by Nation and Newton, “where 
all language items are within their previous experience,” and provided players with “support and 
encouragement … to perform at a higher than normal level” (2008, pp. 152–153). The game also fulfilled 
the requirements of a well-rounded CALL task, as outlined in Chapelle (2003), as it provided enhanced 
input (via the practice feature), interaction (via gameplay), and ample chances for practice. 
The study addresses the following two research questions: 
1. Does playing Spaceteam ESL affect fluency development in English as a second language (ESL) 
learners? 
2. What are learner perceptions of Spaceteam ESL as a tool to reduce anxiety and increase WTC? 
To answer the first research question, quantitative data were analysed to assess fluency development, as 
measured by a combination of syllables-per-minute (SPM) counts and judges’ ratings (see discussion 
below). For the second research question, qualitative data, collected from semi-structured interviews, were 
examined to create categories for further analysis (based on the scope of the current project and results from 
a pilot study, reported in Grimshaw et al., 2015). It was predicted that playing the game as a warm-up 
activity for L2 classes would have a positive effect on oral fluency development. It was also hypothesized 
that the game would be perceived as fun and engaging, with the potential to provide a variety of learning 
opportunities. Although not created as a tool to teach language, Spaceteam ESL can be considered a 
pedagogical game as it allows students to practice L2 interaction in an entertaining and non-threatening 
manner. 
Method 
Participants 
The participants were 20 ESL students (10 males and 10 females) attending a college in Quebec, Canada. 
Jennica Grimshaw and Walcir Cardoso 165 
 
The mean participant age was 21.4 (SD = 0.69), and all spoke French as their L1. All participants were 
placed at the same proficiency level (high-beginner) by the institution. The participant pool was comprised 
of two different ESL classes at the same school, both of which had the same instructor. The instructor was 
a Canadian L1 English speaker who specialized in teaching beginners. One class acted as the treatment 
group, and the other acted as the control. 
Design 
An experimental design was used, consisting of two groups: treatment and control. The treatment group 
engaged in gameplay as a warm-up activity for 15 minutes at the start of each class, held once a week, for 
a period of six weeks. The control group, on the other hand, completed paper-based, interactive, and timed 
activities, such as info-gap and story retelling, that practiced the same skills as a warm-up (e.g., listening, 
speaking, and reading). Although the control group tasks differed from the treatment group, these tasks 
were more similar to typical classroom fluency development activities. 
The study followed a mixed-methods, between-groups design. Quantitative data were collected via pre-
tests, post-tests, and delayed post-tests, in which participants were required to record themselves speaking 
about their summer vacations. The recordings were then analyzed for measures of L2 fluency. Temporal 
measures such as the computation of the number of syllables produced per minute (SPM) are one of the 
most common measures for rating oral fluency and, for this reason, were adopted in the current study. 
Previous studies measuring L2 fluency rely strongly on these types of temporal measures (e.g., Blake, 2009; 
Hird & Kirsner, 2010), presumably because these measures relate to the definition of fluency given by 
pronunciation researchers (e.g., Derwing et al., 2009, who established oral fluency via a combination of 
rate of speech and pause length). In this study, speech samples were measured via the calculation of SPM 
and judges’ assessment of related measures (speech rate, pauses, and overall fluency). SPM was coded 
manually twice by one of the researchers (intraclass correlation coefficient between SPM calculations was 
high at the pre-test: r = .996). Any scores with a difference of more than 2 SPM were examined a third 
time; differences were then averaged. 
10 L1 English and 10 L2 English speakers, all of whom had experience teaching ESL, rated 60 10-second 
clips from each speech sample (one for each participant from each test) on 6-point Likert scales. Samples 
were rated based on overall fluency and temporal measures (speech rate and pauses). The overall fluency 
scale ranged from very dysfluent to very fluent. The temporal measure ranged from very unnatural to very 
natural (see Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2. Rater scale for overall fluency and speech rate and pauses. 
For the qualitative analysis, transcripts of the semi-structured interviews were analysed to generate 
categories based on topics that emerged in relation to themes in the literature and scope of the study, as well 
as themes from the pilot test (Grimshaw et al., 2015). These categories are further analysed below to answer 
the second research question. 
166 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Results 
Syllables per Minute 
A repeated measures factoral design test was conducted to measure the difference between the treatment 
and control groups on the pre-test and the two post-tests, in which the independent variable was the 
treatment and the dependent variable was SPM. Results indicated that there was not a significant difference 
in improvement between groups over time (see Table 1), as p = .395 (ɑ = 0.05). 
On average, the treatment group improved slightly from pre-test (M = 108.27, SE = 8.36) to post-test (M = 
111.09, SE = 8.76; see Table 1). However, a Wilcoxon signed-rank test indicated that there was no 
significant difference between the pre- and post-tests (Z = -0.31, p = .755); there was also no significant 
difference between the pre-test and delayed post-test (Z = -1.78, p = .075). The control group, on the other 
hand, decreased in performance from pre-test (M = 112.67, SE = 10.21) to post-test (M = 101.78, SE = 
7.71). A Wilcoxon signed-rank test again shows no significant difference between the pre- and post-tests 
(Z = -1.49, p = .137) nor between the pre-test and delayed post-test (Z = -1.01, p = .314). 
Table 1. SPM for Storytelling Task 
Group 
Pre-Test  Post-Test  Delayed Post-Test 
M SD  M SD  M SD 
Treatment 108.27 27.72  111.09 27.71  120.27 25.82 
Control 112.67 30.63  101.78 23.13  123.78 29.59 
Judges’ Ratings 
The intraclass correlation coefficient for L1 and L2 English judges at the pre-test showed high agreement 
for speech rate and pauses and overall fluency (r = .933 and .911, respectively). 
Overall Fluency: Judges’ Ratings 
Judges’ ratings for the category of overall fluency (see Table 1), were examined during the pre-tests, post-
tests, and delayed post-tests. A repeated measures factoral design test was conducted for each test. Results 
indicated that there was not a significant difference between the treatment and control groups over time (p 
= .11; see Table 2). 
Table 2. Overall Fluency Ratings for Storytelling Task 
Group 
Pre-Test  Post-Test  Delayed Post-Test 
M SD  M SD  M SD 
Treatment 3.57 0.54  3.71 0.48  3.85 0.51 
Control 3.51 0.46  3.14 0.36  3.52 0.70 
On average, judges rated the treatment group higher on the post-test (M = 3.71, SE = 0.14) than on the pre-
test (M = 3.57, SE = 0.15). A Wilcoxon signed-rank test showed no significant difference between pre-test 
and post-test (Z = -0.76, p = .485). However, there was a significant difference between pre-test and delayed 
post-test results for the game-playing group (Z = -2.09, p = .035). The control group scores on this measure, 
however, decreased from pre-test (M = 3.51, SE = 0.15) to post-test (M = 3.14, SE = 0.11). A Wilcoxon 
signed-rank test showed a significant difference between the pre-test and post-test (Z = -2.03, p = .047). 
There was no significant difference between pre-test and delayed post-test (Z = -0.12, p = .930). 
Jennica Grimshaw and Walcir Cardoso 167 
 
Speech Rate and Pauses: Judges’ Ratings 
A repeated measures factoral design test was conducted and results showed that there was no significant 
difference between groups over time, according to judges’ ratings of speech rate and pauses (p = .122; see 
Table 3). 
On average, judges rated the treatment group slightly higher on the post-test (M = 3.51, SE = 0.18) than on 
the pre-test (M = 3.32, SE = 0.18). However, a Wilcoxon signed-rank test showed no significant difference 
between pre-test and post-test (Z = -0.94, p = .372); there was also no significant difference between the 
pre-test and delayed post-test (Z = -1.96, p = .052). The control group scores on this measure, on the other 
hand, decreased from pre-test (M = 3.35, SE = 0.14) to post-test (M = 3.00, SE = 0.10). A Wilcoxon signed-
rank test showed a significant decrease between pre-test and post-test (Z = -2.67, p = .004), but no 
significant difference between pre-test and delayed post-test (Z = -0.42, p = .734). 
Table 3. Speech Rate and Pause Ratings for Storytelling Task 
Group 
Pre-Test  Post-Test  Delayed Post-Test 
M SD  M SD  M SD 
Treatment 3.32 0.60  3.51 0.56  3.72 0.55 
Control 3.35 0.42  3.00 0.31  3.26 0.93 
Learner Perspectives 
To answer the second research question regarding learners’ perceptions of Spaceteam ESL as a pedagogical 
tool to reduce anxiety and increase WTC, seven participants from the treatment group completed semi-
structured interviews after the post-test in week 6. Categories were created based on analyses of the themes 
that appeared in the interviews (for a more extensive selection of themes, see the Appendix). 
Anxiety 
Most participants reported that they felt less anxious than usual in class after playing the game: “[I feel] a 
little more [comfortable] than I am normally.” “I feel good, it’s funny. For this I feel relaxed.” Some 
participants commented that the game helped to reduce the level of embarrassment they felt in class: “It’s 
more embarrassing before I play the game, but after … I am [embarrassed] but it’s slowly less.” “I just have 
to read, I think it’s not embarrassing, you just game in group.” In addition, participants also perceived that 
the game reduced feelings of anxiety, allowing them to practice their pronunciation with peers: “I feel 
relaxed, the game is funny, and to [speak] with other people at the same level, it’s ok.” “[I] feel good … 
because we practiced to tell the word we don’t know.” In other words, although the oral output was forced 
during gameplay, the fun aspect of the experience helped to reduce anxiety and therefore encouraged 
pronunciation practice. The CMC element of gameplay also appeared to have reduced communication 
anxiety: “It’s more easy to speak to other people when I don’t see this, when I see the screen.” 
WTC 
The time constraints on output production imposed by the game seemed to have encouraged students to 
produce more output than in normal classroom activities: “I use more English in [a short period of] time … 
because in class I never speak because I don’t like.” However, any higher levels of WTC experienced during 
gameplay did not appear to influence WTC in the classroom context when not playing Spaceteam ESL, as 
some participants suggested that they felt the same in class after playing the game. One student stated, “I’m 
comfortable if I don’t speak [in class]” and therefore continued not to participate in class. 
Teamwork 
Participants readily recognized that success in the game was dependent on teamwork. Not only did players 
need to work together to succeed, but they were reliant on each other for feedback on their pronunciation. 
168 Language Learning & Technology 
 
If a player’s teammate misunderstood a command, then they knew that they had made a pronunciation error: 
“If you tell a sentence and the other people don’t understand … you need to have a good [speaking] and a 
good [listening].” When players recognized their errors, they would often repeat the words, playing with or 
modifying their pronunciation: “If it’s my word that not are completed, I will repeat … if I don’t understand 
that another person tell, yes, I will ask him to repeat.” One participant found the teamwork aspect of the 
game to be particularly motivating, stating that success in the game “[is] not for me, it’s for team spirit, it’s 
not just me, it’s all my team to try to learn English.” Each team member therefore contributed to the learning 
experience of their peers. 
Familiarity 
Some participants reported that playing Spaceteam ESL helped them to get to know their classmates: “It 
made me work with a people I never talked, so we are laughing and that’s fun.” Players also mentioned that 
the experience helped to facilitate interaction with peers to create a comfortable learning environment: “I 
talk when I play on the iPads … and after we talk [about] the game. [It helps me] to have communication 
with other people in my class.” “I was probably more comfortable to talk with them [during the game].” It 
was unclear, however, if this had an impact on their interactions in class after gameplay. 
Discussion 
This study investigated the effects of playing the mobile team building game Spaceteam ESL on fluency 
development and examined participants’ perceptions of the game as a tool to reduce anxiety and increase 
WTC. Two research questions were addressed: (1) Does playing Spaceteam ESL affect fluency 
development in English as a second language (ESL) learners? (2) What are learner perceptions of 
Spaceteam ESL as a tool to reduce anxiety and increase WTC? 
For the first research question, the only significant difference observed involved the game-playing group, 
which displayed a significant improvement from pre-test to delayed post-test according to the judges’ 
ratings of fluency. On the other measures (SPM and judge’s ratings of speech rate and pauses), results 
showed no significant difference between the treatment and control groups. However, results show a trend 
for these two measures, as the treatment group consistently outperformed the control group from pre-test 
to post-test, although not significantly. For the second research question, data collected from participant 
interviews revealed that the game was perceived as a means to lower anxiety and encourage pronunciation 
practice; results regarding WTC were inconclusive. 
Fluency Development 
While results suggested that there was no significant difference in improvement between SPM scores for 
the treatment and control groups between the pre-test and the two post-tests, the results did show a slight 
trend favoring the group that engaged in gameplay. This trend, observed in SPM results for the storytelling 
task (Table 1) suggests that, although there was no significant improvement over time, the scores of the 
treatment group did appear to improve between pre- and post-tests, whereas the control group scores 
remained the same or even decreased between the tests (with a significant decrease in speech rate and 
pauses from pre-test to post-test). Participants in the treatment group continued to improve through the 
delayed post-test. The control group, interestingly, also improved from pre-test to delayed post-test, despite 
their decline in performance at the post-test. 
In the judges’ ratings (Table 2 and Table 3), we see another story. Judges’ ratings for overall fluency show 
that the judges perceived the treatment group as improving significantly from pre-test to delayed post-test, 
although not significantly from pre-test to post-test. As in the SPM results, the treatment group showed 
steady improvement while the control group’s performance decreased in the post-test, significantly so in 
the case of speech rate and pauses. Judges’ ratings overall reiterated the suggestion by Derwing et al. (2009) 
that speech rate and pauses play a significant role in the definition of fluency. Judges’ ratings for overall 
fluency and rate of speech and pauses between tests were correlated: as fluency ratings increased (or 
Jennica Grimshaw and Walcir Cardoso 169 
 
decreased), so did scores for speech rate and pauses as rated by judges. Therefore, as students’ fluency 
increased, their speech rate and pauses became more natural, and vice versa. 
These trends in fluency development observed for the treatment group may agree with the predictions of 
Swain’s (2000) output hypothesis. As discussed earlier, Swain suggests that students learn through output 
and production practice in their L2, as they need to experiment with their hypotheses regarding the language 
and its structures, to see how the language functions, and to learn from trial and error. When playing 
Spaceteam ESL, players were forced to produce output: if they did not say their commands orally, their 
team would not be successful. Players were therefore held accountable for their actions and were thus more 
likely to work harder (AbuSeileek, 2012). This forced output also allowed players to experiment with 
pronunciation and receive peer feedback based on success or errors, thereby supporting Swain’s (2000) 
output hypothesis. 
Output (i.e., oral production) is also a requirement for fluency development (Nation & Newton, 2008). Not 
only were players required to produce output to be successful, but they had to do so in a limited amount of 
time. In the current study, participants were encouraged to increase the game speed as they progressed 
through game levels over the treatment sessions (users had the ability to control the game speed). This 
attention to the speeding up of language use might have contributed to the treatment group’s progressive 
increase in SPM scores, as well as judges’ ratings for overall fluency and both speech rate and pauses. 
While participants in the control group also had to produce output in a limited amount of time to complete 
their tasks, there was not the same amount of time pressure or need for feedback as in Spaceteam ESL. 
These students might therefore not have felt the need to perform efficiently. However, as the results for the 
treatment and control groups were not significant, a longer treatment period for both groups is required to 
help better understand the relationship between mobile games such as Spaceteam ESL and fluency 
development. 
The timing of the post-tests and delayed post-tests may provide an explanation for the statistically 
insignificant results of the treatment group and the decline in performance for the control group. There were 
a number of factors that were out of the researcher’s control. Most significantly, there was a week’s break 
between the treatment sessions in Weeks 5 and 6 for the institution’s spring break, during which participants 
had little exposure to English. Participants also had a mid-term oral evaluation which preceded the post-
tests and delayed post-tests, further distracting them from their testing performance. Additionally, due to 
the oral evaluation and other time constraints, the length of the last treatment in Week 6 was reduced to 5–
10 minutes. 
Despite the unfortunate timing of the post-tests and delayed post-tests, participants in the treatment group 
displayed an overall pattern of improvement, albeit not statistically significant for two of the measures. This 
suggests that Spaceteam ESL has the potential to be used as an effective warm-up activity. Unlike 
traditional classroom activities, Spaceteam ESL offers students and teachers a pre-packaged fluency 
development activity (as outlined by Nation & Newton, 2008). It encourages players to speed up their use 
of familiar language items. It also requires little preparation and planning, unlike paper-based or 
conversation activities prepared by the teacher. Spaceteam ESL does not require access to a computer lab 
and is readily available on mobile devices. This increases the portability and accessibility of the game as a 
fluency development activity. 
In addition, the game may be used by students outside of the class to continue oral production practice with 
friends or family members. Although Quebec college students study English for approximately eight years 
prior to admittance, they often do not make significant progress over the course of their language learning 
training, possibly due to their limited exposure to the target language and the lack of distributed and retrieval 
practice, as recommended by Roediger and Pyc (2012). Nation and Macalister (2009) call for teachers and 
curriculum developers to “work within the constraint” or “[overcome] the constraint” (p. 20) of time in the 
classroom to maximize the learning experience. By encouraging and motivating students to continue 
practicing the L2 outside the classroom, language teachers can compensate for limited class time and 
learners can become more proficient and fluent in a shorter period of time. Spaceteam ESL may therefore 
170 Language Learning & Technology 
 
serve as a tool to encourage students to practice oral production outside the classroom, contributing to their 
fluency development and compensating for gaps in class time. 
Learner Perspectives 
Interviews with participants suggest that Spaceteam ESL was positively perceived by the treatment group, 
and participants generally experienced feelings of comfort while engaging in gameplay. For one participant, 
gameplay made him “feel a little more [comfortable] than [he is] normally.” As seen in the literature, the 
CMC element of the game may have contributed to the creation of a comfortable atmosphere, reducing the 
pressure and anxiety of FTF communication by allowing students to focus on the device’s screen, gameplay, 
and the giving and receiving input and output, rather than on how others may perceive their performance. 
Another participant expressed this idea clearly: “It’s more easy to speak to other people when I don’t see 
this, when I see the screen,” corroborating the findings of other studies addressing anxiety and CMC (e.g., 
Arnold, 2007; Baralt & Gurzynski-Weiss, 2011). The fun aspect of mobile gaming may also help to reduce 
anxiety: “it’s [fun], for this I feel relaxed.” 
Participant comments also suggest that the teamwork aspect of the game was beneficial in two different 
ways: it helped to increase familiarity between peers and provided players with peer feedback. This 
corroborates the position of Dörnyei and Kormos (2000) and MacIntyre et al. (1998) that group tasks can 
contribute to a sense of belonging and increase familiarity between group members, which can, in turn, 
increase student WTC. As one of the participants pointed out, “I was probably more comfortable to talk 
with [my peers]” during gameplay, suggesting that WTC levels were higher during gameplay than in other 
tasks. The fun aspect of gameplay, as suggested earlier, may also encourage players to participate and use 
English. One participant admitted that the game was “more fun than English class, we can learn when you 
play so it’s fun.” Warschauer and Healey (1998) suggest the fun aspect of gameplay may be motivating for 
language learners and thereby encourage participation. 
It is not clear, however, if the benefits of gameplay influenced student WTC in other contexts, in or outside 
of the classroom. While participants expressed feeling more comfortable and less anxious after the 
experience, they did not admit speaking more often in class. It is possible then that the predictions for raised 
WTC in the classroom after gameplay may have been misplaced. J. Steele (personal communication, April 
22, 2016) pointed out that while WTC might have increased while participants played the game, WTC 
levels could not be expected to carry over into a completely different task setting. Players might have been 
more willing to produce language during gameplay, but the gaming environment was very different from 
the classroom or testing environments. It is therefore unclear whether the WTC experienced during gaming 
sessions carried over into class, contrary to what was suggested by the pilot study. Despite this, participants 
still experienced the forced output required by Spaceteam ESL, which required them to produce and use 
language in an intelligible manner and under a time constraint. 
Conclusions 
Spaceteam ESL offers a combination of features that encourages fluency development. Not only does it 
address all requirements for a fluency development activity as outlined by Nation and Newton (2008), but 
it also provides the safety of CMC with opportunities for oral output and immediate (peer) feedback, 
addressing the missing component of previous CMC studies (e.g., Baralt & Gurzynski-Weiss, 2011). The 
game also offers a fluency development activity that is pre-prepared and ready for use in the language 
classroom, requiring little preparation from the teacher. Although the treatment group only showed 
significant improvement from the pre-test to the delayed post-test on judges’ ratings of overall fluency, the 
data suggest that playing Spaceteam ESL as a warm-up activity may also affect related aspects of speech, 
such as rate of speech and frequency and duration of pauses. Further research, under more controllable 
circumstances, is needed to determine how much the game can truly influence the development of oral 
fluency. 
Several factors may have contributed to reduced levels of anxiety. As participants reported in the interviews, 
Jennica Grimshaw and Walcir Cardoso 171 
 
participating in gameplay increased feelings of comfort with English in general and encouraged familiarity 
among peers, contributing to a favorable learning environment. Participants were also able to practice their 
pronunciation and receive feedback from peers in a non-threatening manner as a result of the teamwork 
aspect of the game. Players were not judged for errors, and teammates frequently helped one another. 
Further investigation is required to determine the impact of gameplay, if any, on student levels of WTC, as 
this was not explicitly addressed by participants in the interview data. 
There were several limitations in the study, some of which were technical in nature, others methodological. 
Focusing on the technical limitations first, there were some difficulties at the institution (e.g., the 
malfunctioning of some iPads), resulting in some delays during class. Also, as the class only met once a 
week, participants only had a total of 90 minutes maximum of exposure to the treatment, which may not 
have been enough to produce significant results. The instructor was not as strict with the timing of the 
control group activities, but attempted to keep within the 15-minute time frame. Another significant 
limitation was the timing of the post-tests and delayed post-tests, mentioned earlier. Because the testing 
took place after a week of vacation and following mid-term oral evaluations, some participants commented 
that they were tired and were not eager to participate. This is reflected in the quantitative results, as the 
results of some individuals (in both groups) decreased from pre-test to post-test. The final treatment session 
in Week 6 was also shortened (to 5–10 minutes) due to time constraints implemented by the instructor. In 
future studies, the researchers are keen to replicate this investigation over a longer period (i.e., a full school 
semester) and under more controllable circumstances. 
As seen in previous studies (Grimshaw et al., 2015; Papadima-Sophocleous, 2015; Stockwell, 2007), the 
implementation of mobile devices has been successful with language learners. Digital gaming has also 
shown promise and has been used to develop a variety of language skills (Allen et al., 2014; Kim, 2014; 
Lan, 2014; Reinders & Wattana, 2014). Despite the limitations faced in the study, results suggest that 
mobile games such as Spaceteam ESL may be beneficial to encouraging oral fluency development while 
reducing learner anxiety. Spaceteam ESL, like many other mobile apps, offers a ready-made language 
practice activity that can be used anywhere by anyone. With its endless possibilities, mobile gaming in L2 
education may prove to be invaluable to language development. 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank the people who were involved in different aspects of this study: David Waddington, 
Teresa Hernandez Gonzalez, Henry Smith, Elisabeth Maegerlein, Eric Dahl, Alexandre Dion, Stef Rucco, 
Nina Padden, George Smith, Lauren Strachen, Tiago Bione, June Ruivivar, and Kym Taylor. Finally, we 
would like to acknowledge the invaluable contribution of the participants and judges. 
References 
AbuSeileek, A. F. (2012). The effect of computer-assisted cooperative learning methods and group size 
on the EFL learners’ achievement in communication skills. Computers & Education, 58(1), 231–239. 
Allen, L. K., Crossley, S. A., Snow, E. L., & McNamara, D. S. (2014). L2 writing practice: Game 
enjoyment as a key to engagement. Language Learning & Technology, 18(2), 124–150. 
http://dx.doi.org/10125/44373 
Arnold, N. (2007). Reducing foreign language communication apprehension with computer-mediated 
communication: A preliminary study. System, 35(4), 469–486. 
Baralt, M., & Gurzynski-Weiss, L. (2011). Comparing learners’ state anxiety during task-based 
interaction in computer-mediated and face-to-face communication. Language Teaching Research, 
15(2), 201–229. 
172 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Baran-Łucarz, M. (2014). Pronunciation anxiety and willingness to communicate in the foreign language 
classroom. Concordia Papers in Applied Linguistics, 5, 36–49. 
Blake, C. (2009). Potential of text‐based internet chats for improving oral fluency in a second language. 
The Modern Language Journal, 93(2), 227–240. 
Chapelle, C. (2003). English language learning and technology. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins. 
Chik, A. (2014). Digital gaming and language learning: Autonomy and community. Language Learning 
& Technology, 18(2), 85–100. http://dx.doi.org/10125/44371 
Derwing, T. M., Munro, M. J., Thomson, R. I., & Rossiter, M. J. (2009). The relationship between L1 
fluency and L2 fluency development. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 31(4), 533–557. 
Dörnyei, Z. (2005). The psychology of the language learner: Individual differences in second language 
acquisition. Mahwah, NJ: Routledge. 
Dörnyei, Z., & Kormos, J. (2000). The role of individual and social variables in oral task performance. 
Language Teaching Research, 4(3), 275–300. 
Ducate, L., & Lomicka, L. (2009). Podcasting: An effective tool for honing language students’ 
pronunciation? Language Learning & Technology, 13(3), 66–86. http://dx.doi.org/10125/44192 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2014). Games in language learning: Opportunities and challenges. Language Learning 
& Technology, 18(2), 9–19. http://dx.doi.org/10125/44363 
Götz, S. (2013). Fluency in native and nonnative English speech. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins. 
Gregersen, T., & MacIntyre, P. D. (2014). Capitalizing on language learners’ individuality: From 
premise to practice. Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Grimshaw, J., Cardoso, W., & Waddington, D. (2015). Save brown space chicken! Student perceptions of 
Spaceteam ESL. In J. Demperio, E. Rosales, & S. Springer (Eds.), Proceedings of the Second Annual 
Meeting on English Language Teaching. Montreal, QC, Université du Québec à Montréal. 
Hird, K., & Kirsner, K. (2010). Objective measurement of fluency in natural language production: A 
dynamic systems approach. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 23(5), 518–530. 
Horwitz, E. K., Horwitz, M. B., & Cope, J. (1986). Foreign language classroom anxiety. The Modern 
Language Journal, 70(2), 125–132. 
Kim, S. H. (2014). Developing autonomous learning for oral proficiency using digital storytelling. 
Language Learning & Technology, 18(2), 20–35. http://dx.doi.org/10125/44364 
Lan, Y. J. (2014). Does Second Life improve Mandarin learning by overseas Chinese students? Language 
Learning & Technology, 18(2), 36–56. http://dx.doi.org/10125/44365 
MacIntyre, P. D., Dörnyei, Z., Clément, R., & Noels, K. A. (1998). Conceptualizing willingness to 
communicate in a L2: A situational model of L2 confidence and affiliation. The Modern Language 
Journal, 82(4), 545–562. 
Nation, P., & Macalister, J. (2009). Language curriculum design. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Nation, P., & Newton, J. (2008). Teaching ESL/EFL listening and speaking. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Ogata, H., & Yano, Y. (2003). How ubiquitous computing can support language learning. In Proceedings 
of Knowledge, Economy, and Development of Science and Technology (pp. 1–6). Honjo, Japan: 
Advanced Information Systems Engineering Laboratory. 
Papadima-Sophocleous, S. (2015). Integrating computer assisted language learning into out-of-class 
extended learning: The impact of iPod Touch-supported repeated reading on the oral reading fluency 
of English for specific academic purposes students. The Reading Matrix, 15(1), 188–205. 
Jennica Grimshaw and Walcir Cardoso 173 
 
Reinders, H., & Wattana, S. (2014). Can I say something? The effects of digital gameplay on willingness 
to communicate. Language Learning & Technology, 18(2), 101–123. http://dx.doi.org/10125/44372 
Roediger, H. L. III, & Pyc, M. A. (2012). Inexpensive techniques to improve education: Applying 
cognitive psychology to enhance educational practice. Journal of Applied Research in Memory and 
Cognition, 1(4), 242–248. 
Smith, H. (2012). Spaceteam [Mobile application software]. Retrieved from http://spaceteam.ca 
Stockwell, G. (2007). Vocabulary on the move: Investigating an intelligent mobile phone-based 
vocabulary tutor. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 20(4), 365–383. 
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond: Mediating acquisition through collaborative 
dialogue. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 97–114). 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Warschauer, M., & Healey, D. (1998). Computers and language learning: An overview. Language 
Teaching, 31(2), 57–71. 
Appendix. Participant Responses 
Participant Category Comment 
1 Familiarity “[I talk to] maybe 2 or 3 people … a little because it made me work 
with a people to I never talked, so we are laughing and that’s fun” 
 Anxiety “I’m not stressed … I’m relaxed [while playing the game]” [in class, 
after gameplay] 
 Anxiety “[I feel] comfortable, just a little more than I am normally” 
 Pronunciation “yeah maybe, but that’s not a big help, but it’s a little help … with the 
pronunciation of words, but only specific words like asteroid or 
wormhole” 
 Teamwork “because if we only read the thing we need to do we can’t do all the job 
because sometimes the things is on the other iPad” 
 Pronunciation “we repeat the word [when a misunderstanding occurs]” 
2 Pronunciation “The game is very good and I think it’s best practice for [repeating] the 
same words.” 
 Anxiety “I feel good, it’s funny. For this I feel relaxed.” 
 Anxiety/ 
Pronunciation 
“I feel relaxed, the game is funny, and to spell with other people at the 
same level, it’s ok” 
 Pronunciation “I like practice and repeat the words” 
 Anxiety / WTC “It’s more easy to speak to other people when I don’t see this, when I 
see the screen” 
 Teamwork “It’s a team, it’s very team because if you tell a sentence and the other 
people don’t understand, it’s very team, you need to have a good telling 
and a good reception.” 
 Pronunciation “[If there’s a problem] I repeat the word” 
 Pronunciation/ 
Anxiety 
“The pronunciation, and remove the [embarrassment]” 
3 Familiarity “The contact with the people” 
174 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 WTC “It’s fun, it’s more fun than English class, we can learn when you play 
so it’s fun” 
 Pronunciation “The word, the new word, and the pronunciation” 
 Teamwork “Because we can practice communication and that’s it, so you can 
speak in English” 
 Pronunciation “I say that if he can repeat” 
 WTC / Anxiety “I’m comfortable if I don’t speak [in class]” 
 Pronunciation “With the new words, and the team” 
4 Familiarity “Yes, I know them, because I talk when I play on the iPads” 
 Familiarity “Because the game, and after we talk [about] the game and all this to 
have communication with other people in my class” 
 Other “It’s a game, it’s the same to play with my phone on another game, it’s 
just talking in English with another person” 
 Anxiety [regarding comfort, stress] “it’s just fun” 
 Anxiety “it’s more embarrassing before I play the game, but after it’s … I am 
[embarrassed] but it’s slowly less” 
 Teamwork “because it’s spirits, it’s game spirts, it’s not for me it’s for team spirit, 
it’s not just me it’s all my team to try to learn English” 
 Pronunciation “I try to help … I try to search the word, or try another [way of 
pronouncing]” 
 Pronunciation “it’s the same word but yes, it helped me to talk more, but not only to 
talk more, it’s the word we have in the game, my pronunciation is more 
good, but the other words don’t help me to explain, to say the other 
words, it’s just the word in the game that I pronunciate more” 
 Other “I like the movement and it’s easy so it’s fun … it’s not complicated” 
5 Other “but I really like to speak in English and play this game, it’s really fun” 
 Pronunciation / 
WTC 
“I use more English in more small time … because in class I never 
speak because I don’t like” 
 Familiarity “I just play the game with them” 
 Anxiety “I didn’t pay attention about my nervousity in English” 
 Other “I really like this game, it’s easy it’s not hard” 
 Teamwork “it’s not a solo game, it’s a spaceship team” 
6 Anxiety “I was probably more comfortable to talk with them [through the 
game]” 
 Anxiety “comfortable, relaxed, you just had to read [in the game]” 
 Teamwork “it’s teamwork, you know, you need to work to do it in team, to go to 
the next level and advance” 
 Pronunciation “first of all I repeat the sentence, and after if he make a mistake, it 
happened” 
 Teamwork “we work in team to advance” 
 Pronunciation [English improvement] “yes, a little bit, for the pronunciation of some 
words” 
Jennica Grimshaw and Walcir Cardoso 175 
 
 Anxiety / 
Pronunciation 
“It will help you to become more comfortable in English, it will help 
you to pronounce some words” 
7 Anxiety / 
Teamwork 
“Good. Very good, I just have to read, I think it’s not embarrassing, you 
just game in group, it’s ok, it’s very good.” 
 Anxiety / 
Pronunciation 
“Feel good [i.e. comfortable after gameplay] … yes because we 
practiced to tell the word we don’t know so it’s good to practice 
English” 
 Other “because it’s simple, so we just have to read and the other person just 
have to complete, so I think it’s simple, so if we’re not good in English 
it’s easy” 
 Teamwork “because if you tell the words, the person complete, and if you don’t 
tell … and if I tell the word, and my team don’t put the button, so the 
time runs out, so I think it’s a team” 
 Pronunciation “we repeat … if it’s my word that not are completed, I will repeat but 
because my time … if I don’t understand that another person tell, yes I 
will ask him to repeat” 
 Pronunciation “we take more time to pronunciate words, because like individual, in 
the game you practice how to separate the word, so it’s helped to do it 
again with other words” 
About the Authors 
Jennica Grimshaw is a PhD student in Applied Linguistics at Concordia University. Her research focuses 
on the use of mobile technologies, gaming, and speech technology in second language learning with a focus 
on pronunciation. 
E-mail: jennica.grimshaw@concordia.ca 
Walcir Cardoso is a Professor of Applied Linguistics at Concordia University. He conducts research on the 
effects of computer technology (e.g., clickers, text-to-speech synthesizers, automatic speech recognition) 
on L2 learning and the L2 acquisition of phonology, morphosyntax, and vocabulary. 
E-mail: walcir.cardoso@concordia.ca 
