Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2018, Volume 22, Issue 1 
pp. 56–59 
BOOK REVIEW  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Han Luo & Min Gui 
 
 
Review of Online intercultural exchange: 
Policy, pedagogy, practice 
Han Luo, Lafayette College 
Min Gui, Wuhan University 
 
Online intercultural exchange: Policy, pedagogy, practice 
O’Dowd, R., & Lewis, T. (Eds.) 
2016 
ISBN: 978-1138932876 
US $122.62 
308 pp. 
Routledge 
New York, NY  
Online intercultural exchange (OIE), also known as telecollaboration, is defined as “the activity of 
engaging language learners in interaction and collaborative project work with partners from other cultures 
through the use of online communication tools such as e-mail, videoconferencing, and discussion forums” 
(O’Dowd, 2007, p. 4). Research on OIE has flourished in the past 20 years, evidenced by a large number 
of journal articles, dedicated journal special issues (e.g., Belz, 2003; Lewis, Chanier, & Youngs, 2011), 
and edited volumes (Belz & Throne, 2006; Dooly, 2008; Dooly & O’Dowd, 2012; Guth & Helm, 2010; 
O’Dowd, 2007; Warschauer, 1995, 1996; Warschauer & Kern, 2000). Compared to other edited volumes 
on telecollaboration in the market, this book provides a state-of-the-art overview of OIE and focuses on 
its use in university education around the world. 
This 17-chapter edited volume consists of five parts: an overview of OIE (Part I), the integration of OIE 
in university education (Part II), the pedagogy of OIE (Part III), OIE in practice (Part IV), and the future 
of OIE (Part V). 
Part I includes two chapters co-authored by the editors of the book, Lewis and O’Dowd. The first chapter 
gives a brief explanation of OIE and the organization of the book. The authors identify three levels of 
integration of OIE into university of education: classroom-independent, classroom-dependent, and 
institution-integrated. The second chapter provides a systematic review of OIE in foreign language 
learning. Recurrent trends and commonalities emerging from the literature include linguistic development, 
intercultural communicative competence, ethnography, relational approaches to intercultural 
communicative competence development, working together through joint tasks, and learner autonomy in 
OIE. 
Part II (Chapters 3–6) looks at the current and potential impacts of OIE at institutional levels around the 
globe. In Chapter 3, De Wit links two innovative trends of higher education in the past two decades (i.e., 
internationalization and online learning) and focuses on the significant role OIE can play in enhancing the 
internationalization of higher education. He argues that online intercultural learning is a logical step 
toward a more inclusive, innovative approach to internationalization. 
The remaining three chapters of this part examine the practice of OIE in different geographical contexts 
Han Luo and Min Gui 57 
 
across the world. In Chapter 4, Guth provides an overview of OIE in European higher education based on 
survey data with a focus on programmatic or institutional issues. Through close examination of teachers’ 
and students’ perceptions and challenges as well as in-depth analysis of seven institutions as case studies, 
Guth urges OIE to be normalized and institutionalized in Europe. Next, Wilson focuses on the North-
American higher-education context and uses two U.S.–European telecollaborative partnerships to 
demonstrate the consequences of contrastive top-down institutional and national policies on the 
implementation of OIE in higher education institutions. He highlights the need for university 
administrators to develop common ground between their internationalization strategies and OIE. Finally, 
Tudini provides a snapshot of OIE initiatives in Australian higher education based on a review of six 
studies involving educators in Australia as initiators or partners in an exchange project. Due to 
geographical isolation, OIE receives considerable attention in Australia and may develop promisingly if 
carefully nurtured at an institutional level. 
Part III is made up of five chapters (Chapters 7–11) dedicated to the practical and pedagogical issues that 
one would encounter in the process of setting up a telecollaborative exchange, ranging from task design to 
project assessment. In Chapter 7, Müller-Hartmann and Kurek report the findings of an intercultural 
teacher training project using activity theory for data analysis. They specifically explore which factors 
impact task development in the group negotiation process and how intercultural communicative 
competence is developed during task-induced interactions. Chapter 8 presents a dialogic model of OIE 
and focuses on the role of facilitators in this form of exchange. Based on data collected from a 7-week 
dialogic exchange between students in the Middle East and the United States with the help of two 
facilitators, Helm discusses how this model of OIE can be utilized in future telecollaboration. In Chapter 
9, Nissen analyzes and compares six carefully selected blended learning courses that combine OIE and 
face-to-face sessions, aiming at identifying common approaches to designing blended learning courses 
with an OIE component. Important aspects of designing such courses include choosing a lead mode, 
sequencing tasks, determining the teacher’s role, and more. Chapter 10 focuses on exploring what makes 
a telecollaboratively efficient person (TEP). Dooly critically examines current intercultural competence 
theories, identifies characteristics that can help individuals become competent telecollaborators, and 
justifies the TEP set of descriptors, which fall into four main domains: online language competencies, 
social competencies, technical competencies, and intercultural competencies. In the last chapter of Part III, 
Hauck and MacKinnon recognize the challenges of sustaining participation and the significance of 
motivation in OIE activity. Therefore, they propose a soft certification framework as an incentive for 
participant engagement and task execution based on the use of open badges, digital images that can be 
displayed online as evidence of achievements. 
Five chapters (Chapters 12–16) form Part IV, a section devoted to OIE initiatives and emerging models in 
higher education around the world. Part IV not only represents a collection of examples of good 
telecollaborative practice, but also directs OIE practitioners into the most recent trends of 
telecollaboration in university education. In Chapter 12, MacKinnon reports on the Clavier network, a 
large-scale exchange that puts emphasis on informal interaction with minimal intervention from 
instructors. In this network, students can determine the nature of the activities that they would like to be 
engaged in and choose communication channels to blur the boundaries between formal and informal 
learning. In Chapter 13, Leone and Telles introduce the Teletandem Brazil project, in which two students 
help each other to learn their native language through online synchronous intercultural and linguistic 
collaboration. Compared to many other eTandem projects focusing on written in-tandem interactions, the 
Teletandem project is characterized by the use of webcam images of the partners, along with synchronous 
voice and text interaction. Chapter 14 presents the Cultura model, a well-established and influential 
intercultural exchange framework developed at MIT. As Furstenberg explains, Cultura starts with the 
notion of cultural comparisons and offers a comparative approach that asks learners to observe, compare, 
and analyze parallel materials from their respective cultures. In Chapter 15, Byram reports the Cultnet 
Intercultural Citizenship project, which aims at establishing citizenship education as the focus of foreign 
language teaching and learning. This project involves a network of researchers working together in 
58 Language Learning & Technology 
 
groups of two, three, or four on seven sub-projects, while being aware of each other’s work through 
frequent emails and a real-time collaborative editing system. In Chapter 16, Rubin describes the 
Collaborative Online International Learning Network created by the State University of New York system 
to develop online and hybrid courses with international dimensions. These courses intend to implement 
internationalized classrooms through team-taught learning environments, where teachers from two or 
more cultures develop shared syllabi that foster experiential and collaborative student learning. 
The concluding section, Part V consists of only one chapter (Chapter 17), in which O’Dowd examines in 
detail the criticisms toward OIE raised in the literature and proposes ways in which practitioners and 
researchers can continue to improve the efficiency of OIE in response to these concerns. He also explores 
how OIE can be developed and utilized for other disciplines in future university education in addition to 
foreign language education. 
This volume is a delightful addition to the field of telecollaboration due to its wide scope, high quality, 
and pedagogical orientation. First, a strength of this volume lies in its breadth and sophistication in 
addressing a wide range of issues related to OIE. Rather than focusing on the traditional role of OIE in 
foreign language teaching and learning, this volume explores OIE as a major tool for internationalization, 
intercultural development, and virtual mobility in universities around the globe. Second, this book is of 
high quality, manifested in two aspects: well-written individual chapters and sophisticatedly structured 
organization. All the contributors to this volume are well-established researchers as well as experienced 
practitioners of OIE who bring depth of discussion and unique insight to the topics discussed, a feat that 
would be hard to achieve otherwise. In addition, this volume is very well organized into five parts 
devoted to important themes (e.g., OIE around the globe and models of practice). It is worth mentioning 
that some parts even have their own micro substructure. For example, the five chapters in Part III (i.e., 
pedagogical issues of OIE) follow the sequence in which these issues are encountered in the course of 
conducting an OIE from task design to assessment. Third, the collection of short reports of OIE initiatives 
from universities around the world adds to the practical value of this book. These practitioner-authored 
and practically oriented overviews of newly emerging practical models of OIE provide a great potential 
resource for teachers who are interested in incorporating OIE in developing intercultural competencies of 
their students. 
In spite of its high quality and unique contribution, this book has a few areas that leave something to be 
desired. First of all, the goal of this volume is to provide “an overview of how OIE currently is being 
implemented and integrated in university foreign language education around the globe” (p. 273). 
However, the OIE exchanges reported in this volume mainly involve Europe, the United States, and 
Australia, with no discussion of the practice of this activity in Asian countries. Moreover, discussions on 
telecollaboration involving less commonly taught languages, such as Chinese, are absent from this book. 
Second, although the pedagogical orientation and practical models featured in this book may, to a great 
extent, benefit experienced OIE practitioners, new telecollaborators may find this book less useful or even 
difficult to understand as this book presumes substantial prior knowledge on this topic. Third, readers 
who particularly look for models of empirical research on OIE may find this book disappointing. Most 
chapters of this book, with the exception of Chapter 7 by Müller-Hartmann and Kurek, are written in the 
form of pedagogical reports, theoretical explanations, project descriptions and evaluations, or reviews, 
rather than in the form of strictly designed empirical research. 
In conclusion, Online intercultural exchange: Policy, pedagogy, practice is a well-organized, high-quality 
volume on the role of telecollaboration in worldwide university education. It is a must-have for 
researchers, teachers, graduate students, and policy makers interested in OIE. As research and practice in 
OIE continue to develop, future volumes on this topic may advance the field by delving into specific 
themes such as task design, assessment, OIE involving less commonly taught languages, innovative 
research methods, and others, instead of providing overviews. As breadth is usually at the cost of depth, 
each of the above-mentioned themes may deserve a dedicated volume. Another potential direction for 
future endeavors on OIE might be addressing what can be done to ensure that OIE has a more central role 
Han Luo and Min Gui 59 
 
in university education. Notwithstanding more than 20 years of research and practice, an increasing body 
of documented success, and the relative ease of access to Internet technology, OIE, after all, is still 
considered and implemented as a periphery, rather than as a mainstream component, in higher education. 
It is worthwhile to explore the reasons behind this and the solutions for moving forward. 
References 
Belz, J. A. (2003). From the special issue editor. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 2–5. 
https://dx.doi.org/10125/25193   
Belz, J. A., & Thorne, S. L. (Eds.). (2006). Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language education. 
Boston, MA: Thomson Heinle. 
Dooly, M. (Ed.). (2008). Telecollaborative language learning: A guidebook to moderating intercultural 
collaboration online. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Dooly, M., & O’Dowd, R. (Eds.). (2012). Researching online foreign language interaction and exchange: 
Theories, methods, and challenges. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Guth, S., & Helm, F. (Eds.). (2010). Telecollaboration 2.0. Language, literacies, and intercultural 
learning in the 21st century. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Lewis, T., Chanier, T., & Youngs, B. (2011). Special issue commentary: Multilateral online exchanges 
for language and culture learning. Language Learning & Technology, 15(1), 3–9. 
https://dx.doi.org/10125/44230  
O’Dowd, R. (Ed.). (2007). Online intercultural exchange: An introduction for foreign language teachers. 
Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Warschauer, M. (Ed.). (1995). Virtual connections. Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai‘i Second 
Language Teaching and Curriculum Center. 
Warschauer, M. (Ed.). (1996). Telecollaboration in foreign language learning. Honolulu, HI: University 
of Hawai‘i Second Language Teaching and Curriculum Center. 
Warschauer, M., & Kern, R. (Eds.). (2000). Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
About the Authors 
Han Luo is a Visiting Assistant Professor of Chinese at Lafayette College. Her research covers Chinese 
linguistics, cognitive linguistics, second language acquisition, foreign language learning anxiety, heritage 
language education, and technology-enhanced language learning. 
E-mail: luoh@lafayette.edu 
Min Gui is an associate professor of applied linguistics at Wuhan University, China. Her research 
interests include second language acquisition, teaching English as a second language, language 
assessment, L2 reading, and computer assisted language learning. 
E-mail: guimin@whu.edu.cn 
