Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2018, Volume 22, Issue 3 
pp. 65–81 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Inigo Yanguas & Tyler Bergin 
 
 
Focus on form in task-based L2 oral 
computer-mediated communication 
Inigo Yanguas, University of San Diego 
Tyler Bergin, Georgetown University 
Abstract 
This study has a twofold goal: to investigate whether task type has an effect on the number, focus, and 
outcome of language-related episodes (LREs) and to determine whether that effect is the same for video 
SCMC (VidSCMC) and audio SCMC (AudSCMC) groups. Intermediate Spanish learners participated in 
this study involving two jigsaw tasks based on two different picture stories. Participants were randomly 
placed in dyads and assigned to VidSCMC and AudSCMC groups. The dyads then performed a jigsaw task 
and a dictogloss task consecutively in a counterbalanced design. Repeated-measures ANOVA analyses 
were carried out to measure any possible significant differences in the number and nature of LREs by task 
and by group. The results revealed no difference in the number of LREs per task or CMC mode. However, 
significant differences were found in LRE foci per task. Finally, significant differences were also found in 
the number of unresolved LREs per mode. Results are discussed in relation to the pertinent literature. 
Keywords: Computer-Mediated Communication, Task-based Learning and Teaching, Telecollaboration 
Language(s) Learned in This Study: Spanish 
APA Citation: Yanguas, I., & Bergin, T. (2018). Focus on form in task-based L2 oral computer-mediated 
communication. Language Learning & Technology, 22(3), 65–81. https://doi.org/10125/44657 
Introduction 
Second language (L2) text-based synchronous computer-mediated communication (SCMC)1 has grown 
enormously since the early 1990s in the field of computer-assisted language learning (CALL). Early 
research analyzed the characteristics of the discourse that this new mode elicited (e.g., Chun, 1994; Kelm, 
1992; Kern, 1995). At the turn of the century, however, researchers started to investigate focus on form in 
SCMC (e.g., Blake, 2000; de la Fuente, 2003; Smith, 2003), given its key role in instructed L2 learning 
under an interactionist perspective. Proponents of this approach argued that interaction provided an optimal 
environment for L2 learning by allowing learners to focus their attention on linguistic form while attending 
to meaning (Long, 1991). 
Closed-ended, two-way interaction exchanges such as jigsaw or dictogloss tasks have been used in 
computer-mediated communication (CMC) research (e.g., Smith, 2004; Yilmaz & Granena, 2010) for their 
potential to drive learners to focus their attention on linguistic forms in a meaningful context. A fair amount 
of this task-based research in the field of second language acquisition (SLA) has focused on language-
related episodes (LREs) as a way to measure and operationalize attention to form (Leeser, 2004; Swain, 
1998; Swain & Lapkin, 1995, 1998, 2001; Williams, 2001). According to these authors, LREs are instances 
in the conversation in which learners turn their attention to the meaning, form, or use of a lexical item or 
grammatical form in the context of the L2 task being carried out. In the SCMC strand of research, earlier 
task-based studies examined focus on form under the umbrella of negotiation for meaning (e.g. Blake & 
Zyzik, 2003; Fernández-García & Martínez-Arbelaiz, 2002). The reason behind this interest in negotiation 
for meaning is that it may provide opportunities for learners to focus on form. However, more recent studies 
have also examined LREs in task-based contexts (Yilmaz, 2011; Yilmaz & Granena, 2010). 
66 Language Learning & Technology 
 
As can be seen above, research in SCMC has advanced significantly in the past decades by investigating 
interaction and focus on form. However, this progress has been primarily one-sided, since oral SCMC, 
whether it be audio SCMC (AudSCMC) or video SCMC (VidSCMC), has been only sporadically 
investigated despite the pronounced growth in general use of video (and audio) conferencing apps such as 
Facetime, Skype, or Google Hangouts. Thus far, very few studies have explored oral SCMC (e.g., Bueno-
Alastuey, 2011; Jepson, 2005; Kopf, 2012; Sykes, 2005; Yanguas, 2010, 2012); as a result, its applications 
in the L2 classroom and its implications for L2 learning remain largely untapped. Very interestingly, 
however, Yanguas (2010, 2012) found significant differences in the way AudSCMC and VidSCMC groups 
interacted and also in aural comprehension measures, meriting further investigation. Therefore, the study 
reported in this article investigates focus on form in task-based oral SCMC (AudSCMC and VidSCMC) 
comparing jigsaw and dictogloss tasks following trends established in the SLA field by Swain and Lapkin 
(2001) and in text-based SCMC by Yilmaz (2011). 
Review of the Literature 
Text-Based SCMC 
CALL research into SCMC first began with a number of studies in the 1990s (e.g., Chun, 1994; Kelm, 
1992; Kern, 1995). These studies originally focused on text-based interaction for distance learning 
purposes. While this SCMC mode certainly differed from face-to-face (FTF) interaction, some parallels 
could be drawn between the two. Both modes are synchronous modes and tend to be carried out in a more 
informal register than asynchronous forms such as e-mail or the exchange of written letters. Chun (1998) 
posited that SCMC might hold some advantages over FTF communication. She suggested that due to the 
impersonal nature and anonymity provided when communicating via text chat, interlocutors might feel less 
pressure than they would if communicating FTF. Additionally, they might feel less embarrassed about 
making mistakes and more open to participating in honest dialogue. Furthermore, because they were typing 
rather than speaking, learners were able to look back at what they and their partners had typed, thus 
affording them more opportunity to focus on form than would have been possible in FTF communication. 
From a qualitative perspective, these first few original SCMC studies (Beauvois, 1992; Chun, 1994; Kelm, 
1992; Kern, 1995) analyzed the discourse produced by learners performing a variety of activities using 
InterChange, a local-area-network application that allowed for synchronous written communication. This 
research seemed to confirm previous claims regarding the potential benefits of networked computers in 
fostering discussion in the L2: more interaction opportunities were created, leading to more language 
production that was of a higher proficiency level and sophistication (Kern, 1995). 
SCMC and Interaction 
Later text-based SCMC research investigated negotiation for meaning under an interactionist perspective 
both under qualitative and quantitative paradigms. According to Long and Robinson (1998), “people of all 
ages learn languages best, inside or outside a classroom, not by treating the languages as an object of study, 
but by experiencing them as a medium of communication” (p. 18). This idea is central to the interaction 
hypothesis (Long, 1996), which posits that interaction in the target language on behalf of an L2 learner is 
instrumental in facilitating acquisition of the L2. When two or more interlocutors communicate, interaction 
occurs. Through this interaction, learners receive information about the target language and are exposed to 
examples of correct grammatical forms and language use from native speakers as well as higher-proficiency 
non-natives. 
Several text-based SCMC studies have investigated L2 learning and other aspects of communication under 
this interactionist perspective (e.g., Blake, 2000; Blake & Zyzik, 2003; de la Fuente, 2003; Fernández-
García & Martínez-Arbelaiz, 2002, 2003; Pellettieri, 2000; Smith, 2003, 2004). De la Fuente (2003), for 
example, compared the effects of SCMC and FTF interaction in the acquisition of L2 vocabulary. Results 
of this study showed that both FTF and computer-based written interaction seemed to promote written 
receptive and productive acquisition and retention of L2 target words. However, the SCMC mode was 
Inigo Yanguas and Tyler Bergin 67 
 
shown to be less effective than FTF in promoting oral acquisition of the target words. In turn, Smith (2003) 
explored learners’ L2 interaction in order to investigate whether they engaged in negotiated interaction 
when they encountered new lexical items and how this interaction differed from traditional FTF 
interactional patterns. Results revealed that negotiation for meaning did indeed occur in this SCMC context 
but differences in the interaction patterns warranted the need to expand the established pattern of interaction 
for FTF. Finally, Smith (2004) also investigated lexical acquisition in a SCMC context. The outcomes 
indicated that learners did negotiate for meaning when presented with unknown lexical items and those 
items that were negotiated were retained significantly better that those that were not engaged. The findings 
of this study, Smith argued, validated the interaction hypothesis because they showed a stronger link 
between negotiation for meaning in interaction and acquisition. 
Focus on Form and Task Effects in SCMC 
Regarding specifically the investigation of LREs in the text-based SCMC strand of research, some recent 
studies have used task-based research designs to investigate focus on form under this paradigm (Yilmaz, 
2011; Yilmaz & Granena, 2010). The investigation of LREs came as an alternative to research on 
negotiation for meaning and was motivated mainly by Swain’s studies (1995, 2005), as argued by Yilmaz 
(2011). LREs can be defined as “any part of a dialogue where the students talk about the language they are 
producing, question their language use, or correct themselves or others” (Swain & Lapkin, 1998, p. 326). 
They have been used in a variety of FTF and SCMC studies as an indication of focus on form through 
negotiation for meaning (e.g., Leeser, 2004; Swain & Lapkin, 1995). 
A variety of different task types may be used to promote negotiation for meaning in interactive activities 
within the language classroom. Pica, Kanagy, and Falodun (1993) identified a number of tasks including, 
jigsaw, information-gap, problem-solving, decision-making, and opinion-exchange tasks. They posit that 
the most effective task type for fostering interaction and negotiation between language learners is one in 
which each interlocutor holds a portion of the information that needs to be shared in order to reach a 
successful outcome. In addition, both participants should have the same goal, and there should be only one 
possible acceptable outcome. Dictogloss tasks, such as the ones used in the current study, require learners 
to reproduce a text after they have listened to it twice. Usually, learners are allowed to take notes during 
the second time they listen to it. First described by Wajnryb (1990), these tasks have been utilized in L2 
research in order to foster attention to linguistic form without isolating those forms from their meaningful 
context (Leeser, 2004). 
Aside from their use in the classroom, each of the aforementioned tasks has also been implemented in L2 
research studies within an interactionist framework. Researchers have examined the effects of task type 
within text-based SCMC in order to determine whether different types of tasks produce different results 
with regards to interaction among L2 learners. In one early SCMC study involving 50 native English-
speaking students learning Spanish as an L2, Blake (2000) found that jigsaw tasks elicited the majority of 
the recorded negotiations for meaning. According to him, the overall results indicated that only a small 
percentage of the conversational turns taken consisted of negotiations for meaning. The data from Blake’s 
study suggested that jigsaw tasks did, in fact, elicit more negotiations for meaning than the other task types, 
while information gap tasks elicited the fewest negotiations. 
Another early SCMC study of negotiation for meaning by Pellettieri (2000) investigated three two-way 
information-gap tasks, a jigsaw task, and one task combining decision-making, information-gap, and open-
discussion. While all tasks involved a synchronous discussion in the target language, both the jigsaw task 
and one of the information-gap tasks included a composition-writing component. Results of this study 
showed that each task elicited multiple negotiations with a range of 18 to 41 overall negotiations per task. 
However, Pellettieri (2000) did not provide a total number of turns or the percentage of turns that included 
negotiations for meaning. Unlike Blake’s (2000) study, the jigsaw task elicited fewer negotiations than two 
of the three information-gap tasks as well as the combined task. 
Smith’s (2003) study examined the effects of task type with 14 dyads of non-native speakers interacting in 
68 Language Learning & Technology 
 
English in order to complete two jigsaw and two decision-making tasks. In contrast to the small percentage 
of negotiations found in Blake’s (2000) study, Smith (2003) found that 34% of overall turns consisted of 
participants negotiating for meaning. Additionally, the results showed that decision-making tasks were 
more effective than jigsaw tasks in eliciting negotiation for meaning with a ratio of 78% to 22%. However, 
Smith points out that when target lexical items are factored out, jigsaw tasks seem to be more effective in 
eliciting what he refers to as incidental negotiations, or negotiations of non-target lexical items, accounting 
for a total of 60%. This number falls in line with results found in previous research such as the 
aforementioned studies by Blake (2000) and Pica et al. (1993). 
Yilmaz and Granena (2010) examined the effects of task type on LREs with the completion of a dictogloss 
task and a jigsaw task by 10 ESL students interacting via MSN Messenger, a synchronous text chat 
application. The data were analyzed to determine the number and type of LREs. Results of the study showed 
that the dictogloss task elicited far more LREs than did the jigsaw task overall, with every dyad producing 
more LREs during the dictogloss task than during the jigsaw task. Lexical issues elicited over half of the 
total LREs for the dictogloss task, while lexical and grammatical issues were split 50–50 for the jigsaw 
task. The overall majority of LRE verbalization was explicit and most LREs were resolved correctly. 
While this study certainly shed light on the nature and typology of LREs elicited in SCMC, Yilmaz and 
Granena (2010) admitted that the small number of participants presented limitations when attempting to 
generalize the results to the general population. The limitations of their study were addressed in a 
subsequent study by Yilmaz (2011) in which 54 students of English as a foreign language from two different 
classes completed the same jigsaw and dictogloss tasks. Results again showed that the dictogloss task 
elicited more LREs than did the jigsaw task, reaffirming the results of the previous study. Additionally, the 
dictogloss task elicited higher percentages of each LRE focus. The dictogloss task also elicited higher 
percentages of LREs that were solved (both correctly and incorrectly), while the jigsaw task elicited the 
majority of the unresolved LREs. However, most LREs were resolved correctly. Interestingly, the 
dictogloss resulted in higher percentages of all type categories except for metatalk, which represented the 
smallest number of LRE types. Requests for assistance were the most frequent type of LRE, followed by 
negative feedback and self-correction. These results are in line with other studies that suggest dictogloss 
tasks are more effective than jigsaw tasks at eliciting LREs, and specifically those that are solved correctly 
(e.g., Swain & Lapkin, 2001; Yilmaz & Granena, 2010). Yilmaz (2011) argued that this might have been 
due to the fact that dictogloss tasks required less attention and thus learners were able to divert more 
attention to focus on form. 
Synchronous Voice-Based CMC: Audio SCMC and Video SCMC 
While technological limitations originally restricted CMC to text-only interaction, recent improvements in 
audio/video capability, the increased availability of such technology for lower costs, and much faster 
Internet connection speeds have facilitated the implementation of oral SCMC in CALL settings. Both laptop 
and desktop computers, not to mention smartphones, are now widely equipped with microphones and 
cameras, while free user-friendly video chat programs such as Skype are available for download and use 
via the Internet (Yanguas, 2010). According to Bueno-Alastuey (2011), oral SCMC shares many 
similarities with FTF interaction. Because of this semblance, oral SCMC may be useful as a tool to foster 
interaction among learners and prepare them for real-life oral communication. 
Research on oral SCMC, however, whether AudSCMC or VidSCMC, is exceptionally scarcer than research 
on text-based SCMC, which, as seen in the above review, has extensively covered very important aspects 
of L2 learning in the CALL field. Oral SCMC research has only produced a handful of studies that have 
addressed a variety of topics in diverse contexts and from different theoretical perspectives. Therefore, 
drawing any conclusions on the use and efficacy of oral SCMC in CALL becomes an arduous endeavor. 
For instance, Jepson (2005), in one of the earliest studies to utilize AudSCMC in CALL research, aimed to 
explore the repair moves made by ESL learners chatting via AudSCMC and text chat in an online private 
English language school. Results showed that more negotiation for meaning occurred in conversations 
Inigo Yanguas and Tyler Bergin 69 
 
using AudSCMC than those using text chat. While the study is limited by a number of factors, including its 
non-random participant sample as well as some technological issues, it was the first to suggest advantages 
of AudSCMC over text-chat, specifically regarding ability for correction of errors in pronunciation. Another 
early study in oral CMC (Sykes, 2005) compared SCMC, AudSCMC, and traditional FTF groups in the 
pragmatic acquisition of speech acts in synchronous group discussions. Results of the analyses by Sykes 
showed no significant difference on pragmatic development. However, the SCMC group outperformed all 
other groups in the complexity and variety of strategies used. 
Bueno-Alastuey (2010) investigated a pool of Spanish ESL learners taking a class of English for specific 
purposes as part of their Agriculture major. Specifically, she investigated AudSCMC effects on 
pronunciation. She concluded that the oral SCMC used in the study was beneficial because it fostered the 
noticing of the gaps in learners’ phonetic interlanguage and provided opportunities for the production of 
modified output. 
In turn, Bueno-Alastuey (2011) measured the perceived benefits and drawbacks of this type of interaction 
by ESL Spanish college students using oral two-way information exchange tasks. A group of dyads 
interacting in English as an L2 via AudSCMC were compared with a FTF control group. The results 
indicated that the learners who participated in voice-based SCMC with interlocutors of a different L1 
achieved a higher proficiency than the control group. Furthermore, the qualitative data suggested that 
participants in the experimental group felt more satisfied with their improvement via interaction as well as 
with the overall experience. The participants in this group also reported that they were much more likely to 
continue interacting in the L2 than the participants in the control group. 
Interestingly, Bueno-Alastuey (2013) investigated whether the nature of the dyad has any significant effect 
on the quantity and type of LRE triggers, LRE responses, and modified output in AudSCMC. College-level 
ESL learners with different L1s were the participants in the study; different types of dyads were formed 
based on participants’ L1 (Spanish–Spanish, Spanish–Turkish, or Spanish–English). Results of the study 
showed that the type of dyad affected the quantity and type of LRE triggers and LRE responses, as well as 
the nature of the output. Bueno-Alastuey concluded that the typical L2 classroom arrangement in which 
non-native speakers are found with the same L1 seems to be less conducive to learning than others in which 
native speakers are involved. 
Studies by Yanguas (2010, 2012) compared different groups of dyads interacting in Spanish as a L2 via 
FTF, AudSCMC, and VidSCMC modes in order to complete a jigsaw task. On the one hand, Yanguas 
(2010) revealed differences in the way audio and video groups carry out negotiations. On the other hand, 
Yanguas (2012) showed that learners in the AudSCMC group outperformed all other groups in 
comprehension measures. 
Like Bueno-Alastuey’s (2011) study, Yanguas’ (2010, 2012) studies also posit that oral SCMC may 
replicate many of the communicative features of FTF interaction. However, while results showed that all 
three modes fostered interaction and negotiation for meaning, the studies by Yanguas (2010, 2012) also 
suggested that groups communicating via AudSCMC were unable to rely on visual cues and body language 
and thus required more linguistic negotiation. 
Finally, Kopf (2012) reported on VidSCMC interactions between secondary-school learners of German in 
New Zealand. She investigated the effects of CMC on the development of verbal interactional skills and 
the negotiation for meaning process during two different learning activities. Results of this study suggested 
that learners used a variety of strategies and that task type influenced the amount of negotiation routines. 
Moreover, she concluded that video-conferencing had a positive impact on students’ interactional abilities. 
In short, there is a small, but growing, body of research that has investigated oral SCMC in different 
contexts under varying theoretical standpoints. No study to date, however, has explored focus on form and 
task type in oral SCMC. Therefore, the present study seeks to add to the oral CMC literature by investigating 
the effects of task type and SCMC mode (AudSCMC vs. VidSCMC) on LREs. As seen above, previous 
text-based SCMC studies have addressed task modality and focus on form in interactional contexts, but no 
70 Language Learning & Technology 
 
attempt has been made to extrapolate those results to the oral SCMC realm. Furthermore, only one other 
study (Bueno-Alastuey, 2013), which investigated the effect of type of dyad on LREs in Spain, has 
examined focus on form in oral SCMC. Current pedagogical and technological trends call for an update on 
the use and effects of audio and video implementation in L2 learning tasks, whether in or outside the 
classroom. Thus, the current study follows the paths established by Swain and Lapkin (2001) in the field of 
SLA and by Yilmaz and Granena (2010) and Yilmaz (2011) in text-based SCMC in order to investigate 
task-based L2 learner-to-learner oral SCMC in the U.S. university context. Specifically, answers to the 
following research questions are sought: 
1. Is there an effect of task type or CMC mode on the number of LREs? 
2. Is there an effect of task type or CMC mode on the focus of LREs? 
3. Is there an effect of task type or CMC mode on the outcome of LREs? 
Method 
Participants 
Data for this study were gathered during four semesters (Spring 2014–Fall 2015) at a private higher 
education institution in the western US. Six intact fourth-semester Spanish classes took part in this 
investigation. The final number of participants was 78 after a total of 18 students were excluded from the 
final sample due to participants’ declaring Spanish as their native language or due to recording issues. 
A brief questionnaire was administered before the study in order to gather participant information. In 
addition to basic personal information, the form collected participants’ Spanish backgrounds and their 
attitudes toward the use of the technological tools involved. For a summary, see Table 1 and Table 2. 
Table 1. Participants’ Background Information (N = 78) 
Category Response 
Class  
Senior 56.4% 
Junior 24.3% 
Sophomore 6.4% 
Freshman 11.5% 
Age (M) 19.1 
Gender  
Female 75% 
Male 25% 
Spanish in High School (M # classes) 5 
Spanish in College (M # classes) 1.9 
Table 2. Participants’ Use of Skype and Google Documents 
 Use of Skype Use of Google Docs 
Not Comfortable or Very Uncomfortable 6.4% 2.5% 
Comfortable or Very Comfortable 93.6% 97.5% 
Inigo Yanguas and Tyler Bergin 71 
 
Materials 
Before carrying out the tasks, participants signed the consent form and filled out the short background 
questionnaire mentioned above.  
The tasks used in this study originally appeared in a book by Rollet and Tremblay (1975). This work is a 
collection of comic strips designed to elicit writing and speaking in young L1 learners and ESL learners. 
The two comic strips selected for the present study were also used in the studies by Yilmaz and Granena 
(2010) and Yilmaz (2011). In the current study, they were used both for the jigsaw tasks, in scrambled 
order, and for the dictogloss tasks, in written form. 
In the first set of eight pictures, a young boy watches his mother as she pours the jam she has just made into 
a jar. He then sees how she places it out of his reach on top of a door casing. In the next picture, the boy 
asks her if she is leaving the house and she responds that she is going to the post office. After this, the boy’s 
father is shown reading the newspaper in another room. The boy then places a stool on top of a chair and 
tries to reach for the jar of jam. Unfortunately, he cannot reach it because he falls off the stool making a big 
noise. In the last picture, we see how his father enters the room and sees his son on the floor crying; he 
wonders what has happened. 
In the second set of eight pictures, another child is going fishing early in the morning. The boy is imagining 
catching three fish. He then catches those three fish and cooks one on the grill at lunchtime. The boy goes 
to the fish market with the remaining two fish. A man gives him some money in return. When he gets home 
he tells his father about his experience. The father then asks him what he would like to do with the money: 
“Do you want a soccer ball or maybe a fishing rod?” The boy answers that he wants neither; he says that 
he wants a rifle. In the last picture, the father is depicted as being disappointed with his son’s choice. 
The order of the pictures was scrambled for the jigsaw tasks, and each student (student A and student B) 
was given a set of four pictures from the story (student A: 1, 3, 5, 7; student B: 2, 4, 6, 8). The same comic 
strips were used for the dictogloss tasks: two texts were created based on the pictures (see Appendix A), 
following the method used by Swain and Lapkin (2001) and Yilmaz (2011). No specific language structure 
was targeted. 
As in Yilmaz (2011), the text stories were created from the picture stories of the jigsaw tasks in order to 
control for possible content differences across task types. Three native speakers of Spanish were asked to 
write a story based on each set of pictures. These three versions of each set were then combined to create 
one story ensuring the same level of linguistic complexity. 
These two picture stories were utilized in the present study because they have been found to be very similar 
in cognitive complexity measures (see Yilmaz, 2011). In terms of linguistic complexity, the texts created 
for the dictogloss tasks were analyzed in terms of T-units2 and lexical diversity (LD).3 In addition, texts 
were also compared using the Fernandez-Huerta index (FHI),4 a very common test to measure readability 
in Spanish. Both texts had a similar number of T-units (Dictogloss 1 = 18; Dictogloss 2 = 17) and a very 
similar LD score (Dictogloss 1 = 59.8; Dictogloss 2 = 59.7). Regarding FHI, both texts tested in the very 
easy range (90–100) on the scale (Dictogloss 1 = 94.45; Dictogloss 2= 94.06). 
Procedure 
Participants met with the researchers at one of the two computer facilities on campus during their regular 
class time. After they had introduced themselves and all questions were answered, learners signed the 
consent form and completed a short background questionnaire. 
At this point, random dyads were created and assigned to Skype audio (AudSCMC) or Skype video 
(VidSCMC) groups. Numbered Mac computers were allotted and e-mail addresses shared between dyad 
partners. Next, students created the required Google documents and shared them with their assigned 
partners using their e-mail addresses. In addition, each computer was logged in to a Skype account created 
for the study. Participants then established preliminary contact with their partners and ensured that the 
72 Language Learning & Technology 
 
connection was working properly. Once participants were ready, the researchers explained the instructions 
for both tasks (see Appendix B). 
After these preliminary steps were taken, learners began performing the tasks. Tasks (Jigsaw 1 or Jigsaw 2 
and Dictogloss 1 or Dictogloss 2) were alternated between classes and the order of tasks was 
counterbalanced in order to control for task order effects. Table 3 shows the order of tasks, the total number 
of students per class, the number of dyads, as well as the number of students excluded per class. For the 
jigsaw task, learners were given either Form A, which contained pictures 1, 3, 5, and 7, or Form B, which 
contained pictures 2, 4, 6, and 8. Students were then asked to work in pairs to place the eight pictures in the 
correct order and to write a story based on the pictures. For the dictogloss task, the researcher read the story 
twice at a normal pace. The first time, learners were only able to listen; whereas during the second reading, 
they were allowed to take notes. For both tasks, participants were given a maximum of 10 minutes to share 
the information they had with their partners using Skype (see Appendix B for instructions). Participants 
then began writing the story in a Google document using Skype to communicate with one another. Based 
on the time taken by learners to perform the tasks in a pilot study, students were given a total of 35 minutes 
to complete each one. All Skype conversations were recorded using Ecamm. Once the participants had 
finished each task, they shared their document electronically with the lead researcher. 
Table 3. Counterbalancing of Tasks and Dyads 
Class 1 Class 2 Class 3 Class 4 Class 5 Class 6 
Dicto 1 
Jigsaw 2 
Jigsaw 1 
Dicto 2 
Dicto 1 
Jigsaw 2 
Jigsaw 1 
Dicto 2 
Dicto 1 
Jigsaw 2 
Jigsaw 1 
Dicto 2 
(16 - 2) 
N = 14 
(18 - 2) 
N = 16 
(14 - 4) 
N = 10 
(16 - 2) 
N = 14 
(19 - 5) 
N = 14 
(13 - 3) 
N = 10 
Dyads 
3 Audio 
4 Video 
4 Audio 
4 Video 
2 Audio 
3 Video 
3 Audio 
4 Video 
4 Audio 
3 Video 
3 Audio 
2 Video 
Data Analyses and Coding of LREs 
Learners may produce more LREs during the construction phase of the story as they try to convey their 
intended meanings (Leeser, 2004). Therefore, the story construction stage of every conversation was 
transcribed (i.e., Step 2 of each task, see Appendix B). In order to account for time differences across tasks 
in this part of the process (Jigsaw, M = 17:44; Dictogloss, M =16:40), the first seven minutes of the 
conversations that took place during this step were transcribed. Following Leeser (2004) and Yilmaz 
(2011), an LRE was defined as any part of learner–learner interaction in which an interlocutor focused on 
the accuracy of (a) the meaning of a linguistic item, (b) the spelling or pronunciation of a word, or (c) a 
grammatical form. Interactions in which learners implicitly or explicitly corrected themselves or others in 
(a), (b), or (c) were also classified as LREs. 
Two raters independently identified the LREs and coded them in the two categories investigated: LRE focus 
and LRE outcome. Inter-rater reliability was 95% and 92% respectively for each category. Raters discussed 
all cases in which they found disagreement until they were resolved. Results of these analyses produced 
three types of LREs by focus: lexical, grammatical, and orthographic. Lexical LREs focused on the meaning 
or pronunciation of a Spanish word, including prepositions (see Example 1). Grammatical LREs took place 
when learners discussed any syntactical or morphological aspect of any Spanish word or construction (see 
Example 2). Finally, orthographic LREs were those instances in which participants focused on how to spell 
words correctly in Spanish (see Example 3).  
Inigo Yanguas and Tyler Bergin 73 
 
Example 1. Lexical LRE 
Student A: No entendí…pero ¿dijo un banco? ¿Qué dijo? (I didn’t understand…but did he say “a 
stool”? What did he say?) 
Student B: No sé “un banco”...creo que dijo banco. (I don’t know “a stool”…I think he said a stool.) 
A: No sé, ¿qué es un banco? (I don’t know, what is a stool?) 
B: No sé. (I don’t know.) 
A: Ponemos… (We put…) 
B: No tenemos que decir banco. (We don’t have to say stool.) 
A: OK. 
Example 2. Grammatical LRE 
B: Después salía… (After that, she went out [imperfect form].) 
A: Pero yo pienso que es “salió”. (But I think it´s “she went out” [preterite form].) 
B: ¿Salió? (She went out [preterite form]?) 
A: Sí, salió. (Yes, she went out.) 
Example 3. Orthographic LRE 
B: ¿Cómo escribes “cayó”? (How do you spell “cayó” [he fell]?) 
A: Pienso que es c a y… (I think it is c a y…) 
B: OK 
As in previous research (see Leeser, 2004; Swain, 1998; Yilmaz, 2011), our data showed three types of 
LREs as far as the outcome is concerned: unresolved, solved correctly, and solved incorrectly. Example 1 
and Example 2 provide instances of unresolved LREs and LREs solved correctly, respectively. Example 4 
shows an instance of an LRE that was solved incorrectly. 
Example 4. LRE Solved Incorrectly 
B: ¿Cómo escribe “pez”? (How do you write “pez” [fish]?) 
A: p e s… (p e s… [spelling it incorrectly]) 
A: Pez. (Fish. [repeating the word]) 
Results 
Research Question 1 
A repeated-measures ANOVA was performed to answer our first research question—aimed at exploring 
whether there were any significant differences in the number of LREs per task and per mode. Mode was 
entered as the between-subjects variable and Task, as the within-subjects variable (AudSCMC Dictogloss, 
M = 5.63, SD = 1.77; AudSCMC Jigsaw, M = 6.57, SD = 1.57; VidSCMC Dictogloss, M = 6.10, SD = 2.04; 
VidSCMC Jigsaw, M = 5.60, SD = 2.11). No significant differences were found for the number of LREs 
for Task, Mode, or the interactions between both variables. Results are shown in Table 4. 
74 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Table 4. Repeated-Measures ANOVA on Number of LREs for Mode and Task 
Source df SS MS F p 
Mode 1 1.270 1.270 0.369 .553 
Task 1 0.975 0.975 0.245 .623 
Task × Mode 1 10.206 10.206 2.569 .117 
Research Question 2 
The second research question asked if there were any significant differences in LREs’ focus by Task or 
SCMC Mode. To answer ths question, scores for each one of the LRE focus categories revealed in the 
analysis of the transcripts (i.e., lexical, grammatical, or orthographic) were submitted to separate repeated-
measures analyses. Mode was entered as the between-subjects variable and Task as the within-subjects 
variable. Partial Eta squared (η2) was reported as an estimation of effect size for ANOVAs: values of partial 
η2 in the .01–.05 range indicate small effect sizes, values of .06–.13 indicate medium effect sizes, and values 
greater than or equal to .14 indicate large effect sizes (Green & Salkind, 2005). Results for each focus 
category are reported separately below. 
Lexical LREs 
Results for the repeated-measures ANOVA analysis on scores for lexical LREs (AudSCMC Dictogloss, M 
= 3.11, SD = 1.56; AudSCMC Jigsaw, M = 4.84, SD = 1.34; VidSCMC Dictogloss, M = 3.70, SD = 1.42; 
VidSCMC Jigsaw, M = 4.30, SD = 1.34) produced significant differences for Task only F(1, 37) = 10.123, 
p = .003, partial η2= .22. 
Grammatical LREs 
Results for the repeated-measures ANOVA analysis on scores for grammatical LREs (AudSCMC 
Dictogloss, M = 1.63, SD = 0.50; AudSCMC Jigsaw, M = 1.11, SD = 0.94; VidSCMC Dictogloss, M = 
1.45, SD = 0.76; VidSCMC Jigsaw, M = 0.55, SD = 0.60) yielded significant differences for Task only F(1, 
37) = 20.073, p = .0001, partial η2 = .35. 
Orthographic LREs 
No significant differences were found in the repeated-measures ANOVA analysis carried out on the scores 
for orthographic LREs (AudSCMC Dictogloss, M = 0.89, SD = 0.74; AudSCMC Jigsaw, M = 0.63, SD = 
0.60; VidSCMC Dictogloss, M = 0.95, SD = 1.00; VidSCMC Jigsaw, M = 0.75, SD = 0.72). 
Research Question 3 
Finally, in order to analyze if there were any significant differences in LREs’ outcome by Task or SCMC 
Mode, three separate repeated-measures ANOVA analyses were performed on the scores for LREs solved 
correctly, solved incorrectly, and unresolved. As in previous analyses, Mode was entered as the between-
subjects variable and Task as the within-subjects variable. Partial Eta squared (η2) was reported as an 
estimation of effect size for ANOVAs. Results for each outcome category are reported separately below. 
Correct LREs 
Scores for correct LREs (AudSCMC Dictogloss, M = 4.00, SD = 1.76; AudSCMC Jigsaw, M = 4.58, SD = 
1.54; VidSCMC Dictogloss, M = 4.55, SD = 1.61; VidSCMC Jigsaw, M = 4.35, SD = 1.76 were input into 
a repeated-measures ANOVA analysis. No significant differences were found. 
Incorrect LREs 
Results for the repeated-measures ANOVA analysis on scores for incorrect LREs (AudSCMC Dictogloss, 
M = 0.74, SD = 0.45; AudSCMC Jigsaw, M = 0.95, SD = 0.52; VidSCMC Dictogloss, M = 0.80, SD = 0.52; 
VidSCMC Jigsaw, M = 0.60, SD = 0.50) did not produce significant differences in the number of incorrect 
Inigo Yanguas and Tyler Bergin 75 
 
LREs for Task, Mode, or the interactions between both variables. 
Unresolved LREs 
Results for the repeated-measures ANOVA analysis on scores for unresolved LREs (AudSCMC 
Dictogloss, M = 0.89, SD = 0.57; AudSCMC Jigsaw, M = 1.05, SD = 0.25; VidSCMC Dictogloss, M = 
0.75, SD = 0.44; VidSCMC Jigsaw, M = 0.65, SD = 0.59 yielded significant differences for Mode: F(1, 37) 
= 7.857, p = .008, partial η2 = .18. 
Discussion 
The tasks and oral SCMC modes used in this study produced no significant differences in the number of 
LREs produced by learners; both types of tasks (i.e., jigsaw and dictogloss) in either mode (i.e., AudSCMC 
or VidSCMC) led learners to produce a similar number of LREs. As mentioned previously, a few studies 
(Blake, 2000; Pellettieri, 2000; Smith, 2003; Yilmaz, 2011; Yilmaz & Granena, 2010) investigated task 
effects in SCMC. However, none of these studies was carried out in an oral SCMC context and only Yilmaz 
and Granena (2010), Yilmaz (2011), and Bueno-Alastuey (2013) operationalized focus on form using 
LREs. Blake (2000) found that learners performing jigsaw tasks in written-based SCMC focused on form 
more often (i.e., there were more negotiation-for-meaning episodes) than learners carrying out tasks such 
as information-gap, decision-making, or opinion tasks. Along those same lines, Pellettieri’s (2000) 
descriptive study suggested that task type is of utmost importance in determining the amount and quality 
of negotiation produced in a written network-based environment. In turn, Smith (2003) compared jigsaw 
and decision-making tasks and found that the latter produced a significantly higher number of negotiation 
episodes. Also in a written SCMC setting, the studies by Yilmaz and Granena (2010) and Yilmaz (2011) 
found significant differences in the number of LREs produced when comparing jigsaw and dictogloss tasks. 
Contrary to written-based SCMC studies, our study shows no significant differences between tasks in the 
number of LREs produced. Nonetheless, our results support the outcomes of the study by Swain and Lapkin 
(2001) in which they found no significant differences between tasks in the degree of attention paid to form 
when in a FTF context. It could then be argued that modality (oral vs. written) may play a role in how 
learners interact in the L2. The oral nature of the tasks may mitigate potential differences in learners’ 
performance in terms of LREs. Although Swain and Lapkin (2001) hypothesized that, given the right 
circumstances, dictogloss tasks should elicit more instances of focus on form, their results in an oral context 
did not support those claims, and neither do ours (in an oral SCMC setting). Further favoring an argument 
along these lines, Williams (1999) found a very similar number of LREs produced by learners at each 
proficiency level in a FTF study. 
Finally, Bueno-Alastuey (2013) investigated quantity and type of LREs at different proficiency levels using 
a two-way information task only. She did not, however, focus on differences within each proficiency group, 
and thus it was difficult to compare her results to those of the present study. It appeared that the greater 
content or meaning focus in the jigsaw task—argued by Yilmaz (2011) as preventing learners from 
allocating attentional resources to form—did not apply in this particular context. 
Our second research question investigated differences in LRE focus between tasks and oral SCMC modes. 
Our results support other studies in which the main source of negotiation for meaning or LRE focus is of a 
lexical nature. Overwhelmingly, the present study shows that learners’ main concern is vocabulary when 
performing these tasks. Furthermore, our results show a significant difference between tasks in the number 
of lexical LREs and the number of grammatical LREs. On one hand, learners produced a significantly 
higher number of lexical LREs in the jigsaw task. On the other hand, results show that learners in the 
dictogloss task produced a significantly higher number of grammatical LREs when compared to the jigsaw 
task. These results confirm results from past studies in which vocabulary meaning has been the main 
concern of participants when performing L2 tasks in written-based SCMC contexts (e.g., Blake, 2000; 
Pellettieri, 2000; Smith, 2003; Tudini, 2003). Upon examining those studies (that actually used the same 
type of tasks as the present study), we found mixed results. Yilmaz (2011) did not find a significantly higher 
76 Language Learning & Technology 
 
number of lexical LREs in either task, but numbers of lexical LREs were indeed higher than grammatical 
or orthographical LREs. Swain and Lapkin (2001) found no significant differences between lexical and 
morphological LREs produced in the jigsaw and dictogloss tasks. Contextual differences among studies 
make it a challenging task to draw definitive conclusions, but our results seem to confirm that vocabulary 
is the main source of focus on form regardless of the task. However, more studies should be carried out 
with the same type of tasks in similar contexts in order to confirm these conclusions. Let us bear in mind 
that participants in the study by Yilmaz (2011) were college-level ESL learners of differing proficiency 
levels with Turkish as the L1, whereas the participants in the study by Swain and Lapkin (2001) were Grade 
8 Anglophone students of French in an L2 immersion program. 
Finally, regarding the outcome of the LREs produced by learners in this study, no significant differences 
were found between tasks for either correct, incorrect, or unresolved LREs. Interestingly, however, a 
significantly larger number of unresolved LREs were found in the AudSCMC. These results are contrary 
to Yilmaz’s (2011) study in which he found significant differences between the outcomes of LREs elicited 
in the two tasks: learners carrying out the dictogloss task were able to correctly solve more LREs whereas 
participants in the jigsaw task left more LREs unresolved. On the contrary, Leeser (2004) found a higher 
percentage of unresolved LREs in low-proficiency-level dyads performing an oral passage reconstruction 
task similar to the dictogloss task used in this study. 
Unlike the present study, none of these previous works compared modes of communication. Nevertheless, 
given their results, it seems possible to argue that mode might be a key factor in the production of episodes 
in which learners focus on form. Previous studies that did indeed compare modes of communication have 
shown differences in terms of aural comprehension of target vocabulary items (Yanguas, 2012) and in the 
amount of linguistic elaboration used in the negotiation routines by AudSCMC groups. This has led to more 
routines with partial or negative outcomes (Yanguas, 2010). Our results here support those of Yanguas 
(2010), in that the AudSCMC group had more instances of non-communication than the VidSCMC group, 
which provided visual resources that could be used to aid the conversation. Unlike that study, we have not 
analyzed the number of turns per LRE but the positive outcome of such unresolved LREs could be the 
increased quantity of L2 used (Yanguas, 2010); this should be further investigated. 
Limitations and Future Research 
This study has certain limitations that should be addressed in future studies in order to build a clearer picture 
of how L2 learners interact and focus on form in an oral SCMC context. First of all, a qualitative analysis 
of the LREs produced by learners would provide very valuable information as to how students interact 
when performing communicative tasks of the kind investigated in this study. Also, LREs should be 
examined and compared during all phases of the task in order to gain a complete picture of the processes 
involved. Furthermore, proficiency level should also be included as a variable in the research design of the 
study so that we can investigate how learners at different levels of proficiency focus on form in this context. 
Finally, it would be very useful and revealing to include the investigation and analysis of the written 
product. In this manner, the relationship between the written outcome and learners’ interaction could be 
explored. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, the current study set out to investigate whether there were any significant differences among 
L2 Spanish learners in terms of LREs when performing two different communicative tasks (jigsaw vs. 
dictogloss) in two different SCMC modes (VidSCMC vs. AudSCMC). This study revealed no significant 
differences in the number of LREs, but the type of LREs did depend on the task that the learners worked 
on: lexical LREs in the jigsaw task and grammatical LREs in the dictogloss task. Furthermore, SCMC mode 
affected the LRE outcome regardless of the task type. Contrary to Yilmaz (2011), we found no significant 
differences between tasks in the number of LREs elicited. Further oral SCMC studies need to be 
Inigo Yanguas and Tyler Bergin 77 
 
implemented, but it appears that the oral nature of the interaction might mitigate potential task effects, 
corroborating the results of Swain and Lapkin (2001). As in past SCMC studies, lexical LREs are the most 
common, but we have shown significant differences between tasks in the characteristics of LREs and in 
LRE outcome according to SCMC mode. 
As other studies in the FTF and SCMC literature have shown that learners do indeed focus on form and 
produce LREs when interacting in the L2 in those modes (e.g., Leeser, 2004; Yilmaz, 2011), we have shown 
this to be the case in oral SCMC as well. From an interactionist perspective, focusing on form (i.e., attending 
to language form and meaning in context) is a key concept that allows learners to build their L2 while 
attempting to communicate, as we do in the real world. Adding to the scarce amount of oral SCMC research 
in the CALL field, we have evidenced that this oral medium of communication can be used in the L2 
classroom to foster interaction and focus on form. Pending further studies that confirm these results, the 
significant differences shown might be of use in the L2 classroom in order to target vocabulary or 
grammatical goals in an interactional setting. 
Notes 
1. Throughout this article, the term SCMC refers to text-based SCMC, unless explicitly stated otherwise 
(e.g., oral SCMC). 
2. A T-unit is defined as a minimal, independent, terminable clause that has all modifying phrases attached 
to it (Larsen-Freeman, 1991). 
3. LD = Number of different words ÷ Total number of words × 100. 
4. FHI = 206.84 - (0.60p) - (102f). f = clauses, p = words. The test can be accessed online. 
References 
Beauvois, M. H. (1992). Computer-assisted classroom discussion in the foreign language classroom: 
Conversation in slow motion. Foreign Language Annals, 25, 455–464. 
Blake, R. (2000). Computer-mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. 
Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120–136. 
Blake, R., & Zyzik, E. C. (2003). Who’s helping whom? Learner/heritage-speakers’ networked 
discussions in Spanish. Applied Linguistics, 24(4), 519–544. 
Bueno-Alastuey, M. C. (2010). Synchronous-voice computer-mediated communication: Effects on 
pronunciation. CALICO Journal, 28(1), 1–20. 
Bueno-Alastuey, M. C. (2011). Perceived benefits and drawbacks of synchronous voice-based computer-
mediated communication in the foreign language classroom. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 
24(5), 419–432. 
Bueno-Alastuey, M. C. (2013). Interactional feedback in synchronous voice-based computer-mediated 
communication: Effect of dyad. System, 41(3), 543–559. 
Chun, D. M. (1994). Using computer networking to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence. 
System, 22, 17–31. 
Chun, D. M. (1998). Using computer-assisted classroom discussion to facilitate the acquisition of 
interactive competence. In J. Swaffar, S. Romano, P. Markley, & K. Arens (Eds.), Language learning 
online: Theory and practice in the ESL and L2 computer classroom (pp. 57–80). Austin, TX: 
Labyrinth. 
78 Language Learning & Technology 
 
de la Fuente, M. (2003). Is SLA interactionist theory relevant to CALL? A study on the effect of 
computer-mediated interaction in L2 vocabulary acquisition. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 
16, 47–81. 
Fernández-García, M., & Martínez-Arbelaiz, A. (2002). Negotiation of meaning in non-native speaker–
non-native speaker synchronous discussions. CALICO Journal, 19, 279–294. 
Fernández-García, M., & Martínez-Arbelaiz, A. (2003). Learners’ interactions: A comparison of oral and 
computer-assisted written conversations. ReCALL, 15(1), 113–136. 
Green, S. B., & Salkind, N. J. (2005). Using SPSS for Windows and Macintosh: Analyzing and 
understanding data (4th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson. 
Jepson, K. (2005). Conversations and negotiated interaction in text and voice chat rooms. Language 
Learning & Technology, 9(3), 79–98. 
Kelm, O. R. (1992). The use of synchronous computer networks in second language instruction: A 
preliminary report. Foreign Language Annals, 25(5), 441–453. 
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity and 
quality of language production. The Modern Language Journal, 79, 457–476. 
Kopf, M. (2012). Negotiation of meaning in video-conferencing: The potential of online chats for student 
interactions. The New Zealand Language Teacher, 38, 60–71. 
Larsen-Freeman, D. (1991). Research on language teaching methodologies: A review of the past and an 
agenda for the future. In K. de Bot, R. B. Ginsberg, & C. Kramsch (Eds.), Foreign language research 
in cross-cultural perspective (pp. 119–132). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Leeser, M. J. (2004). Learner proficiency and focus on form during collaborative dialogue. Language 
Teaching Research, 8(1), 55–81. 
Long, M. H. (1991). Focus on form: A design feature in language teaching methodology. In K. de Bot, R. 
B. Ginsberg, & C. Kramsch (Eds.), Foreign language research in cross-cultural perspective (pp. 39–
52). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C. 
Ritchie & T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413–468). San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press. 
Long, M. H., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research, and practice. In C. Doughty & J. 
Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 15–63). Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Pellettieri, J., (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical 
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and 
practices (pp. 59–86). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Pica, T., Kanagy, R., & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second language 
instruction and research. In G. Crookes & Gass, S. M. (Eds.), Tasks and language learning: 
Integrating theory and practice (pp. 9–34). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Rollet, G., & Tremblay, R. (1975). Speaking and writing with comic strips. Montreal, Canada: Centre 
Educatif et Culturel. 
Smith, B. (2003). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction: An expanded model. The Modern Language 
Journal, 87, 38–57. 
Smith, B. (2004). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction and lexical acquisition. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 26, 365–398. 
Inigo Yanguas and Tyler Bergin 79 
 
Swain, M. (1995). Three functions of output in second language learning. In G. Cook & B. Seidlhofer 
(Eds.), Principle and practice in applied linguistics: Studies in honor of H. G. Widdowson (pp. 125–
144). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Swain, M. (1998). Focus on form through conscious reflection. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), 
Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 64–81). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Swain, M. (2005). The output hypothesis: Theory and research. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Handbook on research 
in second language teaching and learning (pp. 471– 484). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1995). Problems in output and the cognitive processes they generate: A step 
towards second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 16, 371–391. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1998). Interaction and second language learning: Two adolescent French 
immersion students working together. The Modern Language Journal, 82, 320–337. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (2001). Focus on form through collaborative dialogue: Exploring task effects. In 
M. Bygate, P. Skehan, & M. Swain (Eds.), Researching pedagogic tasks: Second language learning, 
teaching, and testing (pp. 99–118). New York, NY: Longman. 
Sykes, J. (2005). Synchronous CMC and pragmatic development: Effects of oral and written chat. 
CALICO Journal, 22(3), 399–431. 
Tudini, V. (2003). Using native speakers in chat. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 141–159. 
Wajnryb, R. (1990). Grammar dictation. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Williams, J. (1999). Learner-generated attention to form. Language Learning, 49(4), 583–625. 
Williams, J. (2001). The effectiveness of spontaneous attention to form. System, 29, 325–340. 
Yanguas, I. (2010). Oral computer-mediated interaction between L2 learners: It’s About Time! Language 
Learning & Technology, 14(3), 72–93. 
Yanguas, I. (2012). Vocabulary acquisition in oral computer-mediated interaction. CALICO Journal, 
29(3), 507–531. 
Yilmaz, Y. (2011). Task effects on focus on form in synchronous computer-mediated communication. 
The Modern Language Journal, 95(1), 115–132. 
Yilmaz, Y., & Granena, G. (2010). The effects of task type in synchronous computer-mediated 
communication. ReCALL, 22(1), 20–38. 
Appendix A. Task Texts 
El dulce de fresa 
La Sra. Pérez preparaba dulce de fresa en la cocina mientras su hijo la observaba. Cuando terminó, ella 
puso el dulce de fresa encima de la despensa, lejos del alcance de Simón. Entonces, su mamá salía a la calle 
y Simón le preguntó, “¿a dónde vas mamá?” “Voy a la oficina de correos, hijo,” dijo. 
Su mamá no estaba en la casa y su papá estaba en la sala leyendo las noticias; Simón pensó que era el 
momento perfecto para probar el dulce de fresa. Sin embargo, como era muy bajo, no podía llegar con solo 
un banco. 
Entonces, puso una silla enfrente de la despensa. Después, colocó el banco encima. Simón subió y trató de 
coger el dulce de fresa, pero justo cuando estaba a su alcance, el banco empezó a moverse y Simón se cayó 
al suelo. Cuando se golpeó contra el suelo, empezó a llorar. Cuando lo oyó, el Sr. Pérez le dijo, “¡ay Simón! 
¿Qué hiciste?” 
80 Language Learning & Technology 
 
El pescador 
A las siete de la mañana, Luis fue al río con su caña de pescar. En cinco horas y media pescó tres peces 
grandes. Como Luis tenía hambre, preparó uno a la parrilla. ¡Fue delicioso! Decidió llevar los otros dos 
pescados al mercado para venderlos. 
Cuando regresó a su casa, explicó a su papá que le habían pagado por sus peces. Su papá estaba muy 
orgulloso. Ofreció llevar a Luis a la tienda de artículos deportivos. Le preguntó, “Hijo, ¿qué quieres 
comprar? ¿Quieres una pelota, una nueva caña de pescar…?” Luis respondió, “no papá, no quiero ni una 
pelota, ni una nueva caña de pescar.” “¿Qué quieres comprar entonces?” dijo el papá. 
“¡Quiero comprar un rifle!”, respondió Luis. El papá de Luis se puso serio y preguntó, “¿por qué quieres 
un rifle, hijo?” Luis sonrió y exclamó “¡Papá, ya soy un hombre de negocios! ¡Quiero comprar un rifle para 
poder cazar más animales y ganar más dinero!” 
Appendix B. Task Instructions 
Jigsaw Task 
You and your partner are going to work together in order to write a story based on the comic strips below. 
These comic strips have a total of eight pictures of which you only have four (your partner has the remaining 
four). The goal of this activity is to combine these pictures in order to create and write a story. 
There are two different stages in this task: 
1. First, using Skype, and without looking at each other’s pictures, you will tell your partner what 
pictures you have. You should now discuss what you think the right order of the eight pictures is 
and how to order them to create a story. You have a maximum of 10 minutes to complete this first 
step. 
2. Once you finish Step 1, use Skype in Spanish to discuss the development of the story and write it 
in a Google word document; you can both write simultaneously on the same document. You will 
have a maximum of 25 minutes to complete this step and write the story. When you are finished, 
you will share the document with the researchers. 
Dictogloss Task 
You and your partner are going to work together in order to reconstruct a story to which you are going to 
listen while it is read aloud. The goal of this activity is for you and your partner to reconstruct the story as 
closely to the original as possible. You will listen to the story twice. You will be able to take notes only the 
second time. 
After listening to the story, there are two different stages in this task: 
1. Use Skype to speak in Spanish to your partner about the notes you have taken to determine how 
they are going to help you remember and write the story. You have a maximum of 10 minutes to 
complete this first step. 
2. Once you finish Step 1, use Skype in Spanish to discuss the development of the story and write it 
in a Google word document; you can both write simultaneously on the same document. You will 
have a maximum of 25 minutes to complete this step and write the story. When you are finished, 
you will share the document with the researchers. 
  
Inigo Yanguas and Tyler Bergin 81 
 
About the Authors 
Íñigo Yanguas is an Associate Professor and Language Coordinator in the Department of Languages, 
Cultures, and Literatures at the University of San Diego. His research interests include computer-assisted 
language learning and instruction, Spanish as a heritage language, and L2 acquisition. In addition, he is 
experimenting with a number of applications as a means to foster student involvement and L2 production. 
E-mail: inigoyanguas@sandiego.edu 
Tyler Bergin is a Ph.D. student in Spanish Linguistics at Georgetown University. He is currently an L2 
Spanish instructor at Georgetown University and previously taught L2 Spanish at San Diego State 
University. His research interests include SLA, CALL, and sociolinguistics. 
E-mail: tb819@georgetown.edu 
