Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2018, Volume 22, Issue 1 
pp. 184–217 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Melinda Dooly 
 
 
“I do which the question”: Students’ innovative use 
of technology resources in the language classroom 
Melinda Dooly, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona 
Abstract 
Many reports suggest that the use of education technology can have a positive effect on language 
education. However, most of the research indicates that there is need for more detailed understanding of 
the pedagogical processes that support technology-enhanced language learning. This text takes a social 
semiotic perspective to examine multimodal interaction (Jewitt, Bezemer, & O’Halloran, 2016) of 
learners taking part in telecollaborative activities in a language classroom. The study aims to provide a 
detailed view of the ways in which the language teachers’ task-as-workplan (Breen, 1987, 1989), 
designed around different technologies, dovetails (or not) into the task-as-process (i.e., the way in which 
the learners interpret and act upon the task instructions). Comparing the teachers’ pedagogical design 
and intended purpose of different technology-supported tasks with the actual way in which the learners 
interact with the tools, the results show that the students often engage with the technology in unexpected, 
and at times, highly innovative ways that often diverge from the task-as-workplan. 
Keywords: Instructional Design, Language Learning Strategies, Multimodal Texts, Technology-Mediated 
Communication 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: English 
APA Citation: Dooly, M. (2018). “I do which the question”: Students’ innovative use of technology 
resources in the language classroom. Language Learning & Technology, 22(1), 184–217. 
https://dx.doi.org/0125/44587 
Introduction 
Recent innovation in communication technology has had a visible impact on human interaction 
worldwide. To wit, a 2012 consumer report (Ofcom) on communication technology use in the UK 
estimated that more interactions are mediated by technology than those that occur face to face—a 
percentage that has most certainly grown over the past four years. Communication technology enables 
individuals to strengthen relationships with family, friends, and colleagues across the globe; opens up 
new possibilities for alternative education; facilitates growing opportunities for collaboration, game-
playing and knowledge-sharing between people who are geographically separated; and even contributes 
to new forms of social, political, and commercial exchanges (e.g., the sharing economy or collaborative 
consumption). Arguably, a list of the way technology contributes to changes in social interaction could go 
on ad infinitum. 
Understandably, as the use of technology-mediated communication has become normalized practice in 
personal and professional lives, educational initiatives are following suit. Encouragingly, research 
indicates that technology can provide foreign language students with ample opportunities for target 
language use and intercultural exchange, which is likely to promote learning (Thomas, Reinders, & 
Warschauer, 2013). However, there is still a need for more focus on what it means to efficiently design 
communicative target language learning events that integrate communication technology. 
One area in particular that has grown considerably in language teaching is the integration of 
telecollaborative exchange between language learners (see Helm, 2015). The study in this article stems 
Melinda Dooly 185 
 
from a telecollaborative exchange between two secondary education classes of English as a foreign 
language (EFL). However, this particular text focuses on the way in which the communication technology 
designed into the project was used in situ. The data are drawn from video recordings of the participants 
carrying out activities in the classroom (rather than the online asynchronous interaction), because the 
purpose of the study is to look at how they engaged with the technology during tasks designed for 
preparing them to communicate with their telecollaborative partners. The focus is principally on the 
students, although the role the teacher plays concerning their engagement with technology is also 
discussed. Some driving questions for the study were: Do they use the technology as initially planned in 
the telecollaborative project? Do the planning and implementation foster interaction between the 
participants “in personally meaningful ways” (Littlewood, 2014, p. 349) that help develop their 
communicative competence? What can these tell us about how teachers can optimally plan and implement 
the use of common technological tools for enhanced language learning? 
The study aims to provide an overall view of what took place in the foreign language classes by looking 
at specifically instructed use of technology for completing language tasks (and how these instructions are 
interpreted) with more spontaneous, self-initiated use of technology resources (e.g. for resolving language 
difficulties). A commonly expressed teacher anxiety concerning technology in the classroom is that 
students will be sidetracked from the class objectives, but the question remains whether “alternative 
distractions [would] occur if the technological tools [were] removed” (Fang, 2009, Distraction as 
Opportunity, para. 2). A study of the ways in which students interpret the task instructions for using 
technology, along with the ways in which they accomplish other self-initiated tasks (related or not to the 
task-as-workplan; see Breen, 1987, 1989) through technology resources can further understanding about 
whether it is the technology or the instructional process that needs to be reconsidered. 
In a previous study, Dooly (2011) suggested that a micro-analytical approach that combines both online 
and off-line data compiled during long-term telecollaborative interaction can support a deeper 
understanding of potential gaps between task plans, learner actions, and task output. That study took the 
notions of task-as-workplan and task-in-process (Breen, 1987, 1989) as part of the conceptual framework 
to study interactional data from a telecollaborative project with primary education students. Following up 
on this past study, this present article looks at data stemming from a 3-month telecollaborative project 
between two middle school classes in Europe (Spain and Sweden). This study also focuses on 
convergences and divergences from the original workplan as the tasks (involving technology) are 
interpreted and performed by the learners during their in-class activities. Similar to the study by Dooly 
(2011), the focus is on “track[ing] the relationship between the […] phases as they unfold during the 
implementation” (Seedhouse & Almutairi, 2009, p. 312). However, in this current research there is more 
emphasis on the learners’ use of the technological resources as seen through a social semiotic lens 
(Bezemer & Kress, 2016). 
Theoretical Framework 
Multimodality 
This current study expands on the previously mentioned ethnographic study (Dooly, 2011) to take into 
fuller consideration the role of multimodality in the communication events that occur in the language 
classroom. Multimodality is understood here as described by Kress (2010): sets of communication 
practices in terms of the textual, aural, linguistic, spatial, visual, and physical resources (modes), 
including technology, that are used to create meaning and understanding. This implies that the analysis 
moves away from language as the only focus of the language classroom in order to create an analytical 
focus with a wider range of the many communication modes people use, including (but not limited to) 
gestures, images, or technological tools and, perhaps more importantly, the way in which these semiotic 
resources are related (see Bezemer & Jewitt, 2010). Within the language classroom, these foci are 
especially significant as they often entail key aspects of communicative competence. 
186 Language Learning & Technology 
 
While we learn languages to communicate, language is not the only or even (at times) the primary 
mode of communication. These two simple understandings, which underlie the expanding interest of 
language educators and researchers in multimodality, and underpin shifts in our thinking about 
discourse, texts, and language pedagogies, are being reimagined to acknowledge the increasing 
prominence of nonlinguistic modes. (Early, Kendrick, & Potts, 2015, p. 447) 
Likewise, language learning technology is increasingly being “framed in a much more multimodal 
context where learners enjoy greater agency and autonomy to produce language through digital forms” 
(Blake, 2016, p. 137). Thus, this study takes a “multimodal (inter)action analysis” in which the “the work 
of the actor is central because it is through interaction, as well as how space and artifacts mediate 
interaction, that social occasions are instantiated” (Jewitt, Bezemer, & O’Halloran, 2016, p. 132). As 
such, it aims to “collect multimodal materials in the ‘natural’ settings of the people under study” in order 
to provide a “fine-grained analysis” of “all the modes that are in use” (p. 136). 
Educational Ethnography 
This multimodal analysis takes place within a wider frame of educational ethnography. Traditionally, 
ethnographic research is an approach that facilitates holistic analyses of phenomena; the approach 
endeavors to investigate a focal phenomenon within a complex system, leading to a unique and context-
bound understanding of what is happening. Along these lines, immersive fieldwork in classrooms has 
been referred to as school or educational ethnography (Erickson, 1973). Green and Bloome (2005) make 
a heuristic distinction between ethnography-of-education (they cite the example of anthropologists or 
sociologists studying education) and ethnography-in-education (usually carried out by teacher educators, 
teachers, education researchers, and students employing ethnographic research to study education). In this 
case, there were two researchers engaged in data compilation in the classroom: a junior researcher 
(Sabrina, a doctoral candidate) and a senior researcher (her doctoral supervisor) from a teacher education 
faculty. As part of the ethnographic study, the researchers immersed themselves in the community, 
collaborating with the class teachers in the design and implementation of the telecollaborative project 
while collecting data of all the participants (including themselves). 
Following the approach used in Dooly (2011), the fragments shown in the data analysis (below) are 
compared with the original task-as-workplan. However, different from the previously mentioned study, 
the fragments analyzed here do not look at interrelated episodes of data segments between online and 
face-to-face contexts. Instead, the selected segments are from in-class activities only, although they are 
involved in task cycles that made up the telecollaborative project. Additionally, this study looks at 
unexpected outcomes of the interaction that unfold between the researcher and the learners during task-as-
process, looking in particular at the ways in which technology often mediates their communication. 
The expanded focus on other multimodal aspects of communication has inevitably had an effect on the 
way in which the data are transcribed. As Jewitt et al. (2016) point out, “there are no fully settled 
conventions for multimodal transcription” (p. 146). For this reason adaptations to already existent 
transcribing protocols, along with a proposed new model, are used for the representation and analysis of 
the data. 
Data Compilation: Context and Participants 
The data come from a 3-month exchange between two middle school classes (11- to 13-year-olds) in 
Europe (Spain and Sweden). Under the auspice of a research grant by the Spanish government,1 the two 
teachers, along with the university teacher (and author) and a doctoral student, met in October of 2015 to 
plan a telecollaborative project. The teachers decided on the topic of Syrian refugees and co-authored an 
initial work plan for the project during the 3-day meeting. The plan was revised and published in a shared 
online document (a GoogleDoc) and served as the point of reference for weekly progress meetings 
between the teachers and the rest of the research team. The project aimed to guide the students through a 
series of research and discussion activities to help them understand what a political refugee is and get a 
Melinda Dooly 187 
 
better understanding of the current European Union (EU) policies about relocating Syrian refugees and 
social actions that can be taken, while working on communication skills in the target language (English). 
The final output was a blog aimed to raise public awareness of the situation of political refugees and 
suggestions about ways EU citizens can help. 
Out of 43 students, 15 were located in Terrassa, Spain (a region of Barcelona) and 28 in Hässleholm, 
Sweden. In the Terrassa school, the principal school language of instruction was Catalan, however the 
project lessons were carried out in the EFL class. In the partner school, the school language was Swedish, 
and the project also formed part of their EFL class. The focus of this article is only on the Catalan 
students’ classes. 
The data were compiled by the doctoral student and the researcher. All the class sessions that were related 
to the telecollaborative work were recorded using two cameras in the classroom, along with spy glasses 
(glasses with tiny cameras in them) in order to get the students’ perspective of the interaction. 
Additionally, Skype messages, wiki audio recordings, online documents, and other multimodal data 
pertaining to the project were collected. 
Data Management: Adaptation of Transcriptions 
The fragments chosen for analysis were transcribed using the language archiving technology called Elan 
(see the transcription key in the Appendix). Permission to record in-class interaction and to collect online 
data pertaining to the project was obtained from the Spanish and Swedish students, their parents, and the 
schools’ administration, and a research ethics and protocol contract was signed between the principal 
researcher and the heads of the schools. As agreed in the contract, the data were processed and analyzed 
only by persons pertaining to the research project and could be used for publication and teaching 
materials only after taking the necessary steps to ensure anonymity of the participants. For this reason, the 
faces in the images are pixelated and the names of the participants (except for the author) have been 
changed. 
Multimodal texts are composite products of the combined effect of multiple semiotic resources that are 
often hard to represent in static form. Moreover, the analysis itself requires deliberately limiting the focus, 
due to the extremely wide range of potential dimensions in communication, including gaze, gesture, 
movement, body posture, and interaction with different semiotic objects of action, image, and speech 
(Bezemer & Jewitt, 2010). Thus, this article includes two types of transcripts that were deemed 
representative for the research purpose. The first transcription method, which is applied when “the mode 
of speech is involved” (Bezemer & Kress, 2016, p. 36) is an adaptation of the vertical transcript format 
(versus a column format) that is typical of interactional sociolinguistics; as in conversation analysis 
notation, these are segmented according to speaker turns (see Gumperz & Berenz, 1993). 
To more fully approach the multimodality of the participants’ interaction with the technology, the adapted 
version of the Jefferson Transcription System (Jefferson, 2004) used here includes images (screen 
captures from the video recordings) of actions that are considered key descriptive dimensions of 
modalities other than language. Furthermore, to underscore the relevance that non-linguistic 
communication (multimodality) has on interaction, these images have been numbered as turns whenever 
these actions had an impact on the sequentiality of the interaction. They are numbered thus because the 
use of other semiotic modes (apart from language) are seen here as an integral part of communication 
(Jewitt, 2011). Descriptive notes have also been added to the transcripts, with numbering and lettering to 
indicate correlation between actions and spoken turns. 
Additionally, due to the focus of the research, a second type of transcription was created for this study. As 
Bezemer and Kress point out, it is important “to develop a framework that allows us to give accounts of 
instances that involve quite different sets of modes” used for communicating (2016, p. 36). Thus a new 
transcription framework was produced, herein called a pictorial transcription as it relied only on image, 
supported with textual description of the context or actions (based on researcher field notes). These were 
188 Language Learning & Technology 
 
used when other modalities (not language) provided a more accurate representation of the interaction that 
was being analyzed or when the preferred modality of communication (as oriented to by the participants 
themselves) was not primarily language-based. The numbering of these transcriptions was based on 
visible actions rather than spoken turns. 
The analyzed fragments were selected based on the research interest of identifying the different ways in 
which students engaged with the technology (following the initial planning, ignoring the instructions, and 
amending and innovating on the planned use or bringing in different technology). These fragments 
spanned several class lessons and highlighted three main student groups. Field notes indicated that Group 
1 (Marcel, Antoni, Jaime) usually accomplished the tasks, although they often engaged in side activities 
with technology. Group 2 (Alejandro, Joan, Pere) was a highly motivated group although the students 
tended to work individually. Group 3 (Miriam, Nieves, Marga) was made up of the least-participative 
students in the class; they were usually visibly disengaged from the language learning tasks. A whole 
class interaction completes the analysis. 
Analysis 1. Synthesis Task: Comparing 3 Groups’ Task-as-Process 
The following three fragments show three different student groups engaged in the same activity. 
According to the task-as-plan (see Figure 1), this activity was an information-gathering and summarizing 
assignment. It was one of the first activities in the telecollaborative project. Students were supposed to 
view a video (originally posted by the BBC) to which the teachers had added questions and comments via 
the education tool Zaption (this tool is no longer available). This was an online platform that allowed the 
teacher to create interactive lessons (insert discussion cues, questions, comments) into any video on the 
web. As can be seen in Figure 1, this was intended to promote in-class group work. The task-as-workplan 
shows that the students would first watch the video, then discuss and negotiate the correct answers, all of 
which would be compiled in an online document (GoogleDoc) to then be shared with their 
telecollaborative partners. 
 
Melinda Dooly 189 
 
Figure 1. Shared teacher plans for the telecollaborative project. 
That the teacher intended for the video to serve as stimuli for discussion was corroborated by the 
teacher’s instructions of the task at the beginning of the class, as can be seen in Fragment 1 of the 
classroom interaction. The teacher began this turn sequence with a typical discourse marker, so, followed 
by a slight hedge of the instructions to come: what I would like you to do now (Line 1). In the same line, 
the teacher drew out the word groups while raising her voice and made a gesture that indicated the whole 
class, thereby underscoring the notion that the task was intended to be a dialogic activity between the 
members of the group. 
Fragment 1. Teacher Instructions on Zaption Videos 
Participants: Teacher, Marcel, Antoni, Jaime 
Line Participant Transcription 
1 Tchr SO: Teacher (0.1) what i would like you to do now\ in GR:OU::PS\ ((moves 
toward whiteboard, makes circle with hands to indicate everyone)) 
2 Tchr (.) ok/ (.) 
 Notes ((marcel has email account open on laptop; antoni searches for something in 
browser. only jaime has the instruction page open)) 
3 Tchr is- (.) revise: those videos/ (.) revise those videos:\ ((walks in middle of aisle))  
 Notes ((antoni now has cartoon videos on screen; marcel continues with email account; 
jaime still has instruction page open)) 
4  
 
5 Tchr (0.1) and:::: (0.1) find this info\ ((turns back to whiteboard)) ok::/the video is 
about: @what is the video about@/ 
 Notes ((teacher switches from instruction voice to question voice)) 
However, paying attention to key moments of modality (physical presence, movements, engagement with 
artifacts) of the others in the transcript of three groups of students as the event unfolds, we can see that the 
students do not orient toward the intended pedagogical purpose of the interaction (task-as-workplan). In 
Fragment 1, Line 4, the students’ computer screens show that only one of the three students in the Group 
1 followed the teacher’s oral instructions to open the shared file and download the written instructions of 
the task, along with the worksheet to be filled in. The other student (Marcel) has an email account open 
while Antoni is watching a cartoon video. 
190 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Looking at Group 2 following the same instructions (Fragment 2), the members appear to be very 
engaged in the task, but they are notably carrying out the task individually; no intragroup interaction takes 
place. Fragment 2 (a pictorial transcript, based on researcher field notes and video observation), shows the 
sequence of events (task-in-progress) of the same task-as-workplan as they unfolded in this second group. 
In Fragment 2, Action 1, the screen capture shows that the students downloaded the instructions from the 
class folder and were watching the Zaption film. However, despite the seating arrangements for group 
interaction (as seen in Action 2), the students did not discuss their answers together (video observation 
showed almost no verbal interaction between them). Interestingly, the one modality which did not come 
into play was speaking. In this case, the use of technology (video, headphones) seemed to promote 
individual work rather than group discussion, (see Actions 2 and 3; use of earphones; individual 
computers). Actions 3 and 4 demonstrate one student’s deftness at quickly clicking through the possible 
answers in the multiple choice questions in Zaption in a sequential order (top to bottom), rewinding the 
video slightly to return to the questions in the case of a wrong answer, clicking on the next answer and 
upon getting the correct answer cutting and pasting it in the shared document (word for word, not 
summarized) as seen in Action 4. 
Fragment 2. Working Individually in Group Work 
Participants: Alejandro, Joan, Pere 
Action Description 
1 
 
 Students go to instruction pages. Modalities: visual interaction (reading) with static webpage 
(repository); reading of word document. 
Melinda Dooly 191 
 
2 
 
 Students use earphones to watch videos. Modalities: visual interaction (watching) video and 
aural interaction (video and earphones); physical interaction with keyboard (writing on word 
document). 
3 
 
 Student gets wrong answer. Rewinds Zaption. Modalities: visual interaction (watching) video 
and aural interaction (video and earphones); physical interaction with keyboard and mouse 
(rewinding video, writing on word document). 
192 Language Learning & Technology 
 
4 
 
 Student gets correct answer. Stops Zaption, copies answer. Pastes in worksheet. 
Modalities: visual interaction (watching) video and aural interaction (video and 
earphones); physical interaction with keyboard and mouse (rewinding of video, 
writing on word document). 
The third group analyzed for this task-as-workplan (again demonstrated in a pictorial transcript, Fragment 
3) was not engaged in the task at all. In fact, the participants did not appear to orient toward any part of 
the task-as-process until the activity was being drawn to a conclusion by the teacher. The teacher wrote 
the expected answers on the whiteboard. As can be seen in Fragment 3, one of the students from Group 3 
copied the teacher’s answers into the group’s shared document. 
Fragment 3. Not Working During Group Work 
Participants: Miriam, Nieves, Marga 
Action Description 
1 
 
Melinda Dooly 193 
 
 Students arranged so that little interaction takes place. Do not use earphones to listen to video. 
One student (in front) has instruction page open and listens to teacher’s explanation. The other 
students do not pay attention to the task. Modalities: visual interaction (reading) with static 
webpage (repository); reading of word document. 
2 
 
 Group waits for teacher to give answers. First student copies answers directly into worksheet. 
Other students do not watch video or fill in worksheet. Modalities: physical interaction with 
keyboard (writing on word document). 
3 
 
 Teacher writes answers on board. Modalities: (students) physical interaction with keyboard 
(writing on word document); (teacher) physical interaction with whiteboard (writing). 
Interestingly, if the intended task-as-outcome (common answers in a shared document) were observed 
without the observed data from the participants’ task-as-process, it could be inferred that this group’s 
activities actually did converge with the task-as-workplan. Yet, observations of the three groups’ 
interaction with the technology used in this first activity indicated several moments of divergence 
between task-as-workplan and task-as-process. The shared online document contained instructions, cues 
for answers, and spaces for summaries, all of which were intended to act as scaffolding tools for the 
194 Language Learning & Technology 
 
students to interpret and discuss the information contained in the video. They were then expected to 
communicate this information in a synthesized manner to their partners in Sweden. In fact, this document 
was used minimally as a scaffolding tool. The students waited for the teacher to give oral instructions, 
rather than reading through them autonomously, and then followed the links she copied on the board 
rather than going to the document. They either used the shared document for filling in text copied directly 
from the Zaption platform (this was the most common practice observed, not only in Group 2) or waited 
for the teacher to provide answers. Even the teacher did not make full use of the shared document in her 
computer (which was projected onto a large screen at the front of the classroom through an interactive 
whiteboard). Instead, she spent a large amount of time writing out the answers, in longhand, with a 
marker on the whiteboard next to the projected screen (Fragment 3, Action 3). 
The seating arrangements for the students seemed to be aimed at facilitating discussion. However, 
requiring the students to watch the videos individually with earphones, along with allowing all of the 
students access to the final output document (rather than one group secretary, for instance) tended to 
countermand the potential for any sort of discussion. Furthermore, the types of questions that were used 
for the Zaption tool (i.e., multiple choice rather than dialogic) and the fact that the students seemed aware 
that eventually all of the answers would be written on the whiteboard by the teacher also contributed to 
divergence from the tasks as they were originally planned. 
Analysis 2. Writing a Collaborative Essay: A Group’s Task-as-Process 
As can be seen in Figure 2 (showing the task-as-workplan), the students were expected to discuss 
arguments against accommodating Syrian refugees. This activity followed several classes in which they 
had been exploring political and social reasons for accepting refugees and aimed at raising their critical 
reflection and learning how to express opposing opinions in an argumentative text. 
 
Figure 2. Shared teacher plans for the telecollaborative project. 
Following rather lengthy instructions by the teacher (58 seconds), in which she insisted on the importance 
of group discussion, Group 1 was chosen as the center of the researcher’s focus and she began to shadow 
them with her handheld camera (see Fragment 4). The group members appeared to be oriented toward the 
task-as-workplan in Lines 3–7, however, their responses were actually prompted by the researcher who 
asked them what they had answered thus far (not included in transcription). 
Fragment 4. Use of Unexpected Resources to Accomplish Group Work 
Participants: Sabrina, Antoni, Marcel, Jaime 
Melinda Dooly 195 
 
Line Participant Transcription 
1 Notes ((antoni & marcel are sitting face to face with laptops between them open)) 
2  
 
 Notes ((marcel shifts to look at antoni closely, grins)) 
3 Ant because they change eh our: eh tradition ((plays with laptop corner)) 
4 Sab they change our traditions\ (.) >ONE< 
5 Mar vale\ ((starts to type)) 
 Trans OK 
6 Sab second/ 
7  
 
 Mar ((typing, speaking to self)) 
8 Sab second idea\ (.) come on/ 
 Notes ((marcel continues typing)) 
  (…) 
196 Language Learning & Technology 
 
30 Mar ºbecauseº 
 Notes ((camera focuses on marcel)) 
31 Sab because/ 
32 Mar ºa verº (.) >one moment< ((typing)) 
 Trans let’s see 
33 Sab a ver no\ a ver/ 
 Trans Let’s see no let’s see 
 Notes ((still typing. This goes on for 2.8)) 
34 Sab did you find/ 
 Notes ((camera focuses on jaime)) ((camera shows jaime’s screen open to instructions for 
essay but no work done)) ((during this time of 1.5 seconds no one in the group 
talks)) 
35  
 
 Notes ((jaime looks back at camera and researcher, hand resting on laptop near keyboard 
but not typing)) 
36 Sab why do you think/ they- they- (.) some of the people do not want:\ refugees in 
europe\ 
  (…) 
49 Notes ((marcel is typing all this time)) 
50 Jai because (.) ºehmº 
 Notes ((camera focuses on jaime)) 
51 Sab yeah/ (.) because/ 
  (2.1) 
 Notes ((antoni stares at laptop. screen shows essay template still empty)) 
52 Sab come on: (.) come on: ((sing-song voice)) 
53 Mar ((reading from screen)) because some of them are desperate ((mispronounced as 
desesperAte)) and commit crimes\ 
Melinda Dooly 197 
 
54  
 
 Notes ((marcel looks at camera, slight smile)) 
55 Sab uh uhm:/ ok\ 
 Notes ((marcel looks back at screen)) 
  (0.2) 
56 Sab did you take from somewhere/ he/ 
 Notes ((marcel grins, leans over laptop, starts to laugh. Antoni joins in laughter)) 
57  
 
58 Sab $did you read that somewhere/$ 
59 Mar he he he 
60 Ant he he he 
 Notes ((marcel shakes head no)) 
61 Sab YOU ARE copying\ (.) i don’t count it\ (.) come on\ you find another idea 
62 Mar >but< i i i only- ((gestures hand up)) 
198 Language Learning & Technology 
 
63  
 
64 Sab: NO NO NO 
65 Mar: i am writing\ 
66 Sab: ok\ 
During the interaction, in Lines 36–52, two of the students endeavor to provide affiliated, preferred 
responses to the researcher as she continually attempts to orient them to accomplish the task (i.e., finding 
against arguments about refugee asylum). In the end, the group was able to come up with an answer (Line 
53), but it was attributable principally to the individual work carried out by Marcel, who proved that he 
was very adroit at finding answers for questions on the internet (his continual typing from Line 8 onward 
and his reading voice used in Line 53 implied he had searched for an ‘against argument’ on the web). 
His embodiment in Line 57 and Line 58 indicated that he was aware that he transgressed the task-as-
workplan by circumventing the intended dialogic process (group discussion). Instead, he found a suitable 
sentence in a quick online search. He laughingly denied copying in Line 59 and then positioned himself as 
a good student by stating that he was writing (or filling in the GoogleDoc) in Line 59, indicating an 
awareness of expected outcomes (and behavior) involved in the task-as-workplan. At the end of Fragment 
4, in Line 66, the researcher accepted (and validated) the use of the Internet as a resource for resolving 
questions posed by the teacher despite the fact that this was not the teacher’s intention. 
Analysis 3. Suggesting and Voting: 2 Groups’ Task-as-Process 
Fragment 5 and Fragment 6 demonstrate (through pictorial transcripts) other ways in which the students 
used alternative technology to accomplish the group work that was intended to be discussed orally 
between the members. In this assignment, the groups were asked to suggest group names for the 
international working groups that had already been set up by the teachers (between Spain and Sweden). 
The only technology that was included in the task-as-workplan was the shared GoogleDoc, to be used as 
part of the task-as-outcome (see Figure 3). 
Melinda Dooly 199 
 
 
Figure 3. Shared teacher plans for the telecollaborative project. 
Similarly to his actions in Fragment 4, Marcel used an online search as a resource for accomplishing the 
group task in Fragment 5. 
Fragment 5. Find a Name: Engine Search as Resource 
Participants: Marcel, Jaime, Antoni 
Action Description 
1 
 
 Students are pushed to come up with names for their groups. Marcel searches for sites that 
suggest group names. Modalities: visual interaction (reading screen); physical interaction with 
keyboard (typing questions into search engine). 
The members of Group 1 were oriented toward the task (their positions and gestures support this 
conclusion) but their focus was more on outcome than on dialoguing among themselves about names (the 
original intention being that they activate vocabulary in the target language by applying it creatively to 
come up with an interesting group name). Rather than discussion, however, the group gathered around 
Marcel’s computer as he searched for potential names, with minimal oral interaction between the 
students. Similarly, Group 3 also used alternative technology resources to complete the task, rather than 
having a group discussion in the target language, as seen in the next pictorial transcription.  
200 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Fragment 6. Find a Name: WhatsApp as Resource 
Participants: Miriam, Marga, Nieves 
Line Participant Transcription 
1  
 
 Notes Usual leader of the group (Nieves) is absent due to illness. Miriam and Marga use 
their cellphone WhatsApp chat to contact Nieves for suggestions of a group name 
in English. Modalities: physical interaction with cellphone keyboard (writing); 
visual interaction (reading text on cellphone screen); spoken interaction (discussion 
between themselves). There is no interaction with the two computers. 
2  
 
3 Nie: Pirus? XD 
 Notes ((pirus is part of a magical charm that brings back the main character, Sakura, to 
life in the Japanese manga called Bokusatsu Tenshi Dokuro-chan)) 
4 Nie: <crying laughing emoticon, repeated three times> 
5 Mir: Las frikis dice la Marga 
 Trans Marga says the freakies 
Melinda Dooly 201 
 
6 Nie: Las pirus xd 
7 Nie: Nooo 
8  
 
 Notes Girls laugh at suggestions by Nieves. Modalities: physical interaction with 
cellphone keyboard (writing); visual interaction (reading text on cellphone screen); 
spoken interaction (discussion between themselves). There is no interaction with 
the two computers. 
9  
 
 Notes Marga shushes Miriam when she reads WhatsApp text out loud. Eventually girls 
decide on the group name of The Unicorns (based on a Manga character). 
Modalities: physical interaction with cellphone keyboard (writing); visual 
interaction (reading text on cellphone screen); spoken interaction (discussion 
between themselves). There is no interaction with the two computers. 
Given that Group 3 was most frequently disengaged from the in-class activities (researchers’ field notes), 
it was interesting to observe that the interaction mediated through WhatsApp (a cross-platform mobile 
messaging application that allows users to exchange messages without having to pay for SMS) promoted 
far more discussion (although it was in Catalan) than the interactions observed in Fragment 4 and 
202 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Fragment 5 (by a group that was usually quite participative in class). 
Analysis 4. Self-Initiated Technology Mediation: Personifying the Camera 
In the following episodes (fragments 7 and 8), the interaction that took place between the researcher, 
Sabrina, and the students was largely mediated through the small handheld camera she was using to 
collect data for her PhD thesis. Sabrina did not simply record the students as they carried out the 
activities; she deliberately engaged them in dialogue, using the camera as a mediating tool between 
herself and the students. The episode in Fragment 7 demonstrates that the students not only were aware 
that they were being recorded, but also used the technology as yet another means of mediation for 
communication. Sabrina tried to get the groups to tell her the names of the Swedish partners in their 
smaller online working groups. The task-as-workplan (see Figure 4) consisted of the students recording 
group messages for these online partners. 
 
Figure 4. Shared teacher plans for the telecollaborative project. 
In Fragment 7, Sabrina inquired about their names to get the group to focus on the task, but the exchange 
evolved into a short episode of teasing. Aware he was being baited by the researcher about being 
attractive (and attracted to) the Swedish girls in the group, Marcel reacted to the camera as if trying to 
personify the camera as a third party to align with him (Lines 16–23; see also Robinson, 1994, p. 48). 
Fragment 7. Only the Girls’ Names 
Participants: Marcel, Sabrina 
Line Participant Transcription 
1 Sab ok\ i will ask marcel\ (.) marCEL/ >do you do you< do you remember/ 
 Notes ((researcher focuses in on marcel who is still very focused and working alone with 
laptop)) 
2 Mar ((continues typing for a few seconds then looks up at camera)) 
3 Sab your friends/ yo- your junior researcher friends/ 
4 Mar yes: (.) ((raise hand behind head. Brings hand down to indicate number one with 
thumb)) 
5 Sab what are their names/ 
Melinda Dooly 203 
 
6 Mar vendela\ joana\ ((hand goes up and back down with two fingers)) (2) ((holds up 
thumb and finger while thinking)) 
7  
 
8 Mar [a boy] ((hand counts to three, marcel smiles)) 
9 Sab [erasmus] 
10 Mar he he he 
11 Sab and erasmus/ (.) erasmus/ 
12 Mar $a little boy\$ 
13 Sab = you no- you don’t remember the name of the boy but only the girls/ 
14 Mar YES because: (.) the nam- the- ((extends arm to point behind him)) 
15 Mar is- eh- (1) their names is very com- comp- ((brings arm down)) 
16 Mar plic- (.) is very difficult\ $YES::$ 
 Notes ((Marcel looks at camera, looks away, looks back at the camera and smiles, 
protests)) 
17 Sab just a moment\ (.) girls’ names are easier than boys/ 
18 Mar yes:: he he  
 Notes ((seems self-conscious; grins at camera)) 
19 Sab rea:lly:/ 
20 Mar yes:: ((tone implies ‘of course’)) 
 Notes ((marcel looks directly at camera, rather impishly)) 
204 Language Learning & Technology 
 
21  
 
22 Sab hmm:: 
 Notes ((marcel grins widely, turns away, slaps forehead)) 
23  
 
24 Sab therefore you forget about the boys’ names/ 
25 Mar ((shakes head in mock disbelief)) and mark (1.5) yes: ((takes hand away from 
forehead)) that one’s- it is mark or- mark or max\ 
In the beginning, Marcel did not speak directly into the camera (see Lines 4–8). He appeared to be more 
directly answering Sabrina, as he ticked off, with his fingers, the names of the members of his 
international group. However, as he became more aware that Sabrina was teasing him about only 
remembering the girls’ names in the group (Lines 15–20) he began to engage directly with the camera, as 
if appealing to the invisible audience to side with him, particularly through his gestures and posture (see 
Lines 16, 18, 20–23). 
Melinda Dooly 205 
 
Analysis 5. Self-Initiated Technology Mediation: Complaining and Subverting 
The interaction in Fragment 8 demonstrates how one of the students used the technology resources he had 
at hand to engage with the researchers in the target language in conversations that were not part of the 
task-as-workplan. In Fragment 8, Marcel reluctantly acquiesced to wearing spy glasses to record his 
perspective in the study (four pairs were used in the study, and wearers alternated each lesson). 
Fragment 8. Hurts 
Participants: Marcel, Antoni, Sabrina 
Line Participant Transcription 
1 Mar ((typing quickly into computer)) 
2  
 
3 Mar ((looks up at camera, is wearing spy glasses)) 
 Notes ((camera focuses in on marcel from behind)) 
4 Mar look look  
 Notes ((raises arm to get researcher’s attention then points at screen on his laptop)) 
 Notes ((screenshot shows Google translation from Catalan fan mal to English hurt)) 
206 Language Learning & Technology 
 
5  
 
 Notes ((marcel points at glasses, grins)) 
6 Sab $it does not\$ ((reads the screen)) 
7 Notes ((marcel grins at camera, turns back to his laptop)) 
8 Notes ((antoni looks at marcel)) 
9 Sab i don’t believe you\ 
10 Mar ºreallyº  
 Notes ((marcel opens up new window on laptop)) 
11 Mar XXX 
 Notes ((marcel speaks to antoni in spanish, leans over to his laptop)) 
12 Notes ((antoni and marcel laugh about something on antoni’s laptop; they try to block the 
screen from the camera. Researcher moves away as if leaving but captures shot of 
screen.)) 
Melinda Dooly 207 
 
13  
 
Marcel began the fragment by furiously typing into the computer (Line 1), apparently doing a translation 
word search (Lines 4–5) so that he could have the appropriate vocabulary to complain to the researcher 
about wearing the glasses (Line 5 shows translation of the Catalan words for it hurts). Despite the fact 
that Marcel never audibly voiced his protest, he was able to communicate his disgruntlement about 
wearing the glasses to the researcher, who immediately dismissed the complaint. When this short 
exchange proved fruitless, Marcel disengaged from the researcher by first opening up a new window in 
his computer and then turning to Antoni’s computer screen, which showed a website for the videogame 
Grand Theft Auto (GTA), while attempting to block the researcher’s view with his body. The final 
screenshot supported the hypothesis that the students sometimes resisted the activities related to the task-
as-workplan and used the technology tools available to them to accomplish activities related to personal 
interests. Field notes indicated that Antoni (the owner of the computer with the GTA website) routinely 
waited for Marcel to complete the group task while carrying out other (personal) activities online, and 
then transferred the correct answer to the shared group folder. 
Analysis 6. Self-Initiated Technology Mediation: Word Search 
The next fragment took place at the end of the telecollaborative project. The researcher had arranged for 
the students to interview each other about the project. Planned materials for the interviews consisted of 
strips of paper with prodding questions and the video camera for recording the sessions. Because this was 
an extracurricular activity, the teacher was not present in the classroom. The participants in Fragment 9 
were two of the girls from Group 3, the group that had been consistently unresponsive and disengaged 
during the in-class activities (see also Fragment 3 and Fragment 6). In particular Marga had been resistant 
toward the use of English in her communication with the researchers and teachers (field notes). However, 
in this next fragment, Marga is very determined to use all of her resources at hand, including technology, 
to ask a question to the researcher. 
Fragment 9. I Do Which Question 
Participants: Marga, Nieves, Sabrina 
Line Participant Transcription 
1 Notes ((marga is typing rapidly into her cellphone with both hands. she does not pay 
attention to anyone else.)) 
208 Language Learning & Technology 
 
2  
 
3 Nie que quiere enseñar/ ((not visible on camera)) 
 Trans what do you want to show? 
  (…) 
  (0.03) 
7 Mar ((makes signal with hands to wait. whispers to self.)) 
8  
 
9 Sab do you understand the question/ ((behind camera)) 
Melinda Dooly 209 
 
10  
 
 Notes Marga finishes typing, pushes glasses up and hair back and takes breath to speak 
while looking at the mobile screen. 
  (0.02) 
 Notes ((reads from screen, smiles with satisfaction)) 
11 Mar i do/ which question\ 
  (0.02) 
12  
 
 Notes  ((holds up the slip of paper with question written on it to the camera)) 
  (0.02) 
13 Sab huhm/ 
14 Mar [((looks uncertain, looks back at cellphone))] 
15 Nie [ºhe he heº] 
16 Mar ((ducks head, lays paper back down, seemingly in resignation.)) 
210 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Despite the fact that Marga’s use of a text translator on her cellphone did not appear to resolve the 
communication difficulties, as seen by Sabrina’s responses in Lines 13 and 18, Marga continued to 
address the communication problem through the use of technology. Instead of orienting herself to her 
classmate, Nieves, for help (as she had usually done during in-class activities), Marga returned to her 
cellphone and sought another resource: the voice translator (see Fragment 10). 
Fragment 10. I Do Which the Question Paper 
Participants: Marga, Brandon, voice translator 
Line Participant Transcription 
1 Mar i do which\ the question ºpaperº\  
 Notes Marga reads from cellphone screen, looks at camera and holds up slip of paper, 
smiling (0.03). 
2  
 
3 Mar he he he  
4  
 
 Notes Marga moves hand to cellphone screen 
Melinda Dooly 211 
 
5 Mar espera: que te enseño\ 
 Trans wait i’ll show you 
  
 
 Notes Marga taps something on the cellphone screen 
7 Bra =XX 
8 Mar $(ahora si veuràs)$  
 Trans now you’ll see 
 Notes Marga holds out cellphone toward camera 
 Notes Marga looks expectantly at the camera, raises eyebrows and smiles while a voice 
translator plays from her cellphone 
  (1) 
9 Voice i do which the question paper\ 
10 Mar he he he he 
11 Notes Marga continues laughing, hands the cellphone to the researcher to read the screen 
212 Language Learning & Technology 
 
12  
 
Interestingly, because Sabrina did not understand the question in the previous fragment, Marga appeared 
to reword her input to be translated (previous to Line 1, Marga had typed something else into her 
cellphone). This resulted in a more awkward syntax in the second rendering (i.e., I do which the question 
paper; see Fragment 10, Line 1). When her second translation was still misunderstood by Sabrina, Marga 
played the voiced translation function on her cellphone, then laughingly handed the cellphone to the 
researcher to read or repeat the recording (Line 12)—perhaps convinced that it was her pronunciation that 
was the barrier to communication. This relaxed attitude of Marga in this highly challenging 
communicative event was quite different from the tense and withdrawn attitude she had demonstrated 
during the in-class activities. 
Analysis 7: Self-initiated Technology Mediation: Spontaneous Communication 
Finally, in Fragment 11 (a pictorial transcript), it is possible to see how the students brought into play 
unsanctioned (or unplanned) communication technology to contact each other between classes (Sweden 
and Spain) during a formally planned, end-of-project Skype meeting. As can be seen in the first image in 
Fragment 11, the students were arranged in the rooms in both countries so that they could view the 
computer screen in order to have a group-to-group chat. The students had been instructed to think of 
minimally one short good-bye statement (e.g., “Thank you, it was nice meeting you and working with 
you”). The task-as-workplan consisted of individual rounds (see Figure 5). 
 
Figure 5. Shared teacher plans for the telecollaborative project. 
Melinda Dooly 213 
 
However, as can be seen in Fragment 11, there were no individual exchanges as expected in the task-as-
workplan due to the sitting arrangement, the time limitation, and the use of a tablet rather than a computer 
for the online meeting (limiting the possibility of projection onto the wider screen so everyone could see 
the online partners). However, the students that had exchanged contact details earlier in the project 
conversed individually, via their cellphones, during the Skype chat. 
Fragment 11. Skype Meeting 
Participants: Whole group (both classes) 
Action Description 
1 
 
 Modalities: (whole group) visual interaction (watching tablet screen); spoken interaction (via 
embedded microphone in tablet); (pairs) visual interaction (looking at cellphone screen); 
physical interaction with cellphone keypad (texting). 
 
 
These exchanges were confirmed by the students to the researcher in a short follow-up interview (she was 
not given access to the messages themselves). It can be assumed English was used as it was the only 
language that the students had in common in order to communicate. 
214 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Discussion 
At least two broadly different scenarios centered on the use of educational technology seemed to emerge 
from the data presented in this article. First, it became clear that the task-as-process (the task as 
interpreted and performed by the students) often diverged considerably from the task-as-workplan (the 
group work that was explicitly designed into the task). The task-as-workplan consisted principally of very 
teacher-fronted instructions and tasks that involved technology and were quite linearly organized. The 
planning was lock-step organization of tasks involving repetitive interaction with the technology. No 
opportunities for individualized mediation with the technology were provided and there was very little 
variation on how the technology affordances might be interpreted individually and creatively to promote 
communication and shared knowledge building (see Dooly, 2010; Prensky, 2008). 
For instance, in the task-as-workplan involving Zaption, it was expected that the students would use the 
technology resources to prompt group discussion for synthesizing their answers and then communicate 
them to their telecollaborative partners. However, the task-as-workplan ended up generating 
predominantly individual activities (e.g., listening to the videos independently or answering the questions 
on separate personal computers). Moreover, in several cases (although only one was analyzed in this 
article), the students displayed considerable competence in knowing how to accomplish the institutional 
task-as-output while circumventing the original task-as-workplan, as seen in their actions of rewinding, 
copying and pasting from online resources that were not intended for this purpose, or waiting for the 
teacher to give the correct wording on the whiteboard. This corroborated observations about new 
technology use dating back more than a decade: 
Because many of the new technologies make possible a more student-centered classroom, teachers 
must spend some time asking how their classroom practices might be shifted to welcome and support 
such a shift. All too often the new goals will be subverted by relatively subtle factors such as the 
arrangement of classroom furniture so as to make group work difficult and frustrating. (McKenzie, 
1993, sec. 2, para 8) 
In the above quote, McKenzie points out the importance of the physical arrangement of the classroom for 
technology use, however, as technology has become more common in the classroom, this aspect of 
planning is often overlooked. As can be seen in the data, it is still a relevant aspect of planning and 
teaching with technology. For instance, seating students next to each other in face-to-face groups and then 
expecting them to mediate their discussions through their individual laptops resulted in far less online 
production (as was expected) and more oral interaction and individualized work. Some students 
completed the tasks without consulting others, some students engaged in off-task-online activities. 
It is clear that the way in which technology use was planned for the activities in the project contributed to 
moments of student disengagement (e.g., waiting for others to complete the group task, using the 
technology for personal interests), arguably due to the lack of individual accountability for different 
aspects of the group activity. Inevitably, the planning of how to use technology for promoting 
collaborative learning (and subsequent discussion) must follow the same parameters as the collaborative 
work design in any face-to-face classroom—that is, interaction that promotes positive interdependence, 
individual accountability, simultaneous interaction, equal participation, and group autonomy (Jacobs, 
Power, & Loh, 2002). 
Moreover, the lock-step, teacher-fronted task-as-workplan contrasted sharply with the multimodal 
approach the students often took to resolve language problems during moments when they displayed true 
interest in communicating (e.g., talking to the researchers, interacting with the camera). Their practices 
also diverged from the task-as-workplan considerably as they indulged in their own interests 
(demonstrated in their watching videos or searching for information about video games at different 
moments in the lessons or in communicating with their Swedish partners through a variety of mobile apps 
at moments that were not planned nor teacher-controlled). 
Melinda Dooly 215 
 
The data also showed the different ways in which the students used the technology with complete 
adroitness to resolve not only the teacher-initiated tasks rapidly, but additionally, to resolve unexpected 
issues that emerged when using the target language (e.g., using the Internet as a quick way to find a group 
name). In other cases, the use of technology did not necessarily promote any use or reflection on the 
target language (e.g., group name negotiated through the use of WhatsApp). And yet, the technology-
mediated communication in the L1 facilitated the expected final outcomes in the target language (e.g. an 
English name for the group). Clearly the students were competent at using the technology for shortcuts 
(as in Fragment 2, Fragment 4, and Fragment 5) or using mobile technology to involve participants who 
were not present in the class in discussions (as in Fragment 6 and Fragment 11), as well as using their 
cellphones creatively to try to repair miscommunication with the researcher (as in Fragment 10). 
Toohey et al. (2015) underscore the need to reconsider how digital tools are used in learning situations so 
that they are not employed merely “to accomplish the ‘same old’ objectives of school-as-usual” (p. 461). 
The analysis of the data collected and presented here appear to support this argument. Learning tasks 
should be planned so that technological resources can be used creatively by the students to resolve 
communication difficulties that resemble potential situations in the real world. Tasks should “aim to 
develop communicative competence in personally meaningful ways” (Littlewood, 2014, p. 349). This 
may require teachers to be more flexible in their planning of how communication technology is used in 
language learning tasks by proposing situations that challenge the students communicatively in the target 
language and then encouraging them to deploy communication technology creatively, collaboratively, and 
through the combination of different technologies to resolve communication gaps, thereby legitimizing 
their use of communication technology in innovative ways. In short, planning of communicative tasks 
might include requiring the students to explore different available tools to resolve communication issues, 
rather than proposing which tools to use. This more closely mimics real-world situations and fosters not 
only language gains, but also the development of digital competences. 
This is not an argument for ad hoc language and technology classes. Teachers should provide models and 
proposals for using communication technology, while at the same time being aware of and willing to 
acknowledge and validate novel and unanticipated uses that might be put forth by the students. After all, 
this is the way in which the use of communication technology evolves in real-life situations and it is this 
flexible and critical thinking that is precisely what students need now and in the near future. 
Notes 
1. Knowledge for Network-based Education, Cognition, and Teaching (KONECT) is a project funded 
by the Ministry of Science and Innovation: Proyectos I+D del Programa Estatal de Fomento de la 
Investigación Científica y Técnica de Excelencia (EDU2013-43932-P); 2014–2018. 
References 
Bezemer, J., & Jewitt, C. (2010). Multimodal analysis: Key issues. In L. Litosseliti (Ed.), Research 
methods in linguistics (pp. 180–197). London, UK: Continuum. 
Bezemer, J., & Kress, G. (2015). Multimodality, learning, and communication: A social semiotic frame. 
New York, NY: Routledge. 
Blake, R. (2016). Technology and the four skills. Language Learning & Technology, 20(2), 129–142. 
https://dx.doi.org/10125/44465  
Breen, M. (1987). Learner contribution to the task design. In C. N. Candlin & D. Murphy (Eds.), 
Language learning tasks, Vol. 7 (pp. 23–46). London, UK: Prentice-Hall International. 
Breen, M. (1989). The evaluation cycle for language learning tasks. In R. K. Johnson (Ed.), The second 
language curriculum (pp. 187–206). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
216 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Dooly, M. (2010). The teacher 2.0. In S. Guth & F. Helm (Eds.), Telecollaboration 2.0: Language, 
literacies, and intercultural learning in the 21st Century (pp. 277–303). Bern, Switzerland: Peter 
Lang. 
Dooly, M. (2011). Divergent perceptions of telecollaborative language learning tasks: Tasks-as-workplan 
vs. task-as-process. Language Learning & Technology, 15(2), 69–91. https://dx.doi.org/10125/44252   
Fang, B. (2009). From distraction to engagement: Wireless devices in the classroom. Educause Review. 
Retrieved from http://er.educause.edu/articles/2009/12/from-distraction-to-engagement-wireless-
devices-in-the-classroom 
Early, M., Kendrick, M., & Potts, D. (2015). Multimodality: Out from the margins of English language 
teaching. TESOL Quarterly, 49(3), 447–460. https://dx.doi.org/10.1002/tesq.246 
Erickson, F. (1973). What makes school ethnography “ethnographic?” Anthropology and Education 
Quarterly, 4(2), 10–19. https://dx/doi.org/10.1525/aeq.1973.4.2.05x0129y 
Green, J., & Bloome, D. (2005). Ethnography and ethnographers of and in education. A situated 
perspective. In J. Flood, S. B. Heath, & D. Lapp (Eds.), Handbook of research on teaching literacy 
through the communicative and visual arts (pp. 181–202). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Gumperz, J. J., & Berenz, N. (1993). Transcribing conversational exchanges. In J. A. Edwards & M. D. 
Lampert (Eds.), Talking data: Transcription and coding in discourse research (pp. 91–121). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Helm, F. (2015). The practices and challenges of telecollaboration in higher education in Europe. 
Language Learning & Technology, 19(2), 197–217. https://dx.doi.org/10125/44424    
Jacobs, G. M., Power, M. A., & Loh, W. I. (2002). The teacher's sourcebook for cooperative learning: 
Practical techniques, basic principles, and frequently asked questions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin 
Press. 
Jefferson, G. (2004). Glossary of transcript symbols with an introduction. In G. H. Lerner (Ed.), 
Conversation analysis: Studies from the first generation (pp. 13–31). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John 
Benjamins. 
Jewitt, C. (Ed.). (2009). The Routledge handbook of multimodal analysis. London, UK: Routledge. 
Jewitt, C., Bezemer, J., & O’Halloran, K. (2016). Introducing multimodality. London, UK: Routledge. 
Kress, G. (2010). Multimodality: A social semiotic approach to contemporary communication. New 
York, NY: Routledge. 
Littlewood, W. (2014). Communication-oriented language teaching: Where are we now? Where do we go 
from here? Language Teaching, 47(3), 349–362. https://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0261444812000134 
McKenzie, J. (1993). Creating flexible district technology plans. From Now On: The Educational 
Technology Journal, 3(6). Retrieved from http://www.fno.org/FNOFeb93.html 
Ofcom. (2012). The communications market 2012 report. London, UK: Ofcom Media Office. Retrieved 
June 3, 2012 from http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/market-data-research/market-
data/communications-market-reports/cmr12/ 
Prensky, M. (2008). New issues, new answers: The role of technology in teaching and the classroom. 
Educational Technology, 48(6), 64–66. 
Robinson, H. A. (1994). The ethnography of empowerment: The transformative power of classroom 
interaction. Washington, DC: Falmer Press. 
Seedhouse, P., & Almutairi, S. (2009). A holistic approach to task-based interaction. International 
Journal of Applied Linguistics, 19(3), 311–338. 
Melinda Dooly 217 
 
Thomas, M., Reinders, H., & Warschauer, M. (Eds.). (2013). Contemporary computer-assisted language 
learning. London, UK: Bloomsbury. 
Toohey, K., Dagenais, D., Fodor, A., Hof, L., Nuñez, O., Singh, A., & Schulze, L. (2015). “That sounds 
so cooool”: Entanglements of children, digital tools, and literacy practices. TESOL Quarterly, 49(3), 
461–485. https://dx.doi.org/10.1002/tesq.246  
Appendix. Key for Transcription 
Code Description 
TEXT Louder speech than normal 
: elongation of syllable or sound; each colon is about 0.1 seconds 
\ fall in intonation 
/ rise in intonation 
? rise in intonation and is clearly intended as a question 
(.) micro pause of approximately 0.1 second 
((text)) annotator’s notes 
text- syllable is cut off abruptly 
@text@ markedly different tone than elsewhere 
(0.0) longer pauses; per tenth of a second 
>text< speech is noticeably faster 
ºtextº quietly, or in a whisper 
trans annotator’s translation from another language 
$text$ laughingly 
=text speech latched with previous utterance 
[text] 
[text] 
overlapping utterances 
About the Author 
Dr. Melinda Dooly holds a Serra Húnter fellowship as teacher and researcher at the Education Faculty of 
the Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB) where she teaches EFL Methodology and research 
methods courses. She is the lead researcher at the Research Centre for Teaching & Plurilingual Interaction 
(GREIP, UAB). Her principal research addresses technology-enhanced project-based language learning in 
teacher education. Her current research interest is project-based telecollaborative language learning and 
very young learners. 
E-mail: melindaann.dooly@uab.cat 
