Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2018, Volume 22, Issue 3 
pp. 82–102 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Daniel R. Isbell 
 
 
Online informal language learning: Insights from a 
Korean learning community 
Daniel R. Isbell, Michigan State University 
Abstract 
Informal language learning in online communities represents a growing area of interest. In part, this 
interest is due to the potential for meaningful second language (L2) communication, rather than the 
“learning about language” argued to be prevalent in L2 classrooms (Thorne, Black, & Sykes, 2009, p. 
804). This study reports on a netnographic investigation (Kozinets, 2010) of an online community for 
learning Korean. Data collection took place over seven weeks and included observation of a Reddit forum, 
observation of a chatroom, and an open-ended questionnaire. Activity theory (Engeström, 2001) informed 
the analysis of the community learning activity. Contrary to what has been reported about language 
learning in many online communities, findings revealed relatively little target-language use and a great 
deal of learning about language. English was used 93% of the time on the forum, and 81% of the time in 
the chatroom. Other findings include highly-participatory interactional patterns for learning about 
linguistic forms, community rules designed to promote learning on a democratically organized web 
platform, and a stark division of community labor between language learners and language experts. 
Keywords: Collaborative Learning, Computer-Mediated Communication, Learner Autonomy, Social 
Networking 
Language(s) Learned in This Study: Korean 
APA Citation: Isbell, D. R. (2018). Online informal language learning: Insights from a Korean learning 
community. Language Learning & Technology, 22(3), 82–102. https://doi.org/10125/44658 
Introduction 
It is fairly uncontroversial to claim that most language learning occurs outside of classrooms. This claim 
has increasingly motivated investigations into beyond-classroom language learning, with two edited 
volumes published in recent years on the topic (Benson & Reinders, 2011; Nunan & Richards, 2015). Much 
of this beyond-classroom learning is informal, occurring without a planned syllabus. With advances in and 
the continued spread of Internet communications technology, informal language learning in online 
communities represents a growing area of interest, in part due to the potential for meaningful second 
language (L2) communication and socialization rather than the “learning about language” found in L2 
classrooms (Thorne, Black, & Sykes, 2009, p. 804). 
While research in computer-assisted language learning has examined online communities, most of the 
literature is based on the learning of English or other commonly-taught languages (e.g., Ryu, 2013; Sockett, 
2013), and many of the online communities studied are formal extensions of classroom instruction (e.g., 
Lord & Harrington, 2013). Within online informal language learning (OILL) literature, Korean learning 
has scantly been reported. 
The current study seeks to address this research paucity by using the lens of activity theory (AT; Engeström, 
2001) to investigate the practices of a community for online informal Korean learning: /r/Korean, a 
community housed within the social link-aggregation website Reddit. Reddit has the fifth highest Internet 
domain traffic in the United States, and ranks seventh worldwide (Alexa, 2018), yet it has received little 
attention in academic studies of online language learning in comparison with social networks, blogs, or 
Daniel R. Isbell 83 
 
audio/video platforms. 
Online Informal Language Learning 
Sockett (2013) describes informal language learning as “generally incidental” with a focus on “activities 
being communication and enjoyment rather than language learning” (p. 49). In online spaces, this might 
involve participation in social networks (e.g., Pasfield-Neofitou, 2011), computer games (e.g., Ryu, 2013), 
or interest communities (reviewed in Thorne, Sauro, & Smith, 2015). Generally, OILL studies are 
characterized by a high degree of L2 use tied to meaning-focused activity. Ryu (2013), through an AT lens, 
found that computer gamers used English to engage in play of the game Civilization and also participated 
in an English-medium discussion forum related to the game, with very little non-English language used as 
a communicative tool. Sockett’s (2013) French students communicated with European friends on social 
media using English as a lingua franca and consumed popular American and British media online. In cases 
such as these, foundations for language use are often built in classroom learning environments; once 
learners have sufficient proficiency, they go off into the digital wilds to use the language for communication 
(Thorne et al., 2015). Gao (2007) reveals a somewhat different dynamic at work in his tale of informal 
English learning in China: members of the Blue Rain Café frequently shared their real-life learning 
experiences via Chinese on an online forum connected to the café, and often came to the online forum with 
specific questions about English. The learners of Japanese in Pasfield-Neofitou’s (2011) study, who spoke 
English as a first language (L1), also reported mixed L1 and L2 use in their online communications with 
Japanese peers. 
In contrast, Korean OILL has received relatively little attention in the literature (the aforementioned studies, 
for instance, all dealt with English learners, except for Pasfield-Neofitou, 2011). Some of this research has 
focused on heritage learners, investigating informal learning in blogs (Lee, 2006) and community websites 
(Yi, 2008), showing how activity is driven by a desire to maintain language and culture. Kim and Brown 
(2014), adopting a sociocultural perspective, examined the pragmatic competence of four non-heritage adult 
learners in the UK who frequently used Korean in online social communication, finding interactions 
between proficiency, identity, and pragmatic performance. 
Activity Theory 
On a basic level, AT attempts to explain learning outcomes through consideration of connections between 
subjects (learners), tools and signs, and objects (goals). Engeström (2001) has expanded AT (see Figure 1) 
to better accommodate collective activities, now including rules (official or implicit), community (members 
of a group), and division of labor (roles and responsibilities). This framework makes Engeström’s version 
of AT, cultural historical activity theory, particularly useful for examining OILL communities, which are 
inherently collective. 
AT also accommodates the consideration of multiple activities in concert and development of activity over 
time, making it popular in research that tries to capture dynamic, socially-contextualized, and multi-modal 
language learning (e.g., learning through online gaming, Ryu, 2013; vocabulary learning in an extensive 
reading computer program, Juffs & Friedline, 2014; developing L2 academic writing strategies, Park & De 
Costa, 2015). 
84 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 1. An activity system. 
Research Questions 
My goal in this study was to investigate the language learning activity of a Korean informal online learning 
community (r/Korean), broadening the landscape of OILL by focusing on a language and a web platform 
that have received little attention in the field. The following research questions (RQs), informed by AT, 
guided my investigation of the Korean OILL community: 
1. What activities and tools are used in r/Korean to foster language learning? 
2. What patterns of interaction characterize Korean language-focused activities? 
3. What rules govern language-focused activities? 
4. How is labor divided among community members? 
RQ1 targets the objects and tools in the AT framework. RQ2 seeks to describe how subjects in the 
community interact in object-oriented activities. RQ3 and RQ4 address the rules and labor roles that 
underpin the community activity system. 
Methodology 
Netnographic Observation 
Kozinets defines netnography as “a specialized form of ethnography adapted to the unique computer-
mediated contingencies of today’s social worlds” (2010, p. 1). Like traditional ethnography, netnography 
typically entails extensive observations of a community with the aim of describing and understanding 
culture. Netnography differs, however, in that modal affordances of digital spaces allow for a much larger 
degree of unobtrusiveness and expedience in data collection. 
Two methodological tensions within netnography are particularly relevant to the present study. The first is 
related to blending netnography and traditional ethnography; that is, does the study straddle the online–
offline border? In many cases, netnographies remain fully online (Tunçalp & Lê, 2014). This is a defensible 
methodological decision if the topic of study is focused on culture in digital spaces, but it is also a weakness 
if research seeks to integrate the digital and physical activities of individuals (Kozinets, 2010). The second 
issue is observer participation. Although Tunçalp and Lê (2014) found no participation to be more frequent 
than participatory observation in netnographies of management, Kozinets (2010) and Hine (2008) argue for 
the value of participation as a means of gaining deeper, embedded understanding of culture that eludes 
purely observational or textual analyses. 
 
Daniel R. Isbell 85 
 
In the present study, I adopted a netnographic approach that focused exclusively on online activity and 
involved some community participation on my part. I also shared my preliminary findings and solicited 
feedback from the community as a form of member checking. 
Settings and Participants 
My observation of the r/Korean community took place in two online settings: a public subreddit on Reddit 
(henceforth r/Korean) and a chatroom called #korean which was directly linked to on the r/Korean main 
page. 
What Is a Subreddit? 
A subreddit is a user-created page for sharing links and discussions within the Reddit domain. When visiting 
Reddit for the first time, topics from a set of default subreddits are visible on the site’s front page. 
Registering for the site involves creating a username; users may subscribe to additional subreddits of their 
own choosing, or create their own subreddits. In this way, users can create a customized front page of 
Reddit based on their interests. 
Each subreddit has its own unique front page. On the bar at the top of r/Korean’s front page, you see a name 
and subreddit logo (a character holding a Korean flag, with Korean written in Hangeul), and options for 
sorting topics. The default sorting option, Hot, considers popularity and recency when ordering topics 
(hotter topics rise to the top of the page). Immediately below the top bar is a link inviting users to the 
r/Korean chatroom (see next section). Immediately below is the main portion of the front page: a list of 
submitted links and discussion topics (henceforth topics). The column on the right of the screen is referred 
to as the sidebar and contains a search bar, a new topic submission link, a user counter (current and total), 
subreddit rules, and other important information. 
Popularity of topics is determined by voting: upvoting (clicking on triangles pointing upward) indicates 
approval or interest, and downvoting (clicking downward-pointing triangles) is used to indicate lack of 
quality or interest. The numbers between the triangles are scores, which indicate the aggregate rating of a 
topic (default score is 1, upvotes add 1, and downvotes subtract 1). 
A final important note on the front page of r/Korean is the flair option, contained in the sidebar. Flair is a 
small icon that is displayed by your username everywhere within a particular subreddit. r/Korean flair 
indicate one’s L2 Korean proficiency (beginner, intermediate, or advanced; user flair is denoted with curly 
brackets in this article for clarity, e.g., {Beginner}) or native speaker (i.e., {Native Speaker}) status. This 
icon also shows up next to your username in topics you create. 
Clicking a topic (or submitting your own) leads to a comments page. Comments allow any user of the site 
to reply directly to a topic creator or commenter by typing and submitting a message. Comments are 
organized by nested threads rather than a single stream, prioritizing interactional coherence over temporal 
order. Additionally, each individual comment is subject to voting. Under the default best sorting option 
(similar to hot, but with less emphasis on recency), popular comments and their nested responses are 
displayed higher on the page. Under default settings, comments receiving large negative scores (-4 or below) 
become invisible to other readers. 
The Chatroom 
#korean, the chatroom linked to r/Korean, is more straightforward in terms of features. Usernames are 
created before entering, and the chat window dominates the display. A column on the right displays a list 
of all users in the room, and a text input bar runs along the bottom of the screen. Discourse in #korean is 
displayed chronologically in a single stream. 
In addition to human-to-human chatting, #korean also features bots, small programs that automatically carry 
out tasks and display results in the room. One bot continuously scans the front page of r/Korean and posts 
an alert when a new topic or link is submitted. Another bot allows users to query Naver Dictionary. By 
typing .dic followed by a Korean or English word, a user can prompt the bot to broadcast the top definition 
86 Language Learning & Technology 
 
for all to see. 
The r/Korean Community 
Delineating the r/Korean community is a difficult task. At the end of this study, r/Korean had 13,824 
subscribers. This number included duplicate and inactive accounts. At the same time, it did not include 
people who visited infrequently and never subscribed. Raw counts aside, dozens of regulars and a stream 
of drop-in questions or translation requests kept the subreddit consistently active, typically generating 5–
10 topic submissions and 15–35 comments per day. In total, 660 unique users posted on r/Korean during 
the study. Of those users, only 60 had 10 or more posts, and only 25 had 20 or more posts. The #korean 
chatroom was occupied by a smaller set of r/Korean subscribers. Typically, around 50 people were logged 
in to the chatroom, with 5–15 active at any given time. 
Given Reddit’s pseudo-anonymity (Massanari, 2015), describing the community by gender, age, ethnicity, 
and other common identifiers is difficult. However, subscribers who visited frequently tended to use the 
optional flair function, indicating that the community was home to a dozen or so native speakers of Korean 
and several dozen learners ranging from beginning to advanced proficiency. Their real-world locations 
varied; some native speakers revealed that they were living abroad while some learners were in South Korea. 
Reflexivity 
In this study, I assumed a partially-emic, partially-etic position. I am a learner of Korean, and at the time of 
the study, I had been a member of the r/Korean community for over 2 years. In that sense, I was familiar 
with r/Korean activity prior to beginning my investigation. However, in order to achieve a broader 
understanding of the community, I limited my activity during the fieldwork period. During the first four 
weeks, I retreated to primarily non-participatory observation. After making a public entrée as a researcher, 
I participated directly for three weeks, exchanging personal messages with community members, joining 
conversations in the #korean chatroom, and occasionally posting comments on r/Korean topics. 
Data Collection and Analysis 
I collected data from several sources across two virtual spaces. These data included archived 
communications from r/Korean, chatlogs from the #korean chatroom, open-ended questionnaire (OEQ) 
responses from eight community members, and personal field notes (see Table 1). In addition to reflecting 
on my experiences as a participant-observer, I applied additional analyses in order to triangulate findings. 
This involved ongoing and iterative coding throughout and after data collection, drawing on AT to frame 
my analytic decisions. As such, I treated the data in this study as observations of a community rather than 
texts. A total of 55 codes emerged across data sources (Appendix A). The following sections explain how 
I collected and analyzed data from each source. 
r/Korean Submissions 
Over the course of seven weeks, approximately 293 submissions were made by r/Korean community 
members, with resulting interactions totaling over 165,000 words. I archived this data with a Python 
(programming language) script utilizing the Public Reddit API Wrapper package, allowing me to save the 
contents of each topic in text files along with useful metadata (i.e., topic titles, URLs, timestamps, 
usernames, and scores). At the topic level, all submissions were descriptively coded for the object of each 
topic. Additionally, for a subset of topics dealing with language knowledge and language practice (n = 
192), I applied a discourse analytic approach at the comment level, focusing on interactional patterns. I 
drew on (a) the trigger for noticing in the framework by Varonis and Gass (1985) for L2 negotiations of 
meaning, (b) an initiation–response–follow-up framework commonly used in conversation and online 
communication analysis (Benson, 2014; Stenström & Stenström, 1994), and (c) multi-modal discourse 
analysis (Kress, 2012) to consider non-verbal semiotic expressions.  
Daniel R. Isbell 87 
 
Table 1. Data Collection and Analysis 
Type of Data Description Analytic Approach 
r/Korean Submissions 298 topics, 2,600 comments, 165,000 words 
of archived r/Korean communications 
Content Analysis 
Discourse Analysis (for a 
subset of 192 topics) 
#korean Chatlogs Approximately 6.5 hours in six separate 
visits, 9,000 words of chatroom discussion 
Discourse Analysis 
Open-Ended Questionnaire Responses to 10 questions from 8 
community members, 3,600 words 
Content Analysis 
Field Notes 63 pages of observation notes and observer 
comments (18,106 words) 
Content Analysis 
Artifacts (e.g., community 
documents, shared links) 
313 links, 5 documents Content Analysis 
#korean Chatlogs 
In total, I spent 6.5 hours in the #korean chatroom. I selected active times for visits; these mostly occurred 
during the evening in eastern North America (late-morning to midday in Korea). I archived the chatlogs, 
collecting over 9,000 words from 29 users across six visits, and analyzed chatroom discourse in the same 
manner as the r/Korean submissions. 
Open-Ended Questionnaire 
I collected OEQ (Appendix B) responses from eight community members. I approached these participants 
in two ways: (1) an open solicitation in my r/Korean entrée topic, and (2) personal contact based on field-
note-worthy participation. The former strategy helped to include lurkers, members whose visible activity 
is low but may be frequent readers in the community. The latter approach sought the perspectives of 
members who filled key roles in the community and were known to have rich historical knowledge of 
r/Korean. I conducted a thematic analysis of the OEQ responses, synthesizing insights across members. 
Field Notes 
On a near-daily basis, I visited r/Korean for seven weeks. During each visit, I wrote field notes, recording 
observations of topics, interactions, and community members of particular interest. Additionally, I logged 
my personal opinions, questions, and analyses of activity. I subjected these field notes to thematic analysis, 
which helped focus emerging themes based on my impressions during fieldwork. 
Findings and Discussion 
My analysis of the data yielded four major themes: the use of English to learn about Korean, participatory 
learning interactions, rules to promote useful content, and learner–expert division of labor. These themes 
are subsequently situated in the larger activity system of r/Korean. Findings are illustrated with excerpts; 
brackets are used for translations and to supply context where necessary. All usernames are pseudonyms. 
The Use of English to Learn About Korean 
Ostensibly, the object (in AT terms) of r/Korean community activity is “to learn, study, and practice the 
Korean language” (www.reddit.com/r/Korean, emphasis in original). However, in practice, this primarily 
means learning about Korean and is most often accomplished via English as a mediational tool. Figure 2 
below details the foci of the 298 submissions observed. Across all archived topics, there were 153,536 
English words (92.9%) and 11,701 Korean words (7.1%).1 
88 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 2. Bar plot showing frequencies of r/Korean topic submission types. 
Submissions focused on Korean language knowledge dominated r/Korean activity, outnumbering all other 
submission categories combined. The language knowledge topics could be secondarily categorized as 
requests (n = 131) or shares (n = 21). Further unpacking of these topics revealed trends in the type of 
knowledge sought and shared in the community: 51 submissions focused on grammar, followed closely by 
vocabulary (49), and then pronunciation (25). Other sub-areas of language knowledge (e.g., pragmatics, 
graphology) received less attention. Within these topics, Korean was the object of activity, with concepts 
and meanings conveyed through English as a primary mediational tool, as in Excerpt 1. 
Excerpt 1. A Language Knowledge Topic2 
Topic: whats this mean? 그대로인데 
Author: zfate 
Score: 7 
Body: topic :) thanks!! 
Reply 
Author: Apprentm {Advanced} 
Score: 8 
Body: it means “it is as it is” or “it's the same as its been” or just “normal” so like you could say 
직장이 어때요? (how is work?) 
그대로 예요 (it's as it usually is) 
or if we use 인데 you could say 
Daniel R. Isbell 89 
 
자동차 고장 났어요? (did your car break down?) 
그대로인데... 왜요? (its normal... why?) 
--- 
그대로 means “as it is”, “normal” 
인데 means 이다 + ~은데 
이다 is the copula meaning “is” as in “equals” 
and 은데 means that theres some implied meaning or in a simple way, the “...” as in ...why? 
As seen in Excerpt 1, English was used to make the initial request and explain the meaning of the phrase, 
frame examples, and provide grammar details. No translations for this excerpt are provided, as community 
member Apprentm3 had already done so in his reply. 
The next two most common submission types were translation requests and learning discussions. 
Translation requests (Korean into English) were frequently submitted by drop-in visitors rather than 
community members. Learning discussions were generated within the community and primarily involved 
English-language discussions of study tips, learning experiences, and motivations for learning. 
The least frequent submission type was language practice. These topics were secondarily coded as offers 
(n = 21; e.g., sharing a reading practice resource, posting a writing prompt) and requests (n = 19; e.g., 
seeking a Korean-language computer gaming group, requesting beginner-level listening materials). Many 
of these submissions simply involved the sharing of an Internet resource or served to organize a practice 
time on another platform (e.g., exchanging usernames for a Korean messaging app). For practice activities 
that were well-suited to the modal affordances of r/Korean, such as writing practice, Korean was used for 
communication (Excerpt 2). 
In this excerpt featuring two community members discussing music, Korean is both an object of the activity 
and the mediational tool. The two users were expressing meaning and communicating in their L2 (Korean 
as a tool, sharing thoughts on music as an object), with the superordinate goal of improving their Korean 
abilities (Korean as an object). There is no explicit discussion of linguistic features, highlighting a 
difference between this sort of activity and the kind exemplified by Excerpt 1. 
Excerpt 2. Writing Practice about Music. 
Comment 
Author: annyeong_kiwi {Beginner} 
Score: 2 
Body: 저는 보통 발라드와 힙합 아티스트를 들어요. 이 아티스트들은 다비치, 산 이, 아이유, 
범키, 에픽하이 등예요. 감정적 음악은 제에게 항상 마음을 들어서 다비치와 아이유를 너무 
좋아해요. 그리고 수업에 걸얼 때 낙관적인 음악을 들는 것이 좋아해서 힙합도 자주 들어요. 
[I usually listen to ballad (a full genre in Korean popular music) and hip-hop artists. These artists are 
Davichi, San E, IU, BumKey, Epik High, etc. Emotional music is always good to me so I really like 
Davichi and IU. Also when I walk to class I like listening to upbeat music so I often listen to hip-hop, 
too.] 
 
90 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Comment 
Author: intothewild99 
Score: 2 
Body: 저는 힙합 밖에 안 들어요. 어렸을때 랩 음악을 좋았어요. 요즘 한국에는 힙합 인기가 
많아요. 우리 부인 unpretty rap star 프로그램 자주 봐요. 사실 나는 여자 mc 별로 안 좋아해요. 
내 자동차 운전하면 힙합 꼭 들어요. 힙합 들으면 기분이 완전 좋고 스트레스를 풀어요. 
[I don’t listen to anything outside of hip-hop. When I was young I liked rap. These days in Korea 
hip-hop is really popular. My wife watches the program “Unpretty Rap Star” often. But in fact I 
don’t really like female MCs. When I drive my car I gotta listen to hip-hop. When I listen to hip-
hop I feel good and stress goes away.] 
I interpreted this disparity in learning about Korean through English versus learning Korean through 
communication as a contradiction in the community (Engeström, 2001). Mainstream theories of SLA 
emphasize input, interaction, and output in the target language (Gass & Mackey, 2006) which was found 
primarily in the relatively small number of language practice topics. In contrast, the much more numerous 
language knowledge topics lacked such L2 communicative activity and instead were characterized by L1-
mediated vocabulary and grammar explanations (though such explicit focus on lexical and grammatical 
forms is not unhelpful in language learning; see Norris & Ortega, 2001). This finding also contrasts other 
OILL contexts where learner L2 use was more prevalent (e.g., Ryu, 2013; Sockett, 2013), though it is 
somewhat similar to Gao (2007), where L1 Chinese was seen as a useful support when focusing on linguistic 
form. Community members were also cognizant of this, summed up by the user petericn in Excerpt 3 below. 
Excerpt 3. petericn ({Native Speaker}, OEQ) 
There are pros and cons. If you want to be good at Korean, you should try using it more… On the other 
hand, when you learn a new language, you should partially rely on your mother tongue. By discussing 
some words in English, they can understand the meaning more easily and help them use it better. 
petericn supports my own observations about the reliance on English as a mediational tool, but also notes 
the need to use the language in order to develop proficiency. However, r/Korean was not the only online 
space utilized by the community; others appeared to better facilitate Korean interaction. Geurim, r/Korean 
moderator with a 4-year history in the community, placed particular value on communicating in the #korean 
chatroom (Excerpt 4): 
Excerpt 4. Geurim ({Advanced}, OEQ) 
I’ve seen a lot of people improve their Korean through using whatever resources they use, along with 
practicing in the chatroom. Sometimes people ask questions in new threads when they need help too. 
But it’s easier to see people improving when I see them frequently in the chatroom. 
Geurim’s comments on the value of the chatroom for practice opportunities aligned with my own 
experiences. Across my visits to #korean, 1,721 out of the 9,137 words were Korean (18.84%). While this 
was not a large or even balanced portion of Korean use, it was a considerably larger portion than what I 
observed on r/Korean. The Korean I saw and used in the chatroom was mostly communicative, such as 
discussing the weather and travel plans, though there were language knowledge-oriented discussions, too. 
Nonetheless, two users made astute observations about the dominant language of Reddit filtering down to 
r/Korean. “Reddit is a website based on English” (FallZelda, OEQ) and as such, r/Korean exists as “a 
resource for Korean learners on the overwhelmingly English-speaking mothership that is Reddit” 
(m_guishin, OEQ). These comments echoed responses from Pasfield-Neofitou’s (2011) Japanese learners 
about English-dominant sites like Facebook leading to relatively little Japanese communication. And 
Daniel R. Isbell 91 
 
although moderator Geurim did value people using Korean, he was simultaneously “happy with users in 
the subreddit using English to learn Korean” (OEQ). Beginners also shared appreciation for the use of 
English: “I need it!” (FunCreatures, OEQ). 
Additionally, lower-proficiency members sometimes felt shut out of activities and unable to contribute. 
LivingInROK ({Intermediate}, OEQ) expressed this sentiment, writing “I am still high beginner/low 
intermediate, so I do not feel that I have much to contribute.” This tension highlights the important role of 
language proficiency in community activity and tool use. 
In summary, community activity largely focused on learning about Korean, achieved through the actions 
of asking questions or sharing knowledge about grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation. To do this, 
English was commonly used as a mediational tool, meeting the needs of the generally lower-proficiency 
learners. This sort of language-learning activity and L1 reliance is at odds with other accounts of informal 
online language learning (Sockett, 2013; Thorne et al., 2009). However, using an L1 to explain elements of 
the L2 is hardly uncommon in formal learning settings. For example, Nakatsukasa and Loewen (2015) 
found that almost half of form-focused episodes (FFEs; i.e., where attention is brought to linguistic form 
during interaction) in a tertiary Spanish classroom primarily utilized the students’ L1. Furthermore, the 
most common types of FFEs were grammar- or vocabulary-related, not unlike the language knowledge 
topics submitted to r/Korean. 
Participatory Learning Interactions 
Participatory culture drove interactions in the r/Korean community. All submissions to the forum were 
initiated by community members, and the discussions within it relied on community participation. All links 
to outside artifacts, such as YouTube videos or dictionary entries, were selected and shared on the initiative 
of community members; there was no central entity providing content on Reddit (Massanari, 2015). 
Discussions within individual r/Korean topics were characterized by this participatory culture, involving 
learner-initiated questions and detailed, well-exemplified answers and resource links from potentially 
numerous respondents. Importantly, these discussions were subjected to voting, affecting discourse with 
single clicks and potentially changing its very structure. 
Excerpt 5 provides examples of several common interactional patterns on r/Korean. To begin, OddChoice’s 
initiation (I) was approved by the r/Korean community, indicated by a score of 15. Presumably, the topic 
telling someone to “Get over it!” was of interest to many other community members. This caused it to rise 
to the top of the r/Korean front page. Additionally, I noted that this topic was an example of language not 
typically found in textbooks, highlighting the informal setting and learner-driven activity. 
Next, the topic spawned multiple interactions when it received two accurate, informative responses (Rs). 
DonggiAUS and duck50 both received several upvotes for their posts, which included more than just a 
translation of the phrase in the initial question. DonggiAUS provided additional pragmatic information, and 
duck50 provided information on appropriate contexts for using the phrase he provided. Responses such as 
these, including helpful information, examples, or links to relevant external resources, were elevated by the 
community through upvotes. OddChoice followed-up (F) on the response by DonggiAUS, indicating the 
satisfaction of his request by expressing gratitude. 
qwerty, another community member who clicked on OddChoice’s popular topic and read duck50’s 
response containing a trigger (T), initiated a new interaction by asking about the use of the phrase in a 
different situation. duck50 responded, received more upvotes for his accurate response, and qwerty 
followed-up with an expression of gratitude. Below this, we can see OddChoice’s follow-up to duck50, 
which appears after the qwerty-initiated interaction due to comment score ranking and nested threading of 
interactions.  
92 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Excerpt 5. Participatory Interaction (r/Korean) 
Topic: How can I say “Get over it!” with the same nuance as in English? 
(I) Author: OddChoice {Beginner} 
Score: 15 
Body: For example, someone's complaining about something you did and you just want to tell them 
“oh just get over it already”. I'm not looking for a kind meaning such as “try hard and you'll get over 
it”. Thanks. 
Comment 
(R) Author: DonggiAUS {Advanced} 
Score: 6 
Body: 그냥 받아들여! [Just deal with it!] (This is in 반말 [casual speech] as if talking to a friend 
of course.) 
Comment 
(F) Author: OddChoice {Beginner} 
Score: 1 
Body: Thank you kind sir! 
Comment 
(R, T) Author: duck50 {Native Speaker} 
Score: 4 
Body: 그냥 좀 넘어가라! [Just get over it!] Is what I would say. 
Ex) 
A: 어제 간 식당 진짜 별로였어. 비싸고 맛도 없고.. 넌 어떻게 그런 곳에 날 데리고 갈 수 
있어? (The restaurant we went yesterday was really bad. Expensive and the food isn't good either... 
How can you take me to a place like that?) 
B: 아, 그냥 좀 넘어가라! (Oh, just get over it!) 
Comment 
(I) Author: qwerty 
Score: 2 
Body: Can this also be used when someone will not get over someone? E.g. Guy friend keeps 
complaining about why some girl isn't interested in him, friend wants to say “Just get over it” 
Comment 
(R) Author: duck50 {Native Speaker} 
Score: 3 
Body: Nope that would be something like 그냥 잊어 (just forget about her)  
Daniel R. Isbell 93 
 
Comment 
(F) Author: qwerty 
Score: 1 
Body: Thank you :) 
Comment 
(F) Author: OddChoice {Beginner} 
Score: 1 
Body: That example is what I'm looking for. Thanks! 
The two modes of communication, written words and votes, were both necessary to understand the patterns 
of interaction on r/Korean. Excerpt 8, a complete topic, was relatively simple; other topics involved dozens 
of comments in numerous interaction chains with larger numbers of upvotes and downvotes. Users also 
brought audio recordings, video tutorials, blog posts, dictionary links, images, and other web resources into 
these interactions via hyperlink or embedding. The resulting webs of interaction, which might appear 
chaotic in comparison to community blogs (Lee, 2006) or social networks (Pasfield-Neofitou, 2011), 
embodied the participatory nature of r/Korean’s informal learning activity. In AT terms, participatory 
culture could be seen as a product of a democratically-structured community, where tools were selected 
and actions were carried out ad hoc by numerous subjects. 
Rules to Promote Useful Content 
In AT, rules play an important role in regulating individual and group activities. The officially stated rules 
of r/Korean were few in number. To summarize, members were asked to be respectful, to have accounts 
older than 3 days, to label topics with objectionable content NSFW (not safe for work), to refrain from 
piracy, and to avoid directly linking to external sites. However, I also found unwritten rules for r/Korean: 
be accurate, use Hangeul, and give sufficient effort. I interpreted these rules as community responses to the 
potential chaos of the decentralized, participatory Reddit platform. When these rules were followed, 
members believed that better learning would occur. 
Be Accurate 
In order to recognize and validate resources and information about Korean, I observed a great deal of 
negotiation on r/Korean. Perhaps due to the informal environment without teachers or other authorities, 
members needed to take it upon themselves to evaluate the accuracy of submissions and comments. 
Member Tom88 shared how inaccurate resources were handled by community members (Excerpt 6): 
Excerpt 6. Tom88 ({Intermediate}, OEQ) 
There are often sources linked that are good, but also links to some blogs which offer incredibly 
inaccurate Korean… the poor sources are usually downvoted and pointed out in the comments to deter 
users from using them. 
In Tom88’s comment, a Reddit-specific means of addressing quality was revealed: downvoting. Massanari 
(2015), in her ethnographic account of Reddit at large, emphasized how downvotes and upvotes played 
central roles in mediating the activity of Reddit communities, and this was certainly true for r/Korean. 
Member m_guishin even noted that “bad advice [in comments] is downvoted and practically invisible” 
(OEQ), highlighting the powerful effect votes can have. In extreme cases, comments below a certain 
threshold do not appear on other user’s screens, while highly upvoted comments or submission rise to the 
top. 
Excerpt 7 shows how inaccurate information is downvoted and addressed verbally, with a correction 
receiving approval in the form of upvotes. The response by Rootarcs to BBWilson’s question about saying 
94 Language Learning & Technology 
 
thank you was highly inaccurate, poorly explaining the pronunciation of 감사합니다 (/kam.sam.ni.da/) as 
“come-sum-knee-da” (/kʌm.sʌm.ni.da/). Adhering to the rule of accuracy, community members piled on 
downvotes, eventually causing the comment to disappear from the displays of most users. Imprisonedrye 
addressed the inaccuracy verbally, and quite politely, explaining where Rootarcs went astray. This response 
was rewarded with upvotes from the community. While it is common sense for accuracy of information to 
be valued in any learning context, it was interesting here that the maintenance of accuracy was a community 
responsibility rather than a task left to moderators or some other authority. It is important to note, however, 
that reactions to inaccuracy mostly applied to knowledge topics. Making mistakes in practice topics (i.e., 
communicative interaction in the L2) was often corrected but rarely downvoted. Additionally, in the words 
of community member m_guishin, while “downvoting and correcting [were] fine” to address inaccuracies, 
it was not okay “to be disrespectful,” as that violates the officially stated rules. 
Excerpt 7. Addressing an Inaccurate Response (r/Korean) 
Topic: What was wrong with my context 
Author: BBWilson 
Score: 9 
Body: I was traveling through Incheon Airport on holidays. My handy travel guide advised that 
“Gamsahamnida” is Korean for “Thank You”. I practiced as I went through the airport and said 
“Gamsahamnida” to the passport guy. He did a double take and smirked but didnt reply. Was this too 
formal or too informal? Or is thanking an employee not “correct”. I was taken aback by his response 
and didnt say it again. 
Comment 
Author: Rootarcs 
Score: -21 
Body: I agree... probably just the butchering of pronunciation. Phonetically it is said ‘come-sum-
knee-da’ with flowing the syllables together, as usual. (i.e not saying loudly... 
come....sum...knee...daaaa) 
Comment 
Author: Imprisonedrye{Intermediate} 
Score: 6 
Body: Yeah, I do think it gets run together a lot, but I wouldn't say it changes from 감 [note: 
this is the first syllable of “Gamsahamnida”; the vowel is /a/] to come... I think that's mostly 
what your downvotes are about. And I think it's probably better for beginners/vacationers to 
learn the full pronunciation rather than trying to rush through it like a native... Better chance 
that they’ll be understood, you know? 
Use Hangeul, Not Romanization 
By and large, r/Korean discouraged the use of Romanization to represent Korean words or explain sounds. 
This unwritten rule governing an aspect of language use invoked the English only and English grammar 
rules found among L2 users in a gaming community by Ryu (2013). The word family Romanize appeared 
52 times (in English or Korean) in the subset of language-focused r/Korean topics, and every mention of 
the word fell within the context of either telling people not to use Romanization or explaining why 
Romanization was confusing or unhelpful. In many other discussions, community members implored true 
beginners to learn the Korean script, Hangeul, as soon as possible. The use of Romanization also spawned 
Daniel R. Isbell 95 
 
criticism of two language-learning apps shared on r/Korean. In a highly upvoted comment, user Derikk 
humorously captured the spirit of this rule (Excerpt 8). 
Excerpt 8. Do not use Romanization (r/Korean) 
Comment 
Author: Derikk 
Score: 19 
Body: Just don't romanize. The english alphabet and korean alphabet don't translate into each other at 
all, they're completely different. Learn your hangul and disregard the sins of the romanization. 
Generally, community members believe that Romanization of Korean leads to misunderstandings for 
learners, as Romanization generally does a poor job of representing Korean sounds. When the sounds of 
Korean required explanation, I saw a preference among members for pointing out similar sounds in the 
context of English words (e.g., the a in father corresponding to the vowel ㅏ /a/ in Korean) or using the 
international phonetic alphabet. 
Give Sufficient Effort 
Putting forth sufficient effort is a rule for posts. Low-effort posts were downvoted or ignored, while high-
effort posts were rewarded with upvotes and verbal support. The response from Apprentm, discussed 
previously in Excerpt 1, provides a good example of this rule at work. Addressing a relatively simple 
vocabulary question, Apprentm posted a 94-word explanation with several illustrative examples. 
Accordingly, Apprentm’s comment was rewarded with a high score, ensuring that his comment would be 
the first thing anyone read when they entered the topic. Goosetown, a native Korean speaker with a 
background in linguistics, appeared several times in my field notes due to his high-effort posting. 
Goosetown’s responses were often essay-length, were extremely detailed, and frequently featured links to 
trustworthy resources. In these and other cases, I frequently observed verbal thanks or compliments in 
addition to large numbers of upvotes. 
Low-effort posts were treated differently. Very simple requests for linguistic knowledge (e.g., vocabulary 
questions that could be answered with a dictionary search) were sometimes ignored or sparsely responded 
to. These topics attracted few upvotes, and as a result slid down r/Korean’s front page quickly. Low-effort 
comments were also subject to the effort rule. For example, in a topic requesting information about the 
phonetic realization of the letter ㅅ in the word 곳 (place) when different suffixes are attached, several 
members posted informative, effortful responses. However, one member simply posted a list of several 
possible affixations: “곳은, 곳이, 곳에, 곳을” (place-SUBJ, place-TOPIC, place-at, place-OBJ). This was 
downvoted to a score of -1 as a reaction to the lack of effort. While nothing in the response was inaccurate, 
it did not involve sufficient effort to answer the question. Notably, this comment was the first response 
chronologically, yet it appeared below the more effortful responses on the page. 
Learner–Expert Division of Labor 
In AT, division of labor relates objects of activity to specific members of a community. In the bustling 
activity of r/Korean, labor was primarily divided between community members who were either Korean 
learners or experts. In Excerpt 9, beginning learner annyeong_kiwi refers directly to an {Advanced} non-
native Korean speaker, m_guishin, and a {Native Speaker}, petericn, as sources of expert advice. He also 
makes the broad distinction between learners (those who need language help) and experts (those … who 
can speak and write in fluent Korean).  
96 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Excerpt 9. annyeong_kiwi ({Beginner}, OEQ) 
I think some users like m_guishin and petericn are incredibly insightful and helpful. I always pay 
attention when they answer questions because I think they know what they’re talking about. … There 
are people at /r/Korean who can speak and write in fluent Korean too, though, so they always have 
much to contribute to those of us who need language help. 
Native speakers and advanced experts took on most of the question-answering labor, while simpler 
questions could be handled by other learners (Excerpt 10). 
Excerpt 10. Tom88 ({Intermediate}, OEQ) 
…there are a fair number of native, and advanced users who give great advice and even the intermediate 
and ‘beginner’ users chip in for lower level questions as well. 
These two excerpts signal how proficiency characterizes the implicit assignment of question-answering 
labor: learners look to experts to provide helpful explanations. When particularly challenging requests are 
introduced, the reliance on expert labor is magnified. In Excerpt 11, two learners specifically request expert 
responses to a question about subordinators. An intermediate learner, techyou, readily referred to native 
speakers and advanced learners together in his request for an answer to the difficult question. Member 
Beautiful even forgoes mentioning native speakers entirely, highlighting that expert status is not directly 
tied to being a native or non-native speaker. 
Excerpt 11. Call for Help (r/Korean) 
Comment 
Author: techyou {Intermediate} 
Score: 2 
Body: can an advanced/native speaker comment please, i’ve heard so many conflicting opinions on 
this. 
Comment 
Author: Beautiful 
Score: 2 
Body: Same, where dem [them] 고’s [advanced proficiency] at? This is arguably the hardest nuance 
to grasp alongside 이/가 [subject markers] vs 은/는 [topic markers] with the most differing 
explanations out there.. Every resource says something different. Actually, after thinking about it 
some more, I’d say it's even more divisive than 이/가 [subject markers] vs 은/는 [topic markers]. 
Other sorts of labor are also completed by these experts, even when it may be difficult or time consuming 
(Excerpt 12): 
Excerpt 12. petericn ({Native Speaker}, OEQ) 
…but no one makes that practice questions each week. When I had no post to upload I did it once, but 
it is hard to correct their posts, so I gave up too. It’s one of the thing that I want to try again if I have 
time and energy. 
petericn's comment reveals how labor carried out by experts can feel taxing. This raises the question of 
what rewards experts might receive for their labor. Those who need help or practice receive it, allowing 
them to move toward their learning goals, while those who do not need help give answers, make corrections, 
and provide opportunities, presumably in exchange for less-obvious rewards. Perhaps, like some high-
Daniel R. Isbell 97 
 
proficiency members of the Blue Rain Café (Gao, 2007), the experts of r/Korean enjoyed fulfilling a central 
community role. 
While responding to questions, creating practice opportunities, and correcting language errors all represent 
crucial labor in the r/Korean community, the importance of asking questions should not be overlooked, as 
FunCreatures pointed out (Excerpt 13): 
Excerpt 13. FunCreatures ({Beginner}, OEQ) 
…people around here help out so much in simple ways—when people share something or they work 
through a grammatical problem, they help us all out, really. 
Moderator Geurim noted that “the active posters are more commonly high-beginner+” (OEQ). One notably 
active beginning learner, AVgoku, was responsible for submitting 15 of the 192 language knowledge and 
language practice topics. He additionally made 68 comments in these and other topics. These learners are 
responsible for creating a large portion of topics and fill an important role in maintaining the liveliness of 
community activity. 
The r/Korean Activity System 
The four themes I have described paint a vivid picture of activity in the r/Korean OILL community. RQ1, 
about the objects and tools, found an answer in the breakdown of r/Korean topic submissions and the choice 
of language: the primary object of activity in r/Korean was learning about Korean, an activity mediated by 
the English language. Meaning-focused activity mediated by the L2 was present, but much less prominent. 
Investigating RQ2 about interactional patterns yielded a description of smaller activity units and revealed 
how Reddit’s participatory culture and voting system shaped the discourse of activities in the community. 
Looking beyond officially-stated rules, exploring RQ3, saw the emergence of several rules thought to 
promote Korean learning in the community. Last, in examining division of labor, I found that language 
proficiency largely determined who carried out which activities, with lower-proficiency learners asking 
questions while higher-proficiency experts were responsible for answering questions and creating language 
practice opportunities. These findings contribute to a broader, more robust picture of the r/Korean activity 
system, as shown in Figure 3. The two subsystems represent learning about Korean and communicating in 
Korean, and their difference in scale reflects the relative proportion of activity in the overall system. I argue, 
based on experiences reported in community comments and OEQ responses, that genuine Korean learning 
can be an outcome of this system, though the degree is questionable and likely idiosyncratic to each learner, 
depending on time, activity level, and a constellation of factors straddling both online and offline spaces. 
In AT, Engeström (2001) assigns great importance to contradictions in activity systems as catalysts for 
transformations: “As the contradictions of an activity system are aggravated, some individual participants 
begin to question and deviate from its established norms. In some cases, this escalates into collaborative 
envisioning and a deliberate collective change effort” (p. 137). A contradiction also emerged from my 
findings: a tension between learning about Korean and using Korean. In the response to sharing my initial 
findings on r/Korean, over 50 comments were made that included the questioning of norms. Some members 
began submitting their own topics which included hyperlinked references to my findings, such as a writing 
practice topic for beginner learners to introduce themselves in Korean. Another topic, which did not directly 
refer to my findings but seemed to be in the same spirit as the others, involved a native speakers sharing a 
popular Korean essay appended with vocabulary glosses. This initial evidence of change efforts was a 
surprising and pleasing finding. It also highlights the value of participation and member-checking in 
netnographic research, not just for enhancing insights but also for increasing the ethical quality of the study 
by providing an opportunity for contradictions to be aired and potential change efforts to begin. 
98 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 3. Learner view of the r/Korean activity system. 
Conclusion 
These findings should be considered alongside the two major limitations of my investigation. In OEQ 
responses, r/Korean comments, and chatroom discussion, many r/Korean members revealed that they 
engaged in Korean learning activity in numerous spaces, both online and offline (e.g., chatting apps, Skype 
tutors, daily life in Korea, classroom study); this was reiterated when I publicly shared my initial findings. 
Second, my netnographic observation was limited to seven weeks. Although the asynchronous, archival 
nature of r/Korean allowed for comprehensive observation and collection of large amounts of data, a longer 
observation period would have allowed more participation in #korean (and potentially other synchronous 
environments) as well as an examination of historical change in greater depth. 
Limitations notwithstanding, I argue that the present findings revealed an interesting contradiction in the 
r/Korean community that challenges a popular characterization of OILL as for-pleasure L2 communication 
and leisure (Sockett, 2013). The dominant use of English and prevalence of explicit discussion of Korean 
linguistic forms also seems to contrast the suggestion of Thorne et al. (2009) that Internet spaces provide a 
context for socialization into L2 user communities. Instead, what I found in r/Korean suggests that when 
the interest of a community is language itself, different patterns of language use and learning activity may 
emerge. Interestingly, I also found similarities between r/Korean and traditional classroom language-
learning activity (i.e., a focus on linguistic forms and the use of L1 in FFEs). It seems natural for motivated 
language learners, particularly those of lower proficiency who are not engaged in formal language 
instruction, to seek out online communities to answer their questions about linguistic forms. In this sense, 
Sockett’s (2013) strong emphasis on communication for personal enjoyment in his definition of OILL may 
be overly restrictive, as the kind of user-initiated ad hoc activity observed in this study could hardly be 
considered formal learning. 
Compared to gaming, interest communities, and social networks, there is less known about language 
learning activities in online spaces where language is the primary focus. This study demonstrated that going 
on the Internet with a general goal of L2 learning is no guarantee of abundant meaningful L2 input and 
 
Daniel R. Isbell 99 
 
interaction for a learner. At the same time, future research examining how knowledge about a language 
gained online might influence learning or transfer to other contexts of L2 use would be valuable. 
When studying or promoting OILL, considerations should also be made for platform language dominance 
and the proficiency level of learners. Many of the web’s most popular sites, including Reddit, are 
predominantly (if not exclusively) English-medium, which may present an obstacle for learners of other 
languages seeking to improve their skills. Similarly, the aggregate language abilities of a community appear 
to be an important factor. Without a critical mass of speakers possessing sufficient linguistic competence, 
it is unreasonable to expect much spontaneous L2 communication. Thus, lower-proficiency members of 
OILL communities need to deliberately seek out or create community-supported L2 communication 
opportunities until they reach a point where the digital wilds become genuinely accessible. 
Acknowledgements 
I wish to thank the r/Korean members and moderators for being open to and supportive of this project. I 
especially appreciate the users who responded to the OEQ. Additionally, I wish to thank Dr. Peter De Costa 
for guidance and comments on earlier drafts of this article. 
Notes 
1. Korean words were counted based on eojeol units, which are composed of content words and any 
attached morphemes (e.g., case markers, conjunctions, adpositions). As such, proportions of words are 
slightly biased toward English: The adposition to in to school as is a separate word in English but not 
in Korean. 
2. Indentation in r/Korean excerpts indicates the nesting of comments, reflecting how threads are actually 
seen by users. 
3. All usernames have been replaced with pseudonyms. Pseudonyms were constructed to reflect the types 
of usernames seen in r/Korean, which included the use of irregular capitalization and non-alphabetic 
characters. 
References 
Alexa. (2018). Reddit.com Traffic Statistics. Retrieved June 26, 2018 from 
http://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/reddit.com 
Benson, P. (2014). YouTube as text: Spoken interaction analysis and digital discourse. In R. H. Jones, A. 
Chik, & C. A. Hafner (Eds.), Discourse and digital practices: Doing discourse analysis in the digital 
age (pp. 81–96). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Benson, P., & Reinders, H. (Eds.). (2011). Beyond the language classroom. New York, NY: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Engeström, Y. (2001). Expansive learning at work: Toward an activity theoretical reconceptualization. 
Journal of Education and Work, 14(1), 133–156. https://doi.org/10.1080/13639080020028747 
Gao, X. (2007). A tale of Blue Rain Café: A study on the online narrative construction about a 
community of English learners on the Chinese mainland. System, 35, 259–270. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2006.12.004 
Gass, S., & Mackey, A. (2006). Input, interaction, and output: An overview. AILA Review, 19, 3–17. 
https://doi.org/10.1075/aila.19.03gas 
Hine, C. (2008). Virtual ethnography: Modes, varieties, affordances. In N. Fielding, R. M. Lee, & G. 
Blank (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of online research methods (pp. 257–271). London, UK: SAGE. 
100 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Juffs, A., & Friedline, B. E. (2014). Sociocultural influences on the use of a web-based tool for learning 
English vocabulary. System, 42, 48–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2013.10.015 
Kim, E. Y. A., & Brown, L. (2014). Negotiating pragmatic competence in computer mediated 
communication: The case of Korean address terms. CALICO Journal, 31(3), 264–284. 
https://doi.org/10.11139/cj.31.3.264-284 
Kozinets, R. V. (2010). Netnography: Doing ethnographic research online. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE. 
Kress, G. (2012). Multimodal discourse analysis. In J. P. Gee & M. Handford (Eds.), The Routledge 
handbook of discourse analysis (pp. 35–50). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Lee, J. S. (2006). Exploring the relationship between electronic literacy and heritage language 
maintenance. Language Learning & Technology, 10(2), 93–113. http://dx.doi.org/10125/44063 
Lord, G., & Harrington, S. (2013). Online communities of practice and second language phonological 
acquisition. International Journal of Computer-Assisted Language Learning and Teaching, 3(3), 34–
55. https://doi.org/10.4018/ijcallt.2013070103 
Massanari, A. (2015). Participatory culture, community, and play: Learning from Reddit. New York, NY: 
Peter Lang. 
Nakatsukasa, K., & Loewen, S. (2015). A teacher’s first language use in form-focused episodes in 
Spanish as a foreign language classroom. Language Teaching Research, 19, 133–149. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1362168814541737 
Norris, J. M., & Ortega, L. (2001). Does type of instruction make a difference? Substantive findings from 
a meta-analytic review. Language Learning, 51(S1), 157–213. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
1770.2001.tb00017.x 
Nunan, D., & Richards, J. C. (Eds.). (2015). Language learning beyond the classroom. New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Park, J.-H., & De Costa, P. (2014). Reframing graduate student writing strategies from an activity theory 
perspective. Language and Sociocultural Theory, 2(1), 25–50. https://doi.org/10.1558/lst.v2i1.24977 
Pasfield-Neofitou, S. (2011). Online domains of language use: Second language learners’ experiences of 
virtual community and foreignness. Language Learning & Technology, 15(2), 92–108. 
Ryu, D. (2013). Play to learn, learn to play: Language learning through gaming culture. ReCALL, 25(2), 
286–301. http://doi.org/10.1017/S0958344013000050 
Sockett, G. (2013). Understanding the online informal learning of English as a complex dynamic system: 
An emic approach. ReCALL, 25(1), 48–62. http://doi.org/doi:10.1017/S095834401200033X 
Stenström, A., & Stenström, B. (1994). An introduction to spoken interaction. London, UK: Longman. 
Thorne, S. L., Black, R. W., & Sykes, J. M. (2009). Second language use, socialization, and learning in 
Internet interest communities and online gaming. The Modern Language Journal, 93, 802–821. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-4781.2009.00974.x 
Thorne, S. L., Sauro, S., & Smith, B. (2015). Technologies, identities, and expressive activity. Annual 
Review of Applied Linguistics, 35, 215–233. http://doi.org/10.1017/S0267190514000257 
Tunçalp, D., & Lê, P. L. (2014). (Re)locating boundaries. A systematic review of online ethnography. 
Journal of Organizational Ethnography, 3(1), 59–79. https://doi.org/10.1108/JOE-11-2012-0048 
Varonis, E. M., & Gass, S. (1985). Non-native/non-native conversations: A model for negotiation of 
meaning. Applied Linguistics, 6(1), 71–90. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/6.1.71 
Daniel R. Isbell 101 
 
Yi, Y. (2008). Relay writing in an adolescent online community. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 
51(8), 670–680. https://doi.org/10.1598/JAAL.51.8.6 
Appendix A. Analytic Codes 
Codes for Submissions Codes for Discussions Codes for Roles 
1) Language Knowledge 
a) Requests 
b) Shares 
i) Grammar 
ii) Vocabulary 
iii) Pragmatics 
iv) Pronunciation 
v) Graphology 
vi) Discourse 
vii) Culture 
viii) General 
ix) Misc. 
2) Language Practice  
a) Offer 
b) Request 
i) Reading 
ii) Listening 
iii) Speaking 
iv) Writing 
v) Grammar 
vi) Reading & Writing 
vii) General 
3) Learning Discussion 
a) Study Tips 
b) Experiences 
c) Motivation 
4) Translation Request 
1) Answer Questions 
a) Explain 
b) Exemplify 
c) Provide source 
2) Evaluate 
a) Correct 
b) Downvote 
c) Self-edit/delete 
d) Comment  
e) Upvote 
3) Follow-up 
a) Indicate comprehension 
b) Seek clarification 
c) Probe further 
4) Participate (engage in talk, in 
Korean when appropriate) 
5) Moderate 
a) Warn 
b) Delete 
6) Translate (to English, usually) 
1) Community Identity 
a) Lurker 
b) Newbie 
c) Regular 
d) Moderator 
e) Troll 
2) Language Status 
a) Learner 
b) Expert User 
Appendix B. Open-Ended Questionnaire 
Directions: Please answer the questions below. Your experiences and opinions are valuable, and you may 
write as little or as much as you wish, or nothing at all. Please type your answers in a reply to this message. 
Thank you for your participation! 
1. How long have you been a subscriber of /r/Korean? 
2. Why did you come to /r/Korean? 
3. How you participate in the /r/Korean community?  
102 Language Learning & Technology 
 
4. How do you see yourself within the r/Korean community? 
5. What do people in r/Korean do to improve their Korean ability?  
6. On r/Korean, people frequently share links to Korean learning resources. What do you think about 
these resources?  
7. What do you think about the language knowledge and advice of r/Korean users? 
8. Subreddits, like other communities, have unwritten rules and values. In your words, what are the 
rules or values of r/Korean? 
9. Looking at r/Korean, most of the discussion is in English rather than Korean. How do you feel 
about that?  
10. Are you involved in Korean language learning (or teaching) outside of /r/Korean? Please explain. 
About the Author 
Daniel R. Isbell is a doctoral candidate in the Second Language Studies program at Michigan State 
University. He is interested in how technological affordances can support language learning, especially for 
less commonly taught languages. Daniel’s other interests include assessment and L2 pronunciation.  
E-mail: isbellda@msu.edu 
