Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2018, Volume 22, Issue 3 
pp. 41–44 
BOOK REVIEW  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Xinhua Yuan 
 
 
Review of Exploring spoken English learner language 
using corpora: Learner talk 
Xinhua Yuan, Taishan University 
 
Exploring spoken English learner language using corpora: 
Learner talk 
Friginal, E., Lee, J. J., Polat, B., & Roberson, A. 
2017 
ISBN: 9783319598994 
US $ 119.99 
300 pp. 
Palgrave MacMillan 
London, UK 
 
With the innovation and development of computational technology and learner corpora, authentic language 
has become unprecedentedly accessible in the classroom. It is especially beneficial for teachers who need 
to have an in-depth knowledge of learner language to conceptualize classroom activities and understand the 
relationship between classroom interlocutors. It is equally significant for researchers who would like to 
embark on studies in this field. As a university language teacher and researcher myself, I am very lucky to 
have come across Exploring spoken English learner language using corpora: Learner talk, authored by 
Friginal, Lee, Polat, and Roberson. With the aim of offering an in-depth exploration and analysis of learner 
spoken language, this book presents an impressive corpus-based study of learner spoken language produced 
by university-level students of English as a second language (ESL) in the classroom. Using contemporary 
theories as a guide and employing the latest corpus analysis tools and methods, the authors analyze a variety 
of learner speech to offer many new insights into the nature and characteristics of the spoken language of 
college ESL learners. 
A total of 14 chapters are divided into five parts, encompassing theory review, empirical studies, and future 
directions. Part I, including Chapters 1 and 2, provides a preliminary account of corpus-based research of 
spoken learner language. The opening chapter presents a brief overview of studies of spoken English learner 
language as well as an introduction to corpus linguistics and tools and approaches that are particularly 
applicable for comparing a wide variety of speakers and learning contexts. Teachers and interested 
researchers without a solid foundation in corpus linguistics will find these chapters very accessible and 
useful. 
Chapter 2 discusses a total of eight recently collected corpora of spoken academic discourse and learner 
oral language in English. The authors provide descriptions of the texts and types of student oral language 
and some examples of corpus-based studies using these corpora. They serve as very good resources for 
interested readers and researchers since some of them are publicly available, while others may be purchased 
online from their developers. The authors also highlight specialized spoken second language (L2) learner 
corpora collected by various research groups globally, reflecting an internationally growing interest in the 
area of corpus-based research of classroom language and the combination of second language acquisition 
(SLA) and corpus approaches. 
42 Language Learning & Technology 
 
The next four chapters constitute Part II, addressing empirical studies of learner talk in the classroom. To 
begin, Chapter 3 provides an overview of approaches to L2 classroom discourse and describes the Corpus 
of Second Language Classroom Discourse (L2CD) as well as its two sub-corpora L2CD-S and L2CD-T, 
using them to investigate various linguistic dimensions of learner and teacher talk in classrooms of English 
for academic purposes (EAP). The two sub-corpora are again utilized in Chapters 4, 5, and 6 to explore and 
compare different linguistic features of learner and teacher talk. 
Chapter 4 digs into how learners’ and teachers’ classroom use of EAP suggest their stances toward 
propositional content and interlocutors by means of evaluative language, particularly hedges and boosters. 
The analysis finds significant differences in the distribution of these interpersonal resources between learner 
talk and teacher talk. For example, teachers, with more hedges and relatively fewer boosters, seem to 
maneuver caution and certainty more effectively than learners, who, by contrast, seem to be more 
committed to the statements they make (p. 264). Meanwhile, learners also appear to have limited available 
options for expressing certainty and uncertainty. For all the differences, teacher and learner discourse have 
much in common with regard to the top five hedges and boosters. The authors attribute this striking 
similarity to a few possible reasons. One possibility is that learners are frequently exposed to the linguistic 
resources used by their teachers, so they tend to imitate their teachers to some degree. The second one is 
that these hedges and boosters are so widely used in classrooms, that learners lack a wider range of 
alternative vocabulary to express certainty. The authors suggest that teachers need to use other hedges and 
boosters to help learners enhance their linguistic repertories, so that they can have wider options for showing 
stance and engage in more sophisticated interactions. 
Chapter 5 explores the use of personal pronouns in learner and teacher talk. The much more frequent use 
of I and you than we by both teachers and learners suggests that EAP classroom communications are highly 
interactive and interpersonal. The analysis also reveals the different ways in which learners and teachers 
use these pronouns to position each other. For instance, teachers use the inclusive we to signal to learners 
that the classroom lesson is a jointly accomplished endeavor (Lee, 2016), while learners prefer to exclude 
the teachers in their use of we. They also find that while teachers use you and we more frequently to increase 
learner involvement and participation, learners prefer to use I, thus situating themselves at the center of the 
conversation. The authors suggest that teachers need to raise students’ awareness of their use of personal 
pronouns to express their ideas more effectively, so that they can be more involved in classroom interaction 
and establish more intersubjective relations, which are crucial for university classes. 
As the last chapter of Part II, Chapter 6 examines the ways in which learners and teachers use spatial deixis 
to conceptualize classroom space. The analysis reveals that that is the most common demonstrative used 
by EAP teachers, adding evidence to previous findings that demonstratives are the primary spatial deictics 
used in face-to-face interactions (e.g., Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, & Finegan, 1999). Certainly, the 
present findings also differ from previous studies in many aspects. For example, this is also frequently 
utilized by teachers in EAP classrooms. The findings also show that learners and teachers conceptualize the 
classroom space in different ways. For instance, learners tend to use spatial deictics to position objects and 
class participants within their speaker territories, comparable to the way they use pronouns to locate 
themselves at the center of conversations in Chapter 5. By contrast, teachers prefer to shift the focal referent 
proximally to and distally from their territory (p. 266) with the aim of creating a more inclusive classroom 
space, also echoing their use of pronouns described in Chapter 5. Accordingly, the authors suggest that 
EAP teachers need to provide classroom instructions to help learners expand their informational space to 
connect with that of others, which is considered vital in university classroom interactions. 
Another four chapters comprise Part III, revolving around learner talk in language experience interviews. 
Chapter 7 introduces the L2 Experience Interview Corpus, describing participation information, data 
collection, transcription, content analysis programs, and data analysis, providing the analytical foundations 
for Chapters 8, 9, and 10. The first two studies in Chapters 8 and 9 examine the corpus horizontally to 
identify themes or dimensions of L2 learning experienced by most learners. Chapter 8 focuses on the three 
salient themes (i.e., classroom, communicating, and studying), which appear across all texts in the corpus. 
Xinhua Yuan 43 
 
For each theme, the authors provide the 30 most-representative lemmas that are linked to L2 learning 
experience. The analysis indicates that most learners identify learning with classroom learning since most 
of their time spent in learning English is at school. Classroom is in turn related to grammar and exams, 
suggesting that the grammar-translation teaching method is frequently employed in their home countries. 
Learners want to interact with native English speakers and see it as an important part of their learning 
experience, but they are unsure of their own skills and find interaction uncomfortable. Finally, learners link 
studying with reading and writing, showing that vocabulary and written skills may not be easily integrated 
into oral communication skills or at least that learners view them as two very different subsets of the L2 
experience (p.147). 
Chapter 9 is concerned with four psychosocial dimensions experienced by L2 learners (i.e. positive-
learning, negative-anxious, social-participatory, and education). The education dimension mainly relates to 
external impacts or study habits, in contrast to the first three dimensions, which focus on the internal aspects 
of the language learning experience. This chapter aims to provide inspiration for learners to understand 
their own psychological state during the learning process and for instructors to dynamically understand and 
interpret challenges encountered by learners. This study suggests that although the four dimensions are 
separately investigated, L2 learning should be regarded as a whole that is influenced by many aspects of 
the learner’s life, including factors that teachers may not know about or may not have considered important 
(p. 165). In order to enhance L2 proficiency and the enjoyment of the learning process, both students and 
teachers should maintain this level of awareness and see learning as a long-term investment. 
Applying semantic content analysis methods to the L2 Experience Interview Corpus, Chapter 10 vertically 
analyzes and compares the psychosocial traits of each interview participant, namely narrative, cognitive, 
and affective. The analysis finds basic distinctions in the levels of abstraction with which students describe 
the learning process, either surface level or deep level. Surface-level learners accept information passively 
without thorough reflection on its relevance to a learning situation. Deep-level learners tend to relate new 
material to previous knowledge and experience with the intention of understanding the situation for 
themselves (Benson & Lor, 1999). The authors describe several limitations that need to be further 
investigated in future studies and also point out that semantic content analysis should be further confirmed 
and expanded as a methodology for corpus-informed L2 studies. 
Part IV, comprised of Chapters 11 to 13, concentrates on learner talk in peer response activities. Chapter 
11 explores findings on collaborative dialogue in SLA and reviews peer response studies in the L2 writing 
tradition. While the literature suggests that working collaboratively is beneficial for learners (p. 218), both 
SLA and L2 writing researchers have identified gaps in our current knowledge of how students experience 
collaboration in ecologically valid contexts. The authors indicate that there is a need for continued 
systematic analysis of the social and linguistic features of productive talk during peer response, which is 
then discussed in the next two chapters. 
Drawing upon a qualitative analysis of author coding as well as stimulated-recall interviews with students, 
Chapter 12 presents patterns of social interaction in the corpus. It also explores the relationship between 
these patterns and revision outcomes, investigating whether students in some patterns use more feedback 
or have better performance (e.g., write better second drafts) than others. 
To explore the linguistic features of collaboration, Chapter 13 digs into the use of modal verbs as stance 
markers in two sub-sections of the Second Language Peer Response Corpus (L2PR_C): collaborative and 
non-collaborative talk. After presenting the frequencies and communicative functions of six modals and 
semimodals, the authors explore the differences in modal use between the two subcorpora. The analysis 
reveals that collaborative writers, who tend to lessen the intensity of suggestions or to create a more polite 
tone, use more modals as stance markers in a variety of ways—nearly double the number that non-
collaborative writers use. These findings are aligned with the observations of most other research that has 
been done on instructor and student spoken stance marking in academic contexts. With very few exceptions, 
investigations have found that learners use modals less frequently, or in less-effective ways, than native 
speakers or instructors (e.g., Shirato & Stapleton, 2007; Gu, 2014). In the L2PR_C, it is collaborative 
44 Language Learning & Technology 
 
students who seem to parallel instructor or native speaker use, while non-collaborative ones appear to use 
modals in a way that matches studies of learner talk. 
Finally, Chapter 14 provides a comprehensive conclusion of each chapter in Parts II, III, and IV. It closes 
the book with some implications for future research directions, including multimodal annotation and 
phonetically transcribed corpora of learner talk, and more well-designed, well-collected spoken learner 
corpora and teaching applications. 
Using a range of cutting-edge corpus tools and methods, the book highlights three specialized corpora 
collected for the three empirical parts of this book. The authors take historical and methodological 
perspectives to explore spoken learner corpora, and they also suggest pedagogical applications and discuss 
future directions in studying learner language. While research has begun to access authentic classroom 
spoken learner language, it has been less attended to than language use in other settings. Written in a 
practical and accessible style, this book offers valuable resources for interested teachers, students, and 
researchers, particularly for those who lack a solid academic background in corpus linguistics and SLA. 
This original and impressive work focuses on types of speech that are rarely examined and makes a 
significant contribution to the study and understanding of ESL spoken language at the university level. It 
will appeal to students and scholars of applied linguistics, corpus linguistics, SLA, and discourse analysis. 
References 
Benson, P., & Lor, W. (1999). Conceptions of language and language learning. System, 27, 459–472. 
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and 
written English. London, UK: Longman. 
Gu, T. (2014). A corpus-based study on the performance of the suggestion speech act by Chinese EFL 
learners. International Journal of English Linguistics, 4(1), 103–111. 
Lee, J. J. (2016). “There’s intentionality behind it…”: A genre analysis of EAP classroom lessons. 
Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 23, 99–112. 
Shirato, J., & Stapleton, P. (2007). Comparing English vocabulary in a spoken learner corpus with a 
native speaker corpus: Pedagogical implications arising from an empirical study in Japan. Language 
Teaching Research, 11(4), 393–412. 
About the Author 
Xinhua Yuan is an instructor in the School of Foreign Languages at Taishan University and a PhD candidate 
in Corpus Linguistics at Beijing Foreign Studies University. His research interests include corpus linguistics 
and computer-assisted language learning. 
E-mail: yuanxinhua@bfsu.edu.cn 
