Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2018, Volume 22, Issue 3 
pp. 193–213 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Nicole Ziegler 
 
 
Pre-task planning in L2 text-chat: Examining 
learners’ process and performance 
Nicole Ziegler, University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa 
Abstract 
Research suggests that pre-task planning time provides learners with opportunities to formulate, organize, 
and mentally store content, thereby freeing up attentional resources during tasks (Skehan, Xiaoyue, Qian, 
& Wang, 2012). However, relatively few studies to date have investigated pre-task planning in a 
synchronous computer-mediated communication setting (e.g., Lai, Fei, & Roots, 2008; Hsu, 2012, 2015). 
In addition to a scarcity of computer-assisted language learning research, relatively little is known about 
what learners do when they plan or how they use their plans during tasks. The goals of the current study 
were twofold: (a) to examine the relationship between pre-task planning and learners’ production and (b) 
to explore the affordances offered by computer-mediated contexts to further investigate how and what 
learners may (or may not) be planning during pre-task and within-task planning time. Results suggest that 
three minutes of planning time resulted in increases in lexical complexity (but not phrasal or syntactic), 
although no significant findings were identified for accuracy or fluency. In addition, findings indicate that 
technology offers researchers a number of unique methodological affordances, such as the ability to see 
what learners produce, regardless of whether they transmit this information to their interlocutor, thereby 
providing evidence of L2 knowledge that would otherwise be unobservable. 
Keywords: Task-Based Language Teaching, Pre-Task Planning, Synchronous Computer-Mediated 
Communication, L2 Production 
Language(s) Learned in This Study: English 
APA Citation: Ziegler, N. (2018). Pre-task planning in L2 text-chat: Examining learners’ process and 
performance. Language Learning & Technology, 22(3), 193–213. https://doi.org/10125/44664 
Introduction 
A growing body of research has examined various factors impacting second language (L2) task 
performance, with the role of planning on task performance (for an extensive discussion, see Ellis, 2005) 
receiving an increasing amount of interest. Theoretically grounded in information processing approaches 
to second language acquisition (SLA), in which learners’ cognitive capacities are related to their learning 
outcomes, the rationale for planning suggests that learners will benefit from specific activities that allow 
them to redirect their attention between meaning and form in order to support L2 development (Long, 2015). 
Because learners may possess limited capacity for processing input, they can experience difficulty in 
attending to meaning and form at the same time (VanPatten, 1990). Therefore, they need to make (mostly 
unconscious) decisions regarding the allocation of their attentional resources—namely, whether to focus 
on meaning or whether to attend to structure and form (Skehan, 1996). This competition between attentional 
resources places a cognitive burden on learners, particularly those with limited language proficiency, 
because they have to consider and respond to the communicative pressure of the interaction, making it 
difficult to attend to form and structure (e.g., Ellis, 2009). 
In addition, attention and noticing are necessary, beneficial conditions for L2 development (Schmidt, 2001). 
For these reasons, planning time, either before or during a task, has been hypothesized to provide learners 
with increased opportunities for focusing on form (Williams, 2005) and noticing the gap between their 
interlanguage and the target language (Schmidt, 2001), thereby increasing opportunities for L2 
194 Language Learning & Technology 
 
development. In other words, planning is thought to reduce cognitive burden by creating a context in which 
learners can attend to form by drawing on linguistic knowledge that may not yet be automatized (Ellis, 
2005). 
As many have pointed out (e.g., Ellis, 2009; Long, 2015), investigations of planning may provide a basis 
for important pedagogical implications, such as informing how task designers and instructors can most 
efficiently and effectively facilitate learners’ multifaceted L2 development in complexity, accuracy, and 
fluency (CAF) in the L2 classroom. In addition, examining planning can provide opportunities to test 
theoretical claims about the processes of SLA, such as Levelt’s model of speaking (Yuan & Ellis, 2003), 
noticing (Lai, Fei, & Roots, 2008), and models of writing (Ellis & Yuan, 2004). 
Despite these opportunities to examine more closely what we think we know about SLA and to provide 
helpful input for language professionals, relatively few studies have examined what learners do when they 
plan or how they use the products of their planning during task execution. Using the unique affordances 
offered by synchronous computer-mediated communication (SCMC), this study applies a combination of 
screen capture technology and text-chat to examine task planning in learner–learner interaction in SCMC 
contexts—an optimum environment for examining how learners utilize their planning time and whether, 
when, and how they refer to their planning when they are carrying out tasks. 
Literature Review 
Types of Task Planning 
Two broad types of planning have been identified (Ellis, 2005). A basic distinction is drawn between pre-
task planning, often operationalized as planning that occurs before a learner performs a task, and within-
task planning, which is usually defined as planning that occurs during the time that learners are actually 
performing the task (Ellis, 2009). 
Within-Task Planning 
Within-task planning, which allows learners to plan and reformulate both the content and the form of their 
output, is the moment-by-moment planning that takes place during task performance (Yuan & Ellis, 2003). 
The availability of within-task planning not only provides learners with unlimited time to engage in pre- 
and post-production monitoring (Hsu, 2012), but also supplies opportunities for learners to search and draw 
on their linguistic resources during the formulation phase of language production (Yuan & Ellis, 2003). In 
addition, because it provides learners with time to formulate and monitor the output of this formulation 
more carefully than they might when subjected to time pressure, within-task planning is hypothesized to be 
particularly effective in terms of supporting accuracy (Ellis, 2005). 
Within written SCMC, which refers to real time interaction such as a live text-chat, learners may have 
access to increased within-task planning time when compared to oral interaction (Sauro, 2009). Because 
the rate of exchange during SCMC may be slower than in face-to-face (FTF) interaction due to variables 
such as individual typing speed or the speed of the available internet connection, learners participating in 
text-chat may have greater opportunities to review and assess their production during task performance (Lai 
& Zhao, 2006; Payne & Whitney, 2002), potentially leading to improvements in the quality of L2 
production. Although there has been very little investigation of planning in SCMC to date, results by Sauro 
and Smith (2010) provide empirical evidence for the efficacy of within-task planning, operationalized as 
post-production monitoring. Using screen capture, results indicate that learners who engage in post-
production monitoring produce more complex language, suggesting that the developmental benefits of 
within-task planning can and do occur in computer-mediated contexts. 
Pre-Task Planning 
Pre-task planning, defined as planning that occurs before a learner begins the target task, can be further 
categorized as rehearsal, where learners have the opportunity to perform the target task to completion 
Nicole Ziegler 195 
 
before performing it a second time, or strategic planning, which is often defined as opportunities for learners 
to decide what to say or write without completing the task (Ellis, 2009). The majority of research on 
planning has focused on the effects of strategic pre-task planning on learners’ oral and written production 
(e.g., Ellis & Yuan, 2004; Foster & Skehan, 1996; Yuan & Ellis, 2003). Research has suggested that 
strategic pre-task planning may help reduce learners’ cognitive burden during a task by providing 
opportunities for mental organization or the formulation of desired content (Bygate & Samuda, 2005). This 
formulation is then held in learners’ short term working memory, providing access to linguistic resources 
that may not be fully automatized and freeing up other attentional resources for task performance (Ortega, 
1999). Findings indicate that strategic planning may be beneficial to L2 performance, with research 
suggesting that pre-task planning may lead to improvements in complexity (e.g., Ellis & Yuan, 2004; 
Kawauchi, 2005; Ortega, 1999; Skehan, Xiaoyue, Qian, & Wang, 2012; Yuan & Ellis, 2003) and fluency 
(Foster & Skehan, 1996; Skehan et al., 2012). The majority of studies have compared the effects of 10 
minutes of planning time to those of no planning time (e.g., Ortega, 1999; Skehan et al., 2012). Few have 
investigated whether the amount of planning time is proportionally related to improvements in performance. 
For example, Wigglesworth (1997) examined the impact of one minute of planning with results indicating 
positive benefits for learners’ speech performance. Mehnert (1998) examined the effects of one, five, and 
10 minutes of planning time, finding that while oral fluency improved following all three amounts of 
planning time, complexity increased only for learners in the 10-minute planning condition. Accuracy 
improved following one minute of planning and declined again with five and 10 minutes of planning time. 
Scholars have suggested that these differences across developmental constructs may be explained by 
Skehan’s (2007) tradeoff hypothesis, which suggests that as learners’ direct attention toward one 
performance area (e.g., complexity), cognitive resources are drawn away from others (e.g., accuracy). This 
may then result in a trade-off in terms of cognitive resources across constructs. 
Pre-Task Planning in Computer-Mediated Communication 
Despite suggestions that L2 learners should be encouraged to plan before engaging in tasks in SCMC 
(Skehan, 2003), only a handful of studies to date have examined the effects of pre-task planning in 
computer-mediated environments. Focusing on whether pre-task planning might mediate learners’ noticing 
of recasts, Lai et al. (2008) provided learners with 10 minutes of pre-writing to produce a description of 
their picture before performing a spot-the-differences task with the researcher. Results indicated that 
prewriting had a significant effect on the noticing of contingent recasts, suggesting that pre-task planning 
may have served to highlight the gap between learners’ production and the target form indicated by the 
interactional feedback—potentially supporting L2 development. Although these results provide 
encouragement for the use of pre-task planning, performance and production were not addressed, 
highlighting the need for further research on the effects of pre-task planning on learners’ L2 development. 
Seeking to address this gap, Hsu (2012) investigated the effects of pre-task planning time on learners’ CAF 
in written text-chat. Thirty intermediate learners of English were randomly assigned to a pre-task planning 
(10 minutes) or a no-planning condition. All learners were allowed unlimited within-task planning time, 
and interacted one-on-one with the researcher to complete a narrative story-telling task based on a series of 
pictures. Findings indicated that there were no significant differences across measures of CAF between the 
two groups, suggesting that strategic pre-task planning did not impact learners’ performance in meaningful 
ways. More recently, Hsu (2015) compared the effects of rehearsal combined with within-task planning to 
within-task planning only. Similar to Hsu (2012), learners in the rehearsal condition were provided with 10 
minutes of planning time, in which they were permitted to take notes that were later removed, and unlimited 
time to complete the task. Findings indicated that both conditions resulted in greater complexity, although 
learners in the rehearsal condition had more accurate use of grammatical verb forms. 
Although Lai et al. (2008) and Hsu (2012, 2015) provide important information regarding pre-task planning 
in written text-chat, there are still a number of areas that warrant further investigation. These studies took 
place in laboratory environments and consisted of learner–researcher interactions, highlighting the need for 
further research on learner–learner interactions in a classroom context. In addition, the experimental 
196 Language Learning & Technology 
 
conditions of Lai et al. (2008) and Hsu (2012, 2015) included only planning or no planning, where planning 
time was operationalized as 10 minutes. This amount of planning may have provided learners with the 
opportunity to perform the target task to completion before performing it a second time, acting as a form of 
rehearsal (Ellis, 2009). Indeed, Hsu (2012) reports that learners in the planning condition spent 11 minutes 
completing the task, while Hsu (2015) refers to the availability of planning as a rehearsal condition. Thus, 
previous studies using longer pre-task planning times may have measured the effects of rehearsal rather 
than strategic pre-task planning, underscoring the need to examine the potential effects of different amounts 
of strategic pre-task planning time in SCMC. 
In addition, although previous research in FTF and SCMC has aimed to make planning an observable 
activity by using paper and pencil note-taking (e.g., Hsu, 2012; Lai et al., 2008; Yuan & Ellis, 2003), this 
approach provides a limited sense of how and when learners may draw on this planning during task 
performance. Furthermore, most previous research has restricted learners’ access to their plans during task 
completion. Allowing learners to retain access to their plans and using computer-mediated tools, such as 
text chat or Microsoft Word in combination with screen capture technology, provides opportunities to 
collect data on how learners use their pre-task planning time, and whether they refer to it during task 
performance. Ellis (2009) highlights that researchers need measures that can demonstrate that within-task 
planning is taking place. The methodological affordances offered by the combination of text-chat and screen 
capture software provide the means to obtain evidence of within-task planning, particularly in terms of self-
repair (e.g., Smith, 2008) and post-production monitoring (e.g., Sauro & Smith, 2010). 
The Current Research 
This study seeks to address the gaps in the literature by focusing on the differential effects of pre-task 
planning times on performance in learner–learner interactions in the L2 classroom. In addition, this research 
takes advantage of the unique methodological affordances of SCMC, thereby making pre- and within-task 
planning a more observable phenomenon by providing a record of the composition processes and 
subsequent products. 
The following research questions were addressed in this study: 
1. How do different pre-task planning times (no planning time, one minute of planning time, and three 
minutes of planning time) impact learners’ L2 production in terms of CAF? 
2. How might the affordances of SCMC support researchers’ understanding of the composition 
processes involved in pre- and within-task planning and in L2 production? 
Methods 
Participants 
Participants were 44 intermediate learners of English (approximately B2 level in terms of the common 
European framework) enrolled in an intensive language learning program at a mid-size university. Learners 
had a mean age of 23.28 (SD = 5.86) and had been learning English for an average of 9.74 years (SD = 
4.44). A variety of first language backgrounds were represented, including Chinese, Japanese, Korean, 
Khmer, and Spanish. All learners reported familiarity with using computers, typing, and using instant 
messaging to communicate. Intact classes were used for this study, with participants scheduled as a group 
for an additional class session outside of their regularly scheduled course time. Learners were provided 
with a $10 gift card as compensation for their time. 
Materials 
Tasks 
Three picture-narrative tasks were used for this study (for an example, see Appendix A). All three tasks 
depicted a set of related pictures, and participants were asked to co-construct a story with their interlocutors 
based on the pictures using text-chat. Picture-narrative tasks were selected in order to facilitate 
Nicole Ziegler 197 
 
comparability with previous research, both in SCMC (Hsu, 2012) as well as in the planning literature in 
general (Ellis & Yuan, 2004; Ortega, 1999; Yuan & Ellis, 2003). 
Questionnaires 
Learners completed a survey on their language background, language learning experiences, and comfort 
and familiarity with technology. Following the completion of the tasks, learners were asked to complete an 
exit survey (Appendix B) adapted from the study by Baralt and Gurzynski-Weiss (2011). The survey was 
designed to obtain information on participants’ opinions regarding the various planning times as well as 
their general perceptions of learning English using SCMC. 
Procedure 
After completing the background questionnaire, participants were randomly assigned to an interlocutor. 
Learners completed three tasks with the same partner in order to account for any differences in performance 
that might arise from working with different interlocutors. Due to institutional resource constraints, learners 
remained in the same computer lab as their interlocutor. Care was taken to place interlocutors in different 
areas of the lab to reduce opportunities for FTF discussion during the task completion phase, with no 
evidence of FTF communication having been noted. 
Following a within-subject, repeated-measures design, all learners completed three consecutive picture-
narrative tasks with different pre-task planning times. Following a Latin squares design, tasks were counter-
balanced for task and planning time in order to mitigate any possible task or ordering effect. Three levels 
of pre-task planning time were used for this study: no planning time, one minute of planning time, and three 
minutes of planning time. A maximum of three minutes, rather than five minutes as in previous FTF 
research (Mehnert, 1998), was selected, as piloting indicated that this was insufficient time for learners to 
complete the task, thus preventing the possibility of rehearsal. 
Following Hsu (2012, 2015), learners were encouraged to plan for their task performance in the way that 
they felt would best help them achieve their goals, whether this involved focusing on content, form, or 
discourse structure. All planning was conducted using Basecamp Campfire (screenshot provided in 
Appendix C), with the same chat window used for planning and the target tasks. This allowed learners to 
plan individually or with their partners and to maintain access to their planning throughout the task. 
Learners were given unlimited real-time within-task planning time to complete each task. Apple QuickTime 
screen capture software was used to video-record planning and text-chat production. 
Analysis 
Learners’ Production 
Following Sauro and Smith (2010) and Hsu (2012, 2015), learners’ text-chat scripts were converted into 
video-enhanced chat scripts. Screen capture videos from each interlocutor were played back and coded for 
text that was typed and deleted or added before message transmission. Following the conventions 
established by previous research (e.g., Hsu, 2012, 2015; Smith, 2008), text represented by a strike through 
(e.g., never) indicated text that was produced and then deleted before sending. Text located inside of 
brackets (e.g., [the bus]) indicated text that was added after the learner had begun to compose a message, 
but before hitting the Send message button. Text inside of brackets with a strike through (e.g., [the bus]) 
indicates text that was deleted after the learner had composed a message but prior to sending. This provided 
important information regarding what each learner produced, but may not have transmitted, during the 
interaction, providing not only insight into the process, but also data regarding learners’ fluency. The 
deleted and added text was included as data for the coding of CAF features as it was considered valuable 
information regarding planning and monitoring (Hsu, 2012). Figure 1 provides an example of video-
enhanced data compared to text-chat script only. Following the creation of the corpus of video-enhanced 
chat scripts, learners’ production was coded for analysis of speech (AS) units (Foster, Tonkyn, & 
Wigglesworth, 2000), which have been used commonly in SCMC research (e.g., Hsu, 2012, 2015; Sauro, 
198 Language Learning & Technology 
 
2012). Then, chat scripts were coded for measures of CAF in order to assess whether various pre-task 
planning times had differential effects on learner production. 
Text Chat Script Video-Enhanced Chat Script 
|I listened music :: during jogging or walking| [I went to jogging.] |I listened music by my :: 
during jogging or walking.| 
Figure 1. Example of text chat script and video-enhanced chat script. 
Complexity 
Because complexity is a multi-faceted construct, learners’ text-chat production was assessed using a range 
of general measures, including syntactic, phrasal, and lexical complexity. Syntactic complexity was 
operationalized as the total number of clauses divided by the total number of AS units. Following Foster et 
al. (2000), an AS unit was defined as an independent clause together with any subordinate clauses associated 
with it. AS units allow multi-clause units, providing the means to measure production not just in number of 
words or turns, but in clausal units related to topics and ideas. Examples of AS units from the current study 
are illustrated below. Excerpt 1 provides an example of one AS unit and independent clause, while Excerpt 
2 illustrates an AS unit including one independent clause and one dependent clause.  
Excerpt 1. 
|cat is afraid of dog| 
Excerpt 2. 
|I think :: the dog is really stronger than pet own| 
Phrasal complexity was defined as the number of words divided by the number of clauses (Révész, Ekiert, 
& Torgersen, 2014), while lexical complexity was calculated using Guiraud’s index (Hsu, 2012). This index, 
which mitigates the impact of the length of produced text on complexity, is calculated by dividing the total 
number of types by the square root of the total number of tokens. Types and tokens were calculated using 
the concordancing software, AntConc (Anthony, 2014). 
Accuracy 
Accuracy was also measured by multiple indices, including overall accuracy, grammatical accuracy, and 
lexical accuracy. Overall accuracy was operationalized as the percentage of error-free clauses (Foster & 
Skehan, 1996), which were defined as clauses that did not contain any grammatical or lexical errors 
(excluding typographical errors). Grammatical and lexical accuracy focused on the percentage of clauses 
without any errors in morphosyntax or lexis, respectively. 
Fluency 
Much of the research on planning has operationalized fluency as a multifaceted construct consisting of 
silence, repair, and speed, which has been frequently defined as the number of syllables produced per 
minute (e.g., Ellis & Yuan, 2004; Tavakoli & Skehan, 2005). However, due to the unique environment of 
SCMC, where learners may type at different rates and where typing errors might have an outsized adverse 
impact on assessments of speed and silence, an alternative measurement of fluency was needed. Following 
Hsu (2012), fluency was operationalized as the number of dysfluencies produced during each task. 
Dysfluency was calculated by dividing the total number of words reformulated (i.e., those words that were 
typed and then deleted before transmission of the message or those that were added or deleted later in the 
message composition phase) by the total number of words produced. Self-repair of spelling or typing errors 
were not included in this calculation. 
Nicole Ziegler 199 
 
Revisions, Additions, and Deletions in the Composition Phase 
Following the creation of the video-enhanced chat scripts, data were coded for a number of features 
regarding learners’ composition process. For example, multiple revisions, as indicated by an utterance 
followed by one or more immediate deletions and modified utterances, were coded as evidence of within-
task planning. Chat scripts were also coded for text that was added post-production but prior to sending, as 
this was considered evidence of post-production monitoring. In addition, chat scripts were coded for text 
that was deleted after the learner had begun to compose a message but before hitting the Send message 
button. These instances of deleted text were further categorized according to whether they indicated 
avoidance (operationalized as deletion and a novel reformulation preceded by two or more attempts to 
produce a target form or word) or overtyping (defined here as text that was deleted prior to sending in 
reaction to an interlocutor’s message). 
Results 
In order to address the effects of different planning times on multiple measures of learners’ performance, a 
series of multilevel models (MLM; also known as mixed effects models) was conducted where the 
dependent variables of complexity, accuracy, and fluency were nested within-participants and nested 
within-tasks for each analysis. In other words, participants and tasks served as random intercepts. Pre-task 
planning time served as the only fixed effect (centered at 0), and slopes were allowed to vary randomly by 
participant. The selection of planning time as the fixed effect was selected a priori, as this was the 
theoretically motivated variable of interest to the current study. Using these cross-classified models, in 
which every participant completed all tasks and all tasks were completed by all participants, random 
intercepts for participant and task were entered into the model. Z-score analyses did not identify any extreme 
outliers, and because the data met the underlying assumptions, no adjustments or log transformations were 
performed. The lme4 package within the R statistical programming environment (Bates, Maechler, Bolker, 
& Walker, 2015; Venables & Smith, 2010) was used for all multilevel modeling. A fixed effect was 
considered significant if the absolute value of the t statistic was greater than or equal to 2.00 (Gelman & 
Hill, 2007).  
Complexity 
Complexity was measured according to three dimensions: lexical variation, phrasal complexity, and 
subordination (or syntactic complexity), Table 1 provides the descriptive statistics for all three measures of 
complexity. 
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics for the Effects of Planning Time on Complexity 
 No Planning  1-Minute Planning  3-Minute Planning 
Complexity M SD  M SD  M SD 
Lexical 6.66 1.36  6.56 1.26  7.05 1.38 
Phrasal 5.00 0.87  5.04 0.84  4.82 0.85 
Syntactic 1.28 0.24  1.26 0.21  1.28 0.19 
Results from the MLM analyses indicate that there was no significant effect of differential pre-task planning 
times for syntactic complexity, operationalized as the ratio of clauses to AS units, or for phrasal complexity, 
defined here as the number of words divided by the number of clauses. A significant difference, however, 
was found for lexical complexity (Guiraud’s index), indicating a significant effect for planning times on 
the variety of lexical items produced by learners (b = 0.15, SE = 0.07, t = 2.13, Pseudo R2 = .15). A Pseudo 
R2 value of .15 suggests a large effect size for the predictor of planning time on learners’ lexical complexity 
(Cohen, 1988), explaining approximately 15% of the variance. Table 2, Table 3, and Table 4 provide 
statistics for these MLM analyses. 
200 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Table 2. MLM Testing Interactions With Planning Time and Syntactic Complexity 
Fixed Effects Estimate SE t-value 
Intercept 1.27 0.03 37.36* 
Planning Timea 0.00 0.01 0.07 
Random Effects Variance SD Correlation 
Intercept | Participant 0.04 0.19  
Planning Time | Participant 0.00 0.03 -1.00 
Intercept | Task 0.00 0.00  
Residual 0.02 0.15  
aModels used no planning time as the baseline. 
*Significant at < .05 when |t| > 2.00 
Table 3. MLM Testing Interactions With Planning Time and Phrasal Complexity 
Fixed Effects Estimate SE t-value 
Intercept 5.01 0.22 22.60* 
Planning Timea -0.04 0.05 -0.85 
Random Effects Variance SD Correlation 
Intercept | Participant 0.30 0.54  
Planning Time | Participant 0.02 0.13 -.56 
Intercept | Task 0.11 0.33  
Residual 0.41 0.64  
aModels used no planning time as the baseline. 
*Significant at < .05 when |t| > 2.00 
Table 4. MLM Testing Interactions With Planning Time and Lexical Complexity 
Fixed Effects Estimate SE t-value 
Intercept 6.56 0.35 18.95* 
Planning Timea 0.15 0.07 2.13* 
Random Effects Variance SD Correlation 
Intercept | Participant 1.04 1.02  
Planning Time | Participant 0.09 0.30 -.26 
Intercept | Task 0.26 0.51  
Residual 0.57 0.75  
aModels used no planning time as the baseline. 
*Significant at < .05 when |t| > 2.00 
Given that the current research compared three levels of planning time, follow-up MLM analyses with pre-
task planning time as dummy-coded fixed effects were conducted in order to determine where significant 
differences occurred. Random intercepts for participant and task were included in these models, although 
the models would not converge with random slopes, leading to the selection of a simplified structure. 
Nicole Ziegler 201 
 
Findings demonstrate that three minutes of planning time resulted in significantly more lexical variation 
than one minute (b = 0.43, SE = 0.19, t = 2.30) or no planning time (estimate = 0.41, SE = 0.19 t = 2.17). 
No significant differences were found between no planning time and one minute of planning time. Overall, 
these results suggest that three minutes of planning time led to more lexically complex production, although 
there was no impact on syntactic (b = 0.00, SE = 0.01, t = 0.07, Psuedo R2 = .03) or phrasal complexity (b 
= -0.04, SE = 0.05, t = -0.85, Psuedo R2 = .09). Table 5 and Table 6 illustrate these findings. 
Table 5. MLM Testing Interactions With No Planning Time and Lexical Complexity 
Fixed Effects Estimate SE t-value 
Intercept 6.62 0.29 22.69* 
Planning Time (1 Minute)a -0.02 0.19 -0.10 
Planning Time (3 Minutes)a 0.41 0.19 2.17* 
Random Effects Variance SD Correlation 
Intercept | Participant 0.91 0.96  
Intercept | Task 0.14 0.37  
Residual 0.78 0.88  
aThe variable of planning time was dummy coded with no planning time as the baseline. 
bRandom slopes were included in this model, although due to the increasing complexity of the model, they did not 
converge. 
*Significant at < .05 when |t| > 2.00 
Table 6. MLM Testing Interactions With 1-Minute Planning Time and Lexical Complexity 
Fixed Effects Estimate SE t-value 
Intercept 6.60 0.27 24.66* 
Planning Time (1 Minute)a 0.02 0.19 0.11 
Planning Time (3 Minutes)a 0.43 0.19 2.30* 
Random Effects Variance SD Correlation 
Intercept | Participant 0.91 0.95  
Intercept | Task 0.10 0.32  
Residual 0.76 0.87  
aThe variable of planning time was dummy coded with no planning time as the baseline. 
bRandom slopes were included in this model, although due to the increasing complexity of the model, they did not 
converge. 
*Significant at < .05 when |t| > 2.00 
Accuracy 
Accuracy was assessed using measures of overall grammatical and lexical accuracy, operationalized as the 
percentage of clauses with no grammatical or lexical errors, respectively. Table 7 provides the descriptive 
statistics for all measures of accuracy.  
202 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Table 7. Descriptive Statistics for the Effects of Planning Time on Accuracy 
 No Planning  1-Minute Planning  3-Minute Planning 
Accuracy M SD  M SD  M SD 
Lexical 0.84 0.13  0.83 0.14  0.83 0.15 
Syntactic 0.56 0.17  0.58 0.15  0.58 0.15 
MLM analyses found no significant differences across planning times for grammatical (b = 0.01, SE = 0.01, 
t = 0.92, Psuedo R2 = .06) or lexical accuracy (b = -0.01, SE = 0.01, t = -0.73, Psuedo R2 = .09), suggesting 
that pre-task planning did not result in learners’ improved accuracy during production. Table 8 and Table 
9 provide information regarding these results. 
Table 8. MLM Testing Interactions With Planning Time and Grammatical Accuracy 
Fixed Effects Estimate SE t-value 
Intercept 0.56 0.02 24.27* 
Planning Timea 0.01 0.01 0.92 
Random Effects Variance SD Correlation 
Intercept | Participant 0.01 0.12  
Planning Time | Participant 0.00 0.02 -.48 
Intercept | Task 0.00 0.00  
Residual 0.01 0.12  
aModels used no planning time as the baseline. 
*Significant at < .05 when |t| > 2.00 
Table 9. MLM Testing Interactions With Planning Time and Lexical Accuracy 
Fixed Effects Estimate SE t-value 
Intercept 0.84 0.02 42.05* 
Planning Timea -0.01 0.01 -0.73 
Random Effects Variance SD Correlation 
Intercept | Participant 0.01 0.08  
Planning Time | Participant 0.00 0.02 .26 
Intercept | Task 0.00 0.02  
Residual 0.01 0.10  
aModels used no planning time as the baseline. 
*Significant at < .05 when |t| > 2.00 
Fluency 
In terms of fluency, MLM analyses indicated that there was no significant effect for pre-task planning time 
(b = 0.01, SE = 0.01, t =1.42, Psuedo R2 = .04), although trends for a positive effect of pre-task planning 
can be observed based on the t-value. Descriptive statistics for the measure of fluency are provided in Table 
10 while the results of the MLM analysis are provided in Table 11. 
Nicole Ziegler 203 
 
Table 10. Descriptive Statistics for the Effects of Planning Time on Fluency 
 No Planning  1-Minute Planning  3-Minute Planning 
Accuracy M SD  M SD  M SD 
Fluency 0.17 0.09  0.18 0.12  0.20 0.13 
Table 11. MLM Testing Interactions With Planning Time and Fluency 
Fixed Effects Estimate SE t-value 
Intercept 0.17 0.01 12.42* 
Planning Timea 0.01 0.01 1.42 
Random Effects Variance SD Correlation 
Intercept | Participant 0.00 0.04  
Planning Time | Participant 0.00 0.02 1.00 
Intercept | Task 0.00 0.00  
Residual 0.01 0.10  
aModels used no planning time as the baseline. 
*Significant at < .05 when |t| > 2.00 
Discussion 
Overall, statistical analyses indicated that there were no significant effects across different pre-task planning 
times for accuracy, fluency, or syntactic or phrasal complexity. However, three minutes of pre-task planning 
yielded greater lexical variety than one minute and no planning time, suggesting limited, but positive, 
benefits for L2 production. 
This finding may be explained in a number of ways. For example, although pre-task planning time is 
hypothesized to reduce learners’ cognitive burden by freeing up attentional resources, the current results 
suggest that learners may be attending to meaning and content more than form or other linguistic aspects, 
including subordination. In other words, if complex syntactic or phrasal forms occur during the planning 
phase, learners may rely on more simple syntactic or phrasal constructions, directing attention instead to 
the production of more lexically rich language. This finding is also partially supported by the exit surveys, 
in which 11% of learners stated they focused specifically on vocabulary and 7% of learners stated that they 
focused on meaning. However, it should be noted that 30% of learners indicated that they focused on 
grammar, suggesting a possible mismatch in learners’ perceptions of their allocation of attention and their 
subsequent performance.1 
Learners’ attention to vocabulary and meaning may also have been driven by the types of tasks used in the 
current research, as story-telling tasks are meaning-oriented by nature. VanPatten (1999) argues that lexis 
is the most meaning-oriented linguistic feature, suggesting that the task requirements may have encouraged 
learners to use their planning time to focus on meaning, via vocabulary choices, rather than form. These 
findings are similar to previous research examining pre-task planning in FTF contexts (Park, 2010), 
suggesting that task type might play a role in what learners choose to focus on during planning opportunities. 
Three minutes of pre-task planning time may also have provided learners with additional time to complete 
the conceptualization phase of production, during which learners engage in the selection and ordering of 
information to be communicated (Levelt, 1989). This preverbal message is what learners may be focused 
on in terms of processing during initial task performance (Bygate, 1996). Thus, during pre-task planning, 
learners have the opportunity to first establish familiarity with meaning and content. In the current study, 
204 Language Learning & Technology 
 
learners in the 3-minute planning condition had the longest amount of time to build message familiarity, 
therefore potentially freeing up their cognitive resources for the selection and monitoring of language 
during the task performance phase, facilitating the production of more lexically complex forms (which may 
or may not have been produced in pre-task planning). Increased lexical complexity may have been the result 
of more efficient message planning and quicker lexical access and selection (Levelt, 1989). Results from 
the exit survey seem to support this explanation, with 23% of learners stating that longer pre-task planning 
times provided them with more time to think and plan their narratives, suggesting positive benefits for pre-
task planning both in terms of L2 production and learners’ perceptions. 
In addition, the findings of Ortega (2005), in which the most frequently identified benefit of planning time 
was the opportunity to retrieve and access vocabulary, might also help to explain the increased lexical 
variation following the longest available pre-task planning. Providing learners with greater amounts of pre-
task planning time may have allowed them to more carefully consider their lexical choices, thereby 
providing opportunities for learners to take more risks with and expand their choice of vocabulary during 
task performance, supporting their L2 development. 
The lack of impact of pre-task planning time on the complexity and accuracy of features beyond the lexicon 
might also be explained by the lack of directed focus during planning time. Less than half of the learners 
(47%) in the current research indicated that they focused on grammar (N = 13), vocabulary (N = 5), or 
meaning (N = 3), suggesting that the majority of learners were not focused on form or specific target features. 
For example, as Yuan and Ellis (2003) point out, pre-task planning may not “greatly assist formulation, 
especially of grammatical morphology” (p. 7). Instead, learners’ cognitive efforts might be directed toward 
the construction of more meaning or content-based production. Furthermore, as Gilabert (2007) suggests, 
although pre-task planning can and does direct learners to attend to form, it does not focus learners on form 
in a specific way. Thus, in the current study, planning time may have been insufficient to reduce the 
cognitive load enough to facilitate deeper levels of processing in the form of improved grammatical 
complexity or accuracy. 
The lack of differences across learners’ accuracy might also be explained by Skehan’s (2007) tradeoff 
hypothesis, which suggests that because learners’ attentional capacity is limited, the directing of attention 
toward one performance area, such as accuracy, may take cognitive resources away from others. In the 
current study, learners might have struggled to use a richer range of vocabulary, leading to greater lexical 
complexity at the expense of phrasal and syntactic complexity, as well as accuracy and fluency. 
Another possible explanation for the lack of impact across conditions on learners’ performance might have 
been due to the unlimited amount of within-task planning time. Previous research has suggested that 
learners be given more time to plan both content and form during tasks when using written text-chat, as 
there is a natural delay between interlocutors’ transmission of data (Payne & Whitney, 2002; Sauro, 2012; 
Sauro & Smith, 2010). However, this additional within-task planning time may serve as a substantial 
resource in terms of linguistic production, thereby negating the effects of pre-task planning by offering 
learners opportunities to reformulate and produce text within the task as needed (Hsu, 2012). This 
explanation is supported by the exit surveys, which indicated that 14% of learners felt that pre-task planning 
was not beneficial or necessary, as they could plan during the task instead. A summary of the most common 
responses from the exit survey are provided in Table 12. 
Previous research indicates mixed findings, with some studies showing no effects for pre-task planning 
time on any aspect of learners’ production (Hsu, 2012) and others demonstrating improved accuracy and 
no impact on production complexity (Hsu, 2015). In contrast to these results, the current study did not 
reveal any improvements in accuracy. The video-enhanced chat scripts indicated that some learners were 
able to reformulate following transmissions of an utterance by copying and pasting previously sent text 
from the real-time chat script into the text box, where they then proceeded to add or delete text as necessary. 
This suggests that learners were able to evaluate and revise their text after it had been sent, demonstrating 
a unique opportunity for monitoring and reformulation that would not be available to learners outside of a 
SCMC context. Finally, no significant differences in fluency were found, providing additional evidence for 
Nicole Ziegler 205 
 
the lack of benefits of either pre-task planning in terms of rehearsal (Hsu, 2012) or strategic planning (the 
current research). 
Table 12. Percentage of Learners’ Responses According to Item and Theme 
Questionnaire Item Most Common Thematic Responses 
 
Vocabulary 
Useful or Fun to 
Chat in SCMC 
Difficult to Chat in 
SCMC 
Did you learn anything from this 
study? If so, what? 
30% 25% 11% 
 No Particular 
Feature Grammar Vocabulary or Meaning 
Did you focus on any specific 
grammatical form or vocabulary in this 
study? If so, what? 
52% 30% 18% 
 
Less Stressful 
More Stressful 
Than FTF 
More Difficult, due to 
Lack of Gesture or FTF 
What is your opinion about English 
conversation practice via text chat 
online? 
18% 14% 11% 
 Shorter Longer Same 
Did you think having shorter or longer 
times to plan your task was more 
helpful? Why? 
36% 34% 30% 
 One Minute Three Minutes No difference 
Is one amount of planning time (e.g., 1 
minute vs. 3 minutes vs. no planning 
time) more beneficial for practicing 
language conversation than the other? 
Or are they the same? 
25% 23% 23% 
Methodological Affordances of SCMC in Pre- and Within-Task Planning 
The second research question explores how the unique affordances of SCMC can contribute to our 
understanding of learners’ composition processes and subsequent production during planning and task 
completion. This section examines the ways in which the combination of text-chat and screen capture 
technologies provide valuable evidence on the processes and products of learners’ pre-task and within-task 
planning and production. 
The current study required learners to plan using chat software, thereby making planning more observable. 
Screen capture software also provided a record of learners’ activity, such as mouse movements and scrolling, 
in terms of accessing their pre-task planning during the target task. However, the majority of learners did 
not draw on their plans during task production. For the learners that did appear to access their plans, the 
corpus of screen capture data revealed some scrolling up to text produced during pre-task planning when 
composing messages, suggesting that they may have been referring to their plans in order to support their 
production. However, there was no evidence that the learners in this experiment directly utilized previously 
produced text from the pre-task planning phase. Although it was possible that learners re-read and referred 
to their pre-task production in order to facilitate during-task production, thereby drawing on their planning, 
without direct input from learners about how they used these various features, one must interpret these 
206 Language Learning & Technology 
 
findings cautiously and in terms of their potential rather than their generalizability. For instance, although 
learners may have scrolled up to previously produced text, it is not clear whether this action occurred to 
support task completion or was simply something the learners did to pass time while waiting for their 
interlocutors to compose a message. By including retrospective protocols in future research, such as 
stimulated recall protocols or interviews, we may gain a better understanding of how learners make use of 
their plans during SCMC task-based interactions. 
In addition to potentially providing important information regarding learners’ use of pre-task planning, 
using screen capture technology provides researchers with a more detailed view of how learners might 
monitor their production and test out their linguistic hypotheses during within-task planning. In Excerpt 3, 
the learner produced an utterance with multiple errors. Because we were able to follow the process and the 
sequence of how the learner monitored his production, evidence regarding the benefits of within-task 
planning time were clearly provided. 
Excerpt 3. Satoshi 
“One day, Jason, a young man, walk[ed] with him [his] dog, hachi hach hachi.” 
Sequence: 
One day, Jason, a young man, walk with him dog, hachi. 
One day, Jason, a young man, walk with him dog, hach. 
One day, Jason, a young man, walk with his dog, hachi. 
One day, Jason, a young man, walk[ed] with his dog, hachi. 
This excerpt shows how Satoshi2 revises the same sentence multiple times. He begins by revising the 
spelling of hachi and then modifying the possessive determiner, indicating his use of the message 
composition phase to focus on forms. Next, Satoshi revises the verb tense for walk, repairing his erroneous 
utterance and producing the correct form for the context, where the narrative takes place in the past. This 
sequence demonstrates the learner’s ability to identify and repair grammatical errors (Smith, 2008), leading 
to more target-like production in the final sentence that is transmitted to his interlocutor. Overall, video-
enhanced chat scripts indicate that learners produced multiple revisions, approximately 2.90 (SD = 2.66) 
times during task-based interactions, suggesting that learners were actively involved in within-task planning. 
These sequences of monitoring and self-repair also provided evidence of the multiple opportunities for 
noticing that learners were afforded in a written text-chat environment. 
In another example from within-task planning (Excerpt 4), we are able to see how a learner produced an 
utterance, but prior to transmitting it, revised the text and then added a clause before the previously 
produced text. By using screen capture technology, it was possible to clearly see not only what learners 
produced but also in what order they did so. An example from the video-enhanced chat script below 
illustrates text that was added to the beginning of the sentence following the original production. Figure 2 
and Figure 3 provide screen shots where it is possible to see the cursor mid-sentence after the inclusion of 
the additional text. 
Excerpt 4. Hyeon 
“[after few minute,] the bus came the bus stopping” 
 
Figure 2. Example of originally produced text. 
Nicole Ziegler 207 
 
 
Figure 3. Example of revision following post-production monitoring. 
Here, it is clear to see that the learner elaborated on the utterance by providing additional temporal data. 
Overall, learners elaborated on their utterances by adding post-production text 3.40 times (SD = 2.33) 
during task-based interactions, illustrating learners’ post-production monitoring and within-task planning. 
Providing further support for previous research (e.g., Lai & Zhao, 2006; Sauro, 2012; Sauro & Smith, 2010; 
Smith, 2008, 2009), the current findings demonstrate that without video-enhanced chat scripts, it would 
have only been possible to see the learner’s final transmission, thereby obscuring the information regarding 
how the utterance was produced and limiting the potential contributions of this rich environment. 
In addition to providing insight into how learners construct a transmitted utterance during within-task 
planning, the combination of written text-chat and screen capture software also provides evidence regarding 
what learners produce but do not send to their interlocutor. In other words, the use of this unique technology 
provides researchers with information regarding learners’ avoidance of target items. As avoidance is a 
particularly difficult construct to examine, given that it focuses on what learners do not produce, there is 
great potential for investigating this phenomenon using the dynamic video-recordings of written text-chat. 
For instance, in Excerpt 5, it is possible to see how the learner produced a variety of possibilities, deleted 
them, and instead chose to transmit a word that he might have felt more comfortable or confident using. 
Excerpt 5. Hyeon 
“safely or confortably well” 
 
Figure 4. Example of initial production. 
In the example from the video-enhanced chat script above, the learner first writes safely or confortably, as 
illustrated in Figure 4, then deletes the misspelled version of comfortably. Next, he reformulates the 
erroneous utterance, but continues to spell it wrong. Finally, he elects to delete both of these choices to 
instead transmit well to his interlocutor. Video-enhanced chat scripts indicated that learners avoided 
structures or vocabulary 1.48 times (SD = 1.47) during their interactions, highlighting the unique 
methodological advantages of being able to record and track not only what each learner contributes to the 
interaction, but also what learners produced but did not send during written text-chat. 
The ability to track what learners produce but do not transmit to their interlocutors also raises interesting 
questions about how less-dominant or less-interactive learners participate in communicative tasks. For 
example, learners may delete text because their interlocutors produce content that renders an in-progress 
utterance irrelevant or obsolete. Although there is no traditional overlapping speech in terms of what is 
typical of oral interaction. Due to varying degrees of typing speed or linguistic proficiency, some learners 
are able to produce target-like utterances but are not quick enough to share the message with their 
interlocutors. In other words, their interlocutors may be able to overtype them, producing utterances that 
have the result of drowning out an in-progress utterance. In reviewing the video-enhanced chat scripts, these 
instances of deletion due to overtyping occurred an average of 1.95 (SD = 1.77) times during learners’ task-
based interactions, highlighting the output that learners intended to contribute but did not in response to 
content produced by their interlocutor. 
208 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Although previous research has highlighted the potential benefits of the delay between interlocutors’ 
message transmission for planning and production purposes (Sauro & Smith, 2010), there may also be 
unintended consequences of the delay for learners that take longer to produce text than their interlocutor is 
willing to wait for a response. While the combinations of technologies provide important information 
regarding what learners produce but do not transmit, it is difficult to obtain evidence regarding what a less-
productive learner may have intended to produce, but did not, as well as why they may not have transmitted 
the information. This lack of production may be interpreted as linguistic difficulty or lack of knowledge, 
and without the use of retrospective protocols, it would be challenging to develop a deeper understanding 
of the causes underlying decreased learner production. SCMC data combined with screen capture data, on 
the other hand, provide information regarding learners’ intended production, regardless of whether they 
transmit the message to their interlocutor. 
 
Figure 5. Example of interlocutors’ simultaneously produced text. 
In the preceding example, Asami had already typed the bus was broken, but she was not as quick as her 
partner Hyeon, whose text is indicated in white in Figure 5, so she had to erase it. Even though Asami did 
not contribute her idea to the interaction, it is possible to see that she produced the utterance, demonstrating 
evidence of her linguistic ability and knowledge. In other words, using traditional methods, such as relying 
solely on written text-chats (without the video-enhanced information), we are constrained in our ability to 
observe what learners are capable of doing, rather than only what they choose to contribute to an interaction. 
Pedagogical Implications 
Results of the current research suggest that three minutes of pre-task planning time positively benefits 
learners’ lexical complexity. Previous research has shown a significant relationship between ratings of 
intermediate ESL learners’ writing skills and lexical variation (e.g., Engber, 1995), suggesting that the 
positive effects of three minutes of planning time extend beyond vocabulary development. In addition, Lu’s 
(2012) recent meta-analysis provided evidence for a strong relationship between lexical variation and the 
quality of learners’ oral task performance, with learners’ proficiency best predicted by lexical variation. 
Together with the current findings, these results suggest that instructors may wish to allow opportunities 
for the development of lexical range, a feature of production that may be enhanced by providing short 
amounts of pre-task planning time. 
Furthermore, learners’ opinions of pre-task planning, as reported in the exit surveys, indicated that 34% of 
learners felt that longer planning times were better because they provided more time to think and organize 
for the task. Exit surveys also demonstrated that learners felt that pre-task planning time benefited their 
production of English, with 41% of learners reporting that they focused specifically on grammar or 
vocabulary and meaning making as opposed to not focusing on a specific linguistic or communicative 
aspect of their production. In addition, when compared to no planning time (N = 4) or one minute of 
planning time (N = 7), more learners (N = 12) indicated that they felt three minutes of planning time was 
most beneficial. Surveys indicated that learners felt that three minutes of planning time provided time for 
them to consider their production and organize their story, suggesting that learners’ perceptions of the 
efficacy of pre-task planning time aligns with the current results. 
Nicole Ziegler 209 
 
Limitations and Future Research 
There are a number of limitations that must be acknowledged for the current study. First, although post-hoc 
power analyses revealed power of .80 or above for all statistical tests, the sample size (N = 44) was still 
relatively small. Second, because this study was exploratory in nature, learners were not provided with 
explicit instructions in how to use their pre-task planning time, which may have impacted their focus on 
form. Future research may wish to examine the role of explicit guidelines, such as those used by Ellis and 
Yuan (2004), on learners’ processes and learning outcomes by comparing pre-task planning conditions with 
and without instructions. In addition, retrospective protocols, like stimulated recalls, would provide insight 
regarding why learners performed certain actions in pre- and within-task planning, as the use of screen 
capture videos would provide researchers with a strong stimulus in which to support learners’ memory of 
their decisions and process during language learning tasks. Learners in this study were also provided with 
unlimited within-task planning time, a condition consistent across much of the research (e.g., Hsu, 2012, 
2015; Sauro & Smith, 2010). As has been suggested by previous scholars (e.g., Hsu, 2012), the use of 
unlimited within-task planning may negate any substantial effects from pre-task planning. Therefore, future 
research should consider examining whether limiting within-task planning time, such as by applying 
pressure through time limits for task completion (Ellis, 2009), might enhance the benefits of pre-task 
planning time. 
Acknowledgements 
I would first like to thank the participants who made this research possible. Warmest thanks also to Alison 
Mackey and Bryan Smith for their encouragement and support regarding this research, as well as for their 
many insightful comments and helpful suggestions. A deep and heartfelt thank you to Nick Pandža for his 
help with the analysis portion of this article. I would also like to express my gratitude to the following 
graduate students for their assistance during the transcription and coding process: Özgür Parlak, Huy Phung, 
Kristen Rock, and George Smith. Many thanks are also due to Joel Weaver, Christine Guro, and the 
instructors at the Hawaii English Language Program, without whom this project would not have been 
possible. I would also like to thank the anonymous LLT reviewers for their valuable comments. Any 
remaining errors are my own. 
Notes 
1. The majority of learners (52%) did not indicate focusing on any specific aspect of their production. 
2. All learners' names have been replaced with pseudonyms. 
References 
Anthony, L. (2014). AntConc (Version 3.4.3) [Computer software]. Tokyo, Japan: Waseda University. 
Retrieved from http://www.laurenceanthony.net/ 
Baralt, M., & Gurzynski-Weiss, L. (2011). Comparing learners’ state anxiety during task-based 
interaction in computer-mediated and face-to-face communication. Language Teaching Research, 
15(2), 201–229. 
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015). Package ‘lme4’. Retrieved from https://cran.r-
project.org/web/packages/lme4/lme4.pdf 
Bygate, M. (1996). Effects of task repetition: Appraising the developing language of learners. In J. Willis 
& D. Willis (Eds.), Challenge and change in language teaching (pp. 136–146). Oxford, UK: 
Heinemann. 
210 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Bygate, M., & Samuda, V. (2005) Integrative planning through the use of task repetition. In R. Ellis (Ed.), 
Planning and task performance in a second language (pp. 37–74). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John 
Benjamins. 
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Ellis, R. (Ed.). (2005). Planning and task performance in a second language. Amsterdam, Netherlands: 
John Benjamins. 
Ellis, R. (2009). The differential effects of three types of task planning on the fluency, complexity, and 
accuracy in L2 oral production. Applied Linguistics, 30, 474–509. 
Ellis, R., & Yuan, F. (2004). The effects of planning on fluency, complexity, and accuracy in second 
language narrative writing. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 26, 59–84. 
Engber, C. A. (1995). The relationship of lexical proficiency to the quality of ESL compositions. Journal 
of Second Language Writing, 4, 139–155. 
Foster, P., & Skehan, P. (1996). The influence of planning and task type on second language 
performance. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 18, 299–323. 
Foster, P., Tonkyn, A., & Wigglesworth, G. (2000). Measuring spoken language: A unit for all reasons. 
Applied Linguistics, 21, 354–375. 
Gelman, A., & Hill, J. (2007). Data analysis using regression and hierarchical/multilevel models. New 
York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Gilabert, R. (2007). The simultaneous manipulation of task complexity along planning time and [+/–
Here-and-Now]: Effects on L2 oral production. In M. P. Garcia Mayo (Ed.), Investigating tasks in 
formal language learning (pp. 44–68). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Hsu, H. C. (2012). Investigating the effects of planning on L2 text-chat performance. CALICO Journal, 
29, 619–638. 
Hsu, H. C. (2015). The effect of task planning on L2 performance and L2 development in text-based 
synchronous computer-mediated communication. Applied Linguistics, 38(3), 359–385. 
Kawauchi, C. (2005). The effects of strategic planning on the oral narratives of learners with low and high 
intermediate proficiency. In R. Ellis (Ed.), Planning and task performance in a second language (pp. 
143–164). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Lai, C., & Zhao, Y. (2006). Noticing and text-based chat. Language Learning & Technology, 10(3), 102–
120. 
Lai, C., Fei, F., & Roots, R. (2008). The contingency of recasts and noticing. CALICO Journal, 26, 70–
90. 
Levelt, W. J. M. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articulation. Cambridge, MA: MIT. 
Long, M. H. (2015). Second language acquisition and task-based language teaching. Oxford, UK: Wiley-
Blackwell. 
Lu, X. (2012). The relationship of lexical richness to the quality of ESL learners’ oral narratives. The 
Modern Language Journal, 96(2), 190–208. 
Mehnert, U. (1998). The effects of different lengths of time for planning on second language 
performance. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 20, 83−108. 
Ortega, L. (1999). Planning and focus on form in L2 oral performance. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 21, 109–148. 
Nicole Ziegler 211 
 
Ortega, L. (2005). What do learners plan? Learner-driven attention to form during pre-task planning. In R. 
Ellis (Ed.), Planning and task performance in a second language (pp. 77–109). Amsterdam, 
Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Park, S. (2010). The influence of pretask instructions and pretask planning on focus on form during 
Korean EFL task-based interaction. Language Teaching Research, 14, 9–26. 
Payne, J. S., & Whitney, P. J. (2002). Developing L2 oral proficiency through synchronous CMC: 
Output, working memory, and interlanguage development. CALICO Journal, 20, 7–32. 
Révész, A., Ekiert, M., & Torgersen, E. N. (2014). The effects of complexity, accuracy, and fluency on 
communicative adequacy in oral task performance. Applied Linguistics, 37(6), 828–848. 
Sauro, S. (2009). Computer-mediated corrective feedback and the development of L2 grammar. Language 
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 96–120. 
Sauro, S. (2012). L2 performance in text-chat and spoken discourse. System, 40, 335–348. 
Sauro, S., & Smith, B. (2010). Investigating L2 performance in text-chat. Applied Linguistics, 31(4), 554–
577. 
Schmidt, R. (2001). Attention. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language instruction (pp. 3–
32). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Skehan, P. (1996). A framework for the implementation of task-based instruction. Applied Linguistics, 17, 
38–62. 
Skehan, P. (2003). Focus on form, tasks, and technology. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 16, 
391–411. 
Skehan, P. (2007). Language instruction through tasks. In J. Cummins & C. Davison (Eds.), International 
handbook of English language teaching (pp. 289–301). New York, NY: Springer. 
Skehan, P., Xiaoyue, B., Qian, L., & Wang, Z. (2012). The task is not enough: Processing approaches to 
task-based performance. Language Teaching Research, 16, 170–187. 
Smith, B. (2008). Methodological hurdles in capturing CMC data: The case of the missing self–repair. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(1), 85–103. 
Smith, B. (2009). The relationship between scrolling, negotiation, and self-initiated self-repair in a SCMC 
environment. CALICO Journal, 26, 231–245. 
Tavakoli, P., & Skehan, P. (2005). Strategic planning, task structure, and performance testing. In R. Ellis 
(Ed.), Planning and task performance in a second language (pp. 239–273). Amsterdam, Netherlands: 
John Benjamins. 
VanPatten, B. (1990). Attending to form and content in the input. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 12, 287–301. 
VanPatten, B. (1999). Processing instruction as form–meaning connections: Issues in theory and research. 
In J. Lee & A. Valdman (Eds.), Form and meaning: Multiple perspectives (pp. 43–68). Boston, MA: 
Heinle and Heinle. 
Venables, W. N., & Smith, D. M. (2010). An Introduction to R. Bristol, UK: Network Theory Limited. 
Wigglesworth, G. (1997). An investigation of planning time and proficiency level on oral test discourse. 
Language Testing, 14(1), 85–106. 
Williams, J. (2005). Form-focused instruction. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Handbook of research in second 
language teaching and learning (pp. 671–691). New York, NY: Routledge. 
212 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Yuan, F., & Ellis, R. (2003). The effects of pre-task planning and on-line planning on fluency, 
complexity, and accuracy in L2 monologic oral production. Applied Linguistics, 24, 1–27. 
Appendix A. Sample Story-Telling Task 
 
Appendix B. Exit Survey 
1. Did you learn anything from this study? If so, what? 
2. Did you focus on any specific grammatical forms or vocabulary words during planning? If so, what 
did you focus on? 
3. What is your opinion about English conversation practice via text chat online? Please explain. 
4. Did you think having shorter or longer times to plan your task was more helpful? Why? 
Or 
Do you think having shorter or longer times to plan your task are about the same? Why? 
5. In your opinion, is one amount of planning time (i.e. 1 minute vs 3 minutes vs no planning time) 
more beneficial for practicing language conversation than the other? Or are they the same? Why or 
why not? 
6. Do you have any other comments about what you did? 
Thank you for your participation! 
Nicole Ziegler 213 
 
Appendix C. Screenshot of Chat Program 
 
About the Author 
Nicole Ziegler (PhD, Georgetown) is Associate Professor of Second Language Studies at University of 
Hawai‘i at Mānoa. Her research focuses on instructed SLA, including research in L2 conversational 
interaction, TBLT, and CALL. She is also interested in Maritime English, specifically the development of 
task-based materials for the commercial shipping industry. 
E-mail: nziegler@hawaii.edu 
