Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2018, Volume 22, Issue 3 
pp. 1–19 
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Robert Godwin-Jones 
 
 
Contextualized vocabulary learning  
Robert Godwin-Jones, Virginia Commonwealth University 
APA Citation: Godwin-Jones, R. (2018). Contextualized vocabulary learning. Language Learning & 
Technology, 22(3), 1–19. https://doi.org/10125/44651 
Evolving Views on Vocabulary Development 
Lexical development in a second language (L2) is increasingly understood to be complex and multi-
dimensional (Kim, Crossley, & Kyle, 2018; Pellicer-Sánchez, 2016). Knowledge of a word or expression 
may be at different levels of depth—that is, recognizing the word receptively, being able to use it 
productively, knowing its associated word family, or being able to understand and use it in non-literal 
expressions and pragmatically appropriate ways (Elgort, 2017). Vocabulary learning occurs over time and 
is dependent on learner actions and on multiple encounters with a given item. Words are “open systems” 
(Churchill, 2007, p. 354); word knowledge emerges dynamically and contingently through context and user 
interactions (Kasper & Wagner, 2018). The process involved thus invites the application of a dynamic 
systems or complexity theory (CT) perspective (Godwin-Jones, 2018a). 
Research in cognitive linguistics has led to new insights into the process of vocabulary acquisition (Bisson, 
Van Heuven, Conklin, & Tunney, 2013). Studies have shown, for example, that words have psychological 
properties—subjective characteristics such as the level of concreteness or imageability—which affect 
retention (Crossley, Kyle, & Salsbury, 2016). Such insights have been confirmed and expanded through 
eye-tracking research that looks at vocabulary comprehension in L2 reading (Pellicer-Sánchez & Siyanova-
Chanturia, 2018). At the same time, work in corpus linguistics has changed how we understand the nature 
of language and language learning (Rousse-Malpat & Verspoor, 2018). Native speaker corpora show how 
language is actually used, while learner corpora provide insights into the process of L2 development 
(Boulton & Cobb, 2017; Godwin-Jones, 2017a). 
Findings from corpus-based studies, discourse analysis, and other fields have shifted our understanding of 
language from a model based on rules to one based on patterns of usage (Ellis, 2017). One of the key 
takeaways from this usage-based view of language is the importance of formulaic language or lexical 
chunks, that is, fixed or schematic multiword units in both written and spoken modes (Elgort, 2017; Lin, 
2014). This has had a significant impact on research in L2 development, including the learning of 
vocabulary, with a growing recognition of the importance of moving beyond single words and direct first 
language (L1)–L2 equivalencies (Coxhead, 2015; Elgort, 2017). Eye-tracking technology has provided 
insights into how idioms and other formulaic expressions are accessed in L2 reading (Carrol & Conklin, 
2017). 
Another development in second language acquisition (SLA) research that has had an impact on our 
understanding of L2 development is the use of multimodal conversation analysis (CA) to examine learners 
in the wild, people using and learning language while engaged in everyday social, educational, professional 
pursuits (Eskildsen, 2018; Theódórsdóttir, 2018). Results of such studies question the reality of traditional 
dichotomies like learner and user, native speaker and novice, L2 input and output. Studies in informal 
language learning point to the affordances for L2 learning, including vocabulary development, through the 
online consumption of texts, music, and videos (Godwin-Jones, 2018a). Interactions through gaming, social 
media, or virtual worlds represent further channels for L2 vocabulary expansion. 
While vocabulary development is mostly peripheral to entertainment or socialization, there are 
2 Language Learning & Technology 
 
opportunities for explicit learning which can complement incidental learning. In fact, recent work based on 
usage-based language theories calls for a combination of inductive learning and explicit instruction (Ortega, 
2015; Tyler & Ortega, 2018). A common denominator in current views and practices concerning vocabulary 
learning is the recognition of the centrality of context, whether that be in independent reading, watching, or 
listening in the L2; interacting with other L2 users online (social media, gaming, fanfiction, etc.); accessing 
sample expression use through corpora; using L2 material supplied with glosses or other comprehension 
and learning assistance; or encountering and learning new words through everyday conversations in the 
target language. Contextualized encounters are likely to enhance the chances of retention, as words and 
expressions are used in meaningful, and therefore more memorable, ways. In this column we will look at 
different online contexts of language use that enable vocabulary expansion and enrichment. 
Extensive Reading 
We learn our L1 through exposure to the language around us. That occurs in sufficient quantity so that we 
learn words and expressions with little conscious effort (Nation, 2007; Sternberg, 1987). Usage-based views 
on language posit that we learn a L2 in the same way, through rich input, with what we are exposed to most 
frequently being learned most quickly and thoroughly (Tyler & Ortega, 2016). One of the key factors in 
incidental vocabulary learning is frequency of exposure. Multiple encounters are needed to establish a 
lasting connection between form and meaning. Studies of incidental vocabulary learning have varied in the 
number of encounters necessary from 6 (Rott, 1999) to 8 (Horst, 2005) or 10 (Webb, 2007). Waring and 
Takaki (2003) reported that 20 or more encounters might be necessary. Caution is needed in generalizing, 
as a good number of factors other than frequency may affect retention (Kim et al., 2018). Words vary in 
characteristics affecting learning (Garner & Crossley, 2018). Concrete and familiar terms (e.g., house), for 
example, are more easily retained than abstract nouns (e.g., justice). The medium may be a factor, as words 
spoken may have particular salience depending on context and mode of speech (Behney, Spinner, & Gass, 
2017). Salience is likely to be conceptual but could be grammatical as well, in that particular word 
combinations or schema may be memorable (Crossley et al., 2016). If in written form, illustrations in the 
text may play a role (Stanley, 2015; Webb & Chang, 2015). Individual differences among learners are of 
course important as well, including age, background knowledge, and proficiency levels, as well as 
motivation and cognitive abilities (Hu & Nassaji, 2016; Kim et al., 2018; Kramsch, 2002). Of course, 
computer-assisted language learning (CALL) has from its earliest days looked to constructed salience, or 
enhancing the prominence of targeted items (Behney et al., 2017), to promote noticing (Schmidt, 1990) and 
potential uptake in L2 instructional materials (see Otto, 2017). 
Language learning in formal instructional settings does not typically supply the repeated exposure to words 
and expressions for inductive, incidental learning (Lin, 2014). Indeed, the emphasis in most teaching 
contexts will be on memorization and on learning through elicited output (i.e., using lexical items in writing 
and speaking). Repeated exposure to introduced lexis is limited, often due to curricular considerations, 
namely the need to move on to the next unit and to a new set of vocabulary. This varies of course with the 
instructional model and the level of instruction. Ideally, one hopes that students will gain sufficient interest 
in the target language so that they will look for opportunities outside of class for L2 use and development, 
potentially leading to greater L2 vocabulary expansion. Classroom teachers will normally alert students to 
such possibilities. Today, those opportunities will overwhelmingly be online (Godwin-Jones, 2018a). The 
availability of authentic language materials in all languages and modes (e.g., text, audio, and video) enables 
learners to find L2 content which fits their needs and interests. Recent studies have shown how online 
resources can contribute to L2 learning, including incidental vocabulary learning (Cole & Vanderplank, 
2016; Sundqvist & Sylvén, 2016). 
The learning experienced through frequent watching of videos, from gaming in the L2, or by way of other 
recreational or social activities, is incidental to the purpose of engaging in those online activities (Sockett, 
2014). Online reading can occur under similar conditions, although the purpose may well be information 
retrieval or reading for professional reasons. However, many online readers may be engaging in that activity 
Robert Godwin-Jones 3 
 
for pleasure, through reading stories, novels, or nonfiction. This is quite different from how L2 texts are 
used in basic language instruction, namely treated as vehicles for examining language and culture. In the 
language classroom, that process will normally translate into close readings that analyze structural and 
lexical properties. Reading online, if not connected with course assignments, is likely to be a quite different 
experience from intensive reading, with the emphasis solely on reading for meaning. Vocabulary 
knowledge may be expanded, but that will be an incidental by-product. This is the theory behind the concept 
of extensive reading, which has been used and studied for some time in both formal and informal language 
learning (Peters, Heynen, & Puimege, 2016; Waring, & McLean, 2015). Other terms have been used for 
this method, including pleasure reading, sustained silent reading, or free reading (Chen, Chen, Chen, & 
Wey, 2013). The idea is that L2 learners engage in a high volume of reading, normally outside class, with 
materials of their own choosing and at a level of difficulty that allows for easy understanding and a 
pleasurable reading experience. Learners are encouraged to read whole books, rather than excerpts. 
Extensive reading has been championed by Krashen (1989) as evidence for his input hypothesis, namely 
that this activity supplies comprehensible input as a condition for L2 acquisition. 
There has recently been a significant rise in interest in extensive reading for language learning. Dao’s (2014) 
meta-analysis of research in this area points to studies that show improvement in a range of L2 areas 
including vocabulary competence and reading comprehension and speed. Allan (2009) points out that not 
only does extensive reading develop reading skills, but it also “consolidates previously learned grammar 
and vocabulary” (p. 63). Studies have shown that the pleasure and sense of accomplishment in reading L2 
books independently can be highly motivating (Arnold, 2009; de Burgh-Hirabe & Feryok, 2013; Ro, 2013). 
That includes the possibility of engaging or re-engaging demotivated students (Day & Robb, 2015). The 
rich supply of digital texts online has given a new vitality to extensive reading (Pino-Silva, 2006; Sun, 
2003), especially through the availability of e-books on mobile devices (Dao, 2014; Godwin-Jones, 2010). 
Instructional L2 units have developed programs that take advantage of the vast variety of texts online to 
ensure learner choice (Mercado, 2015) and have created online challenges and reader rankings to encourage 
more reading (Day & Robb, 2015; for an online implementation, see mReader). 
While the emphasis in extensive reading is traditionally on learners reading independently without 
assistance or monitoring, there is also the possibility of connecting the experience to explicit language 
learning, described by Pellicer-Sánchez (2016) as “semi-incidental acquisition” (p. 25). Several recent 
studies have looked at enhancing the learning potential of extensive reading through the use of data-driven 
learning (DDL) using corpora. Allan (2009) created a small corpus from graded readers and used DDL-
based training and exercises to help students acquire lexical chunks. Hadley and Charles (2017) had 
students directly access a corpus compiled from the Oxford Bookworms graded readers. After a half hour 
of silent reading, the Japanese EFL students in the experimental group used printed DDL materials to find 
and categorize patterns in the lexical items. While Hadley and Charles experienced considerable resistance 
from the students in the experimental group (likely because this was an extra, time-consuming task), other 
studies have shown more positive results in supplementing inductive learning with explicit instruction (e.g., 
Khezrlou, Ellis, & Sadeghi, 2017; Lee, Warschauer, & Lee, 2017; Pellicer-Sánchez, 2016). One approach 
is to integrate other media into the reading process. Webb and Chang (2015) added audio recordings to 
students’ extensive reading in graded readers and found higher vocabulary gains than with the control group 
using a conventional textbook. Brown, Waring, and Donkaewbua (2008) used a similar approach, also with 
positive results. Chun (2011) has pointed out that, in fact, CALL supplies multiple opportunities for 
optimizing extensive reading for vocabulary learning and the development of reading ability. 
Discovering and Working With Online Texts 
One strategy to ensure frequency of encounters in incidental vocabulary learning is to help students find 
texts which include repeated occurrences of target items. This can be achieved in different ways. Texts can 
be chosen which already fit that requirement. Alternatively, texts can be arranged or modified to fit needs. 
Digital texts offer the opportunity to statistically determine lexical suitability, modify texts as needed, or 
4 Language Learning & Technology 
 
enhance the texts (Pellicer-Sánchez, 2016). Ghadirian (2002) developed a program (TextLadder) to arrange 
a set of texts from Voice of America news broadcasts so that target items would be encountered at least five 
times. Brown and Eskenazi (2004) used a software program called Readers Practice (REAP) to enable 
students or teachers to find texts on the web that satisfy particular lexical requirements. There are online 
tools that analyze texts for L2 readers, based on vocabulary range or sophistication and text complexity, as 
recently discussed by Pilán, Vajjala, and Volodina (2016) and Xia, Kochmar, and Briscoe (2016). Online 
services are available for analyzing texts for readability in English (Text Readability), in German 
(Lesbarkeitsindex), and in Chinese (Sung, Lin, Dyson, Chang, & Chen, 2015). Chinkina and Meurers (2016) 
developed a web-based corpus query system designed to allow teachers to find linguistically appropriate 
texts. Recommendation systems have been developed, such as that described by Nikiforovs and Bledaite 
(2012) for vocabulary development. That system relies on learner profiles to provide sequential 
recommendations designed to combine likely known vocabulary with a subset of new expressions (see 
further discussion in Godwin-Jones, 2017c). 
My VLS-Reader (Hsu & Ou Yang, 2013) features a variety of ways readers can enhance their opportunities 
for vocabulary learning in an online environment. Those include supplying preliminary word lists, review 
reminders, and sub-windows showing contextual meanings of selected items. The Mywordtools system 
similarly supplies learners with a variety of tools to explore word meanings (Lan, 2013). Students in an 
experimental group using the tool were also encouraged to share their learning experiences with others. 
That group outperformed both those who did not use Mywordtools and those who used the platform but 
without sharing. Liu (2016) found that having students share the concept maps created for targeted 
vocabulary items also enhanced learning. Of course, helping students understand written texts and learning 
vocabulary has long been done in CALL through a variety of add-on text enhancement and input enrichment 
methods (Marefat & Hassanzadeh, 2016). For texts, the principal method has been glossing. Multiple 
studies have shown that glossing items aids vocabulary development (Boers, Warren, He, & Deconinck, 
2017; Chun, 2011; Khezrlou et al., 2017). Results have varied depending on factors such as student learning 
levels and type of gloss (e.g., L1 translation, L2 explanations, graphics, audio, video, or a combination 
thereof). A recent study (Khezrlou et al., 2017) used multimedia glossing and found that groups explicitly 
instructed to use the glosses performed better in terms of both reading comprehension and vocabulary 
development. The highest performing group, however, were those who were given a list of targeted items 
with L1 translations before reading and told to study the list. Similar positive results in using multimedia 
glosses were reported by Rouhi and Mohebbi (2013). 
A “multi-componential approach” to illuminating the meaning of vocabulary items in texts (Pellicer-
Sánchez, 2016, p. 99) is in line with the redundancy principle that elaboration helps retention (Hu & Nassaji, 
2016; Khezrlou et al., 2017). Too much elaboration, however, may be distracting or cause a cognitive 
overload (see the discussions in Lan, 2013; Lan, Fang, Legault, & Li, 2015). That may be particularly an 
issue with lower-level learners (Peters et al., 2016). Boers et al. (2017) recommend the use of L1 translations 
for novice learners, rather than graphical or other media glosses. Ideally, glossing implementations could 
be adaptive and flexible, providing options to users in terms of nature and extent of glossing information, 
ranging from L1 equivalents to multiple, corpus-retrieved examples (Chun, 2011). 
DDL approaches can be helpful in supplying corpus-derived assistance in both the reading process and in 
explicit vocabulary study. Daskalovska (2015) found direct corpus consultation by students worked well 
for simple collocations but not as well for more complex constructions. Lee et al. (2017) added to their 
digital readings glosses which linked targeted items to three sample sentences taken from a corpus, 
highlighting the use of each item in a key word in context format. A second experiential group viewed the 
concordance lines, but also was shown a dictionary definition. It was the second group that performed best 
on vocabulary post-tests. Using a definition apparently helped users to confirm assumptions or correct 
wrong inferences (see Godwin-Jones, 2001). Corpora can be particularly useful in helping to learn multi-
word constructions, in which grammar and lexis are inseparable (Ellis, 2017). Shin and Kim (2017) 
explored teaching the use of particles in English through a learner corpus as a consciousness-raising 
exercise. Article use in English is notoriously difficult to learn, as rules take the learner only so far. The 
Robert Godwin-Jones 5 
 
positive results were shown to be tied to students working with articles in the context of lexical bundles, 
and viewing them as illustrations of usage patterns, rather than rules. Vyatkina (2016) used corporal 
consultation to help students learn verb-preposition combinations in German. Such “complex lexico-
grammatical constructions” (p. 211) are better learned in context as connected chunks of language. This 
corresponds to usage-based views that “a language user has available to him or her a large number of semi-
preconstructed phrases that constitute single choices, even though they might appear to be analyzable into 
segments” (Sinclair, 1991, p. 100). 
Part of the rationale for using corpora for learning constructions such as collocations is to emphasize to 
learners the importance of phraseology, i.e., the central role played by fixed expressions in language use 
(Li, 2017). DDL can also be helpful in understanding that genres of written or spoken discourse use and 
recycle particular constructions (see Ackerley, 2017). While this may be something of which students 
become aware themselves by browsing and analyzing patterns, there may be a need for explicit instruction. 
Such is likely the case for lower-level students (Shin & Kim, 2017). It may also be needed for low-salience 
features of lexical chunks such as case endings, which do not affect meaning (Vyatkina, 2016). Philip (2010) 
points out that for today’s students, the ability to query corpus-based resources to obtain information or 
confirmation on the fly (the author labels this hit-and-run DDL) corresponds to “learners’ demands for 
faster, better, cheaper, and personalized responses to their language queries” (p. 14). The vignettes of 
individual student language learning included in each chapter of the book on language learning beyond the 
classroom by Nunan and Richards (2015) illustrate the validity of this view of student preference for seeking 
immediate solutions (online or in-person) to L2 learning needs. 
Extensive Viewing 
A decade ago, Webb (2009) discussed the benefits available in English as a second language settings to 
watch English language television programs, whereas in English as a foreign language (EFL) contexts, 
“learners would have little opportunity to watch L2 programs” (p. 336). As recently as five years ago, 
Vanderplank (2016; a published account of a 2013 plenary talk) concluded that “TV has still not developed 
as a global resource for language learning and teaching” (p. 240). How times have changed! English 
language television programs are now widely available online, through streaming services such as YouTube 
or Netflix. Many videos are available for downloading as MP4 files, although often with questionable 
legality. This is true not only for English language videos, but also for other languages as well. This 
represents a bonanza for incidental L2 vocabulary learning enabled by several developments including (a) 
the wide availability of film and television subtitles and captions, (b) the possibility of watching an entire 
series of a TV program online, and (c) the fact that corpora of scripts and subtitles have become available. 
Studies have shown that captions (designed for the hearing impaired, in the original production language) 
and subtitles (in the viewer’s L1) can enhance listening comprehension and aid in vocabulary development 
(Perez, Van Den Noortgate, & Desmet, 2013; Peters et al., 2016; Vanderplank, 2016). The national TV 
networks in many countries dub movies or TV shows into the local language (for a discussion, see Sockett, 
2014). However, online versions (or DVDs) are often available with optional captions and subtitles. It is 
especially helpful for language learning if subtitles can be turned off and on (Peters et al., 2016; Sockett, 
2014). This allows learners to watch the same videos repeatedly, using titles or captions as scaffolding until 
they are able to view and understand without assistance. Vanderplank (1988) describes this process of 
watching and reading as providing instant feedback to learners. If subtitles are not embedded or available 
in the source used, many can be freely downloaded from online sites (Hanf, 2015). 
One of the advantages of TV programs compared to feature films is their shorter length, making them more 
versatile for use in language learning, both in the classroom and at home. Additionally, many TV series, 
especially comedies and dramas, are episodic, with the same group of characters experiencing similar 
situations from week to week. This is an ideal set-up for learning from a usage-based perspective, since the 
spoken language tends to be continually recycled as the characters experience different, but analogous, 
storylines in each episode. For that reason, Webb and Chang (2015) advocate that learners use a narrow 
6 Language Learning & Technology 
 
viewing approach, watching all episodes of a series from the beginning. This can have a motivating effect, 
as learners becoming interested in following the further twists and turns undergone by characters they have 
gotten to know. 
Finally, researchers have studied the language used in TV shows and found that it corresponds in particular 
genres (especially comedies and dramas) to everyday language, at least for English language TV. Lin (2014) 
compared the language as collected in the iTV corpus, consisting of the subtitles of readily accessible TV 
programs on the British Broadcasting Corporation’s web-based video streaming facility, with that from the 
spoken component of the British National Corpus (BNC). His study, as well those of others (e.g., Rodgers 
& Webb, 2011; Webb, 2010, 2011), show that the language on TV corresponds to that of everyday speech. 
Webb and Chang (2015) looked in particular at the use of formulaic language and found that in that area as 
well, the language used on TV corresponded to recorded speech in the BNC. Sockett and Kuysk (2015) 
created a corpus of scripts from popular US television series and identified frequently recurring 4-grams in 
the corpus, set patterns of four consecutive words. They tested French students learning English who were 
regular viewers of the videos and found that they had greater knowledge of the 4-gram constructions 
identified as most frequent than did a control group not having watched the videos. Ortega (2015) points 
out that learner exposure to formulaic expressions through multimedia can contribute to idiomaticity, with 
the likelihood that L2 learners will use encountered constructions in pragmatically appropriate ways. 
In many EFL regions, written material often dominates the curriculum at the expense of spoken materials 
(Webb & Chang, 2015). The multimodal character of TV can offer a welcome supplement. Actors on TV 
provide examples of effective spoken communication that can supply potential models for combining words, 
paralanguage, and body language to express meaning. It is also the case that the native-level prosody of 
actors, such as the intonation used in formulaic expressions, can be very helpful for learners (Lin, 2012). 
On the other hand, depending on their proficiency level, learners may be initially overwhelmed by the 
language used in popular target-language TV programs, which tends to be highly colloquial and spoken at 
normal speed. Students already have experience watching TV in their own culture and L1 and are likely to 
expect initially to understand just as completely in the L2, using the same medium (Vanderplank, 2016). 
This is an area where explicit instruction in the classroom could be helpful, even though the extensive 
viewing would occur outside of the class. Classroom training might include playing and analyzing sample 
target-language TV and discussing viewing strategies (see Webb & Chang, 2015). 
Vocabulary Development From the Perspective of Complexity Theory 
CT, or complex dynamic systems theory, is being seen as a useful approach in understanding vocabulary 
development, one that compliments usage-based views on language (Churchill, 2007; Zhao & MacWhinney, 
2018). CT stresses the importance of initial conditions on potential outcomes. Emerging results are not 
necessarily commensurate with effort, as effectiveness in learning is shaped by different learner 
characteristics that come together in a variety of combinations to determine outcomes (Godwin-Jones, 
2018a). This is true for vocabulary development, since word knowledge, as Kramsch (2002) points out, is 
provisional, always subject to further expansion. Our initial understanding may be quite limited. As Philip 
(2010) shows, learners might initially have a simplistic knowledge based on equivalency with L1 lexis, and 
only through repeated exposures over time (as well as possibly through explicit instruction) can they 
broaden their understanding of an item to its use in collocations or idiomatic expressions. Elman (2011) 
points to the fact that stages of vocabulary knowledge are in fact often non-native in their nature before 
arriving at pragmatically appropriate levels. In CT, attractor states describe stages of stability in intersecting 
systems, as is this case when a learner reaches a plateau that only shifts under changes in subsystems (i.e., 
through reading, encounters in different contexts, corrective feedback, etc.). The incremental nature of 
vocabulary development—particularly the understanding of lexical chunks—points to the importance of 
studying development over time, a key aspect of CT (Zhao & MacWhinney, 2018). This provides insight 
into emergent outcomes affected by changing factors in learning trajectories (Lowie, 2013). Longitudinal 
studies are especially helpful in understanding the dynamics at work in combinations of inductive and 
Robert Godwin-Jones 7 
 
explicit processes. Using CT, Zheng (2016) provides a model for this kind of research, looking at the 
development of lexical sophistication and the frequency in the use of formulaic language of Chinese 
learners of English over a 1-year period. 
Depending on the learning environment, another factor, especially in L2 contexts, is environmental 
conditions. Churchill (2007) provides a fascinating case study of demonstrating the evolution in the 
knowledge of one expression in one learner (the author himself) as the lexical item (a Japanese expression 
related to drawing blood) was encountered in a variety of ways over time. Those included overhearing 
conversations of doctors with nurses, reading the word on a medical chart, hearing a variant used on a 
Japanese television news broadcast, reading it in a newspaper, and having medical personnel tell him about 
a procedure he was to undergo. The study describes well the gradual and non-linear path of learning, 
featuring zigzags and an unpredictable process. As the author goes from understanding the single word 
meaning to comprehending its use in phrases, his knowledge undergoes a “progressive coordination of 
relationships between forms (meaning, collocations, derivatives, etc.) and between ecology and forms, for 
and by the learner” (p. 343). Hauser’s (2017) study using CA of one Japanese learner acquiring knowledge 
of one English word (near) shows that learning is particularly likely if the item to be learned is immediately 
useful to the learner. 
The gradual and individualized nature of vocabulary learning is evident in another auto-ethnographic study 
that chronicles the author’s experience of Learning Spanish by using it (Stanley, 2015). She discussed the 
circular or cyclical path often evident in gaining a depth of understanding of individual words and 
expressions. She describes hearing particular words repeated in casual conversation, which, because heard 
often, she would look up at home, if the precise meaning was not clear from the context. Later, she would 
try out using the word herself in conversation. In the process, she describes the traditional distinction in 
SLA between input and output as blurry: 
When I sat in the market with my book, I was learning a few words from the page (input) but I was 
also speaking to people (output), and sometimes those people were explaining new words (input) 
or I was trying to make meaning without the right words (output) and they would help me fill the 
gaps (input). The two processes are blended. (p. 246) 
This echoes the call from Crossley et al. (2016) for a more nuanced distinction between input and output. 
It also reflects Eskildsen’s (2018) characterization of continuing to make that distinction in SLA as 
“obscurantism” (p. 59), as, from a usage-based perspective, “use and acquisition are essentially inseparable” 
(Eskildsen & Majlesi 2018, p. 3). 
Stanley (2015) describes learning lexicogrammar as detective work. Learning chunks of language involves 
listening and discovering, as in her growing understanding of the negative imperative in Spanish: 
As people spoke to me in Lima I would replay their words in my head, making sense of things and 
sometimes trying them out for myself. A street seller went off to find small change and told me to 
stay (no se vaya) until he returned. I pondered this new construction, not learning its grammatical 
label until years later. I had never noticed it before, and had certainly never used it. To learn 
language by speaking it, one must become a language detective: a sleuth, an interrogator of words. 
I saw the same construction used in the title of a Jaime Bayly book, No se lo digas a nadie, on sale 
on every street corner that year. Both phrases are commands: Don’t go! Don’t tell anyone. I tried 
using this structure in all commands, and sometimes it worked and sometimes it caused looks of 
slight puzzlement. This was the negative feedback I needed to tell me that something wasn’t quite 
right. So I restricted its use to phrases in which I knew it worked: ¡no me lo digas! ¡no te vayas! 
Ah, these all start with no, maybe it is not all commands, only the negative ones? I tried that and it 
worked better. (p. 247) 
This passage illustrates L2 development over time, largely through a trial and error process. The detective 
role the author describes corresponds to how language learning is viewed from usage-based and complexity 
theories. L2 users pick up bits and pieces from encountered language usage and use them as cues and clues 
8 Language Learning & Technology 
 
for their own formulations, gradually enhancing their depth of knowledge. The environment around the 
user—through encounters with objects (e.g., the title of a popular novel) and people (e.g., the street vendor’s 
remark, puzzled looks)—plays a major contributing role. The passage also documents the natural 
convergence of form, meaning, and syntax in the learning process. 
In addition, the preceding passage by Stanley (2015) demonstrates the advantage of the learner’s awareness 
of strategies for language development. Recent studies have shown that learner effectiveness in incidental 
learning can be enhanced through appropriate learning strategies. That might involve maintaining a 
vocabulary notebook or online journal, as described by Walters (2015). Classroom instruction in strategy 
development can be effective, as discussed by Hsiao, Lan, Kao, and Li (2017). Alternatively, suggestions 
might come from social media, connecting with other learners through online communities of interest. Lin 
and Siyanova-Chanturia (2014) describe how a participant from Hong Kong improves her approach to 
English language learning through peer interactions on Twitter and Facebook. This type of communication 
can occur through the use of social or collaborative reading tools such as eComma (Blyth, 2014) or 
HyLighter (Thoms & Poole, 2017). A student using eComma in a Chinese language course commented, 
that “ just highlighting a single word and asking what it means is something you could ask a dictionary, but 
something like this [i.e., eComma], or something like ‘how does, why does this work in this sentence’ is 
something you can really only ask of a group” (Thoms, Sung, & Poole, 2017, p. 45). Yeh, Hung, and Chiang 
(2017) describe the process of peer sharing annotations on text features (through GoogleDocs) as 
“reciprocal teaching” (p. 35). The usefulness of social and collaborative dynamics in vocabulary 
development reflects sociocultural and ecological approaches to SLA, which emphasize consideration of 
the social environment in which L2 development occurs (e.g., Kramsch, 2003; Lantolf & Thorne, 2006; 
van Lier, 2004). 
Embodied Learning 
Stanley (2015) describes how she learned the Spanish equivalent for slippery, namely from a companion 
with whom she was climbing rocks, who warned her that they might be resbalosas. The real-life setting—
and the heightened emotional state through the potential danger—likely ensured that the word was 
internalized. An interesting account of the importance of the embodied learning of vocabulary is described 
in Svennevig (2018), based on the experience of one individual at work. A migrant worker in Norway used 
largely physical actions in the work environment to discover needed Norwegian expressions. Those 
included pointing gestures, the manipulation of objects, and the extensive use of deictic verbal expressions 
(e.g., that one over there) to engage with coworkers to discover collaboratively the needed expression. 
Eskildsen and Wagner (2015) use multimodal CA to analyze how the use of two propositions (under, across) 
are learned by a group in a classroom setting. This study shows that even in instructed settings, 
lexicogrammatical learning is not a simple process, but involves getting acquainted with lexical items “in 
a range of different relevant situations” (p. 289): 
Carlos went from displaying understanding through embodiment and translation into the L1, to 
using it when the term had been provided already, to ultimately using it spontaneously. However, 
even in the spontaneous uses, he kept employing the same or similar gesture as he did when first 
encountering the word in class which shows the fundamentally embodied nature of language. (pp. 
290–291) 
The authors assert that vocabulary learning reflects Vygotskian internalization and Bakhtinian 
appropriation processes that “L2 vocabulary learning appears to be a very slow, gradual, and embodied 
process of learning to control semiotic resources in situated settings” (p. 292). 
There is, in fact, a growing recognition of the importance of physical actions and environmental factors in 
language learning (Ortega, 2017). Reported experiments with usage-based approaches to language learning 
in Vietnam and the Netherlands found that illuminating learning materials—movie clips or narrated 
stories—through the use of gestures, eye gaze, and body language enhanced learning (Rousse-Malpat & 
Robert Godwin-Jones 9 
 
Verspoor, 2018). Comparisons with the control group, which experienced a traditional explicit and rule-
based approach, found that the experimental treatment yielded better retention and proficiency development. 
A similar study in Sri Lanka, using the enhanced movie clip approach in an online environment showed 
even stronger learning benefits (Rousse-Malpat & Verspoor, 2018). This would seem to provide a good 
rationale for further exploration of vocabulary development in virtual and immersive environments. 
There are studies that have explored vocabulary learning in virtual environments such as Second Life. Lan 
et al. (2015) found that for English speakers learning Chinese, the manipulation of and zooming in on 3-D 
objects in Second Life while hearing the corresponding Chinese expressions aided vocabulary retention. 
The authors conclude that the “virtual ‘whole body’ interaction with the environment through these avatar-
based social immersions may provide a rich learning experience comparable to, if not better than, that 
provided by the real natural learning environment” (p. 673). Studies of language learning through virtual 
gaming environments have also shown that the potential for language learning is aided by the embodied 
presence of the learner in the virtual environment. Newgarden and Zheng (2016) point to the empowering 
agency of avatars in World of Warcraft to “gesture, emote, speak, and move about an expansive virtual 
space” (p. 276). Studies of online gaming have shown the richness of language use in those environments 
as well, as players are “exposed to huge amounts of text” (Scholz & Schulze, 2017, p. 108). Other studies 
have shown how gameplay in the L2 can enhance vocabulary learning (Jensen, 2017; Shintaku, 2016; 
Sylvén & Sundqvist, 2012). Gains come through gameplay (the necessity of understanding names of game 
objects, descriptions, instructions, and feedback from other players or non-playing entities) and 
participation in associated activities such as fan sites. The process of embodied connections to learning in 
gaming or in other immersive environments may lead to the emotional investment of the learner in the 
virtual environment, creating hospitable conditions for lexical retention. 
Another approach that involves physical movement is to develop learner lexicons through manipulation of 
space and objects. This was in fact a major feature of Gattegno’s (1963) silent way of language instruction, 
which relied heavily on the use of colored rods. More recently, augmented reality (AR) has offered new 
approaches to language learning through encounters with objects triggering information retrieval, such as 
an identifying label, translation, or multimedia gloss (see Godwin-Jones, 2016a). AR can be used to supply 
cultural as well as linguistic information when using an app such as wikitude to identify landmarks, 
buildings, or businesses and providing relevant data. AR could enhance projects that explore linguistic 
landscapes, that is, culture and language learning through encounters with language as used in urban 
settings (e.g., ads, billboards, signs, menus, etc.). A recent study on linguistic landscapes concludes that 
“vocabulary learning turned out to be the most important advantage of using linguistic landscapes in foreign 
language learning” (Wilton & Ludwig, 2018, p. 87). Using mobile devices in projects involving learners 
exploring L2 cultural sites provides not only opportunities for the use of AR, but also the possibility of 
students using cameras and mobile journals to record and share experiences related to language learning 
(see Godwin-Jones, 2016b). That might include maintaining a vocabulary log with the possibility of 
gradually adding to the depth of understanding of lexis through noting idiomatic and collocational uses. 
Lessons From Vocabulary Learning in the Wild 
Compared to classroom instruction, language learning in the wild can be “hugely complex and 
unpredictable” (Theódórsdóttir, 2018, p. 36). Having L2 learners record encounters that are then transcribed 
and studied using CA has demonstrated the validity of that view. Interestingly, this type of research has 
shown that the most frequent learning activity in informal settings is word searches. The examples studied 
give evidence through CA of the largely collaborative process of resolving word searches in encounters 
between learners and proficient speakers (Eskildsen, 2018; Eskildsen & Majlesi, 2018). In the process, 
participants’ identities are co-constructed, blurring the distinction between novice and expert. Such research 
has the potential to inform both online language exchanges and classroom interactions. Given the intense 
current interest in telecollaboration for language learning, recordings and analyses of interactions such as 
word searches in online partner exchanges would be welcome. They would be especially valuable if they 
10 Language Learning & Technology 
 
included video recordings, so as to capture nonverbal actions. It would be instructive to compare the 
dynamics with those characterized by the works of Theódórsdóttir and Eskildsen (2011), Theódórsdóttir 
(2018), and others, to see how the medium of audio, video, or text exchanges affect the unfolding of word 
searches and other language processes such as corrective feedback. It may well be that the assigned roles 
in collaborative exchanges (i.e., native speaker and L2 learner) tend to render conversations more formal 
and predictable. Theódórsdóttir (2018) shows how the physical environment, the up-close give-and-take, 
and the body language of face-to-face participants may lead to a degree of personal and emotional 
investment that aids retention of new lexis. The dynamics online may lack the same degree of immediacy 
and emotional closeness. 
Studies using CA also reveal another socially grounded aspect of lexis, namely the extent to which 
vocabulary selection reflects the phenomenon of priming, understood in this context to refer to the 
“recycling of a given construction offered by the interlocutor in the conversation and reused with different 
lexical items by the learner” (Ortega, 2015, p. 359). Such common reformulations, as well as the frequent 
presence of adjacency pairs as conversation framing, point to a principal tenet of usage-based linguistics, 
that language is both fixed and flexible at the same time (Crossley et al., 2016; Kramsch, 2002). CA-based 
analyses bring into view the central role played by local and social contexts in lexical choice, showing that 
language and language learning are situated in contextualized social interactions (Tyler & Ortega, 2018). 
Insights from studies in informal language learning and socially-framed lexical development can inform 
classroom instruction as well (Eskildsen & Majlesi, 2018). Garner and Crossley (2018) found that the use 
of multiword units was greater in conversations between follow learners than between learners and native 
speakers. They tied this to findings that L2 speakers use more words in conversation with peers, leading to 
more comprehensible input from interlocutors, freeing up cognitive resources to use more advanced 
language features including n-grams (multiword units), possibly also resulting in greater emotional comfort 
and ease. That, in turn, may lead to a sense of freedom to experiment with novel expressions or to try out a 
word in different combinations. Here again, knowing more about the interactions of emotions and social 
contexts with language learning generally and with the learning and use of vocabulary specifically 
(especially lexical chunks) would be helpful. That could help find ways to maximize learning in setting up 
dyads and suggesting approaches to conducting conversations. Tanaka’s (2017) study of vocabulary 
motivation is helpful in that regard. It found that motivated peers had little impact on others, but that in a 
group setting, demotivated peers had a decidedly negative impact. 
Tanaka (2017) traced the demotivation in her instance to the predominate pedagogy of EFL instruction in 
Japan which she describes as emphasizing rote memorization. For many students, that method does not 
prove to be effective, resulting in a negative perception of their abilities and amotivation. According to 
Tanaka, students are unaware of other strategies for learning vocabulary. This, to my mind, points to a dual 
problem, namely using an inefficient and outmoded methodology and not helping students to become 
informed language learners. There is a case to be made for dedicated vocabulary learning in particular 
contexts, for example, because of time constraints or due to a short-term need for a particular lexicon (see 
Elgort, 2011; Nation, 2007). Yet, it seems to me, that even if this kind of explicit learning is emphasized in 
class, language teachers today have the responsibility to point to the availability and advantages of online 
services or apps for language learning (Godwin-Jones, 2015). Apps such as Anki offer sophisticated spaced 
repetition algorithms, stack synchronization across devices, rich mnemonic and multimedia integration, and 
optional gaming and competition features (see Nakata, 2011; Godwin-Jones, 2017a). Such services provide 
meaningful elaboration (Rousse-Malpat & Verspoor, 2018) or rich learning (Hu & Nassaji, 2016), as they 
offer multiple ways to encounter and practice lexical items. A recent study (Chukharev-Hudilainen & 
Klepikova, 2016) highlights the advantages of such programs and discusses limitations, including the 
absence of options for production of items in context and not taking into account word frequency in learning 
recommendations. I would add to that list the fact that item use in collocation or other fixed multiword 
expressions is not emphasized. In fact, the absence of contextualizing features is often a problematic aspect 
of dedicated vocabulary learning tools or services. 
Robert Godwin-Jones 11 
 
Conclusion and Outlook 
There is evidence that learners are making significant use of lexical tools on mobile devices (Ma, 2017). In 
addition, there are many options to explore incidental learning through the availability of video streaming 
apps, podcasts, audiobooks, newscasts, fan sites, social media, and so forth, all available on mobile devices 
(Godwin-Jones, 2017c). Ma’s (2017) recent case study of Hong Kong students’ use of mobiles for learning 
English points to the rich collaborative and sharing activities in which students engage with their phones. 
Those actions on mobile devices included recommending new apps and strategies for language learning as 
well as suggesting specific English language videos. Several students reported using their phones to 
collaborate on English language projects. Clearly, mobile devices offer an idea vehicle for bridging the gap 
between school and life (Godwin-Jones, 2018b). 
Given the widespread use of mobile devices for language learning (incidental and dedicated), Ma (2017) 
calls for app and software developers to create integrated apps that cater to typical learner needs and habits. 
The apps therefore need to be flexible and adaptive, so as to be useful to learners at different levels and 
with different backgrounds and needs (Chun, 2011). Specifically, Ma (2017) calls for tools that “make use 
of vast online language data, incorporate lexical concordances, and offer means for self-regulating language 
learning” (p. 18). Ideally, such a comprehensive app would allow for the incorporation of data from 
appropriate apps (assuming available open APIs). That might include preferences for online reading (or 
even automatic text queuing) as well as syncing with lexical tools. For logistical reasons and privacy 
concerns, incorporating informal learning experiences is difficult, at least automatically (see Godwin-Jones, 
2017b). However, at a minimum, there should be an option to add data manually as well as to include a 
learning journal. Studies have shown that keeping a reflective journal has positive impacts on meta-
cognitive awareness, self-regulation, and learner autonomy (Walters, 2015). 
An example of a software approach that moves in the direction of integration and adaptability is the eCALL 
system (MacWhinney, 2015). It traces a variety of learner data including error and usage patterns. Tracking 
learner functions across different functions allows the system to provide suggestions, “For example, we 
may find that learners of Chinese spend 15 minutes with the Pinyin Tutor module and then shift to working 
with subtitled video for 45 minutes. We can track such patterns across days, and use these data to guide 
further construction of the system” (p. 28). The eCALL system experimentally supports informal language 
learning “using the computer as a backdrop for the promotion of actual interactions in the community” (p. 
40). The author gives examples of learners of Icelandic recording interactions in Reykjavík over several 
months (Eskildsen & Theódórsdóttir, 2015); the interactions are then transcribed and loaded into a corpus. 
One could well envision such a system also accessible as a mobile app, with the option of speech recognition 
instantly providing preliminary transcripts of conversations. Such a system would be both adaptive and 
personal and could serve learners with a variety of learning needs and preferences who live and learn in 
many different contexts. 
One of the strongest arguments in favor of an integrated approach to vocabulary learning is that the 
approach enables and encourages contextual learning. Elgort’s (2017) review article about research on 
technology-mediated vocabulary learning points to the need for vocabulary research that examines fluency 
development (i.e., effective ways to link skills activities to learned vocabulary). This is needed so that 
learned constructions can be internalized and automatization of use can be enabled (see Kim et al., 2018). 
While that is something language teachers try to do in the classroom (mostly through elicited output), 
suggesting that students seek out online sources and resources is likely to increase substantially 
opportunities for practice and learning. Opportunities may come through participation in online social 
interactions in the L2, through individual reflective writing, or through teacher- and learner-created or 
commercial tools and exercises. Chukharev-Hudilainen and Klepikova (2016) describe a web-based 
program that generates contextual practice exercises which aim to deepen student’s knowledge of targeted 
lexis online. 
In most L2 learning contexts today, vocabulary learning is likely to be contextualized through both online 
12 Language Learning & Technology 
 
exposure and explicit instruction. The likelihood is that most learning will happen implicitly, but with “fine-
tuning” through dedicated vocabulary learning “with the aid of top-down, conscious processing” (Tyler & 
Ortega, 2018, p. 318). That conscious processing by the learner ideally will be accompanied by an 
awareness of both learning strategies and online tools and services. Several studies have pointed out that 
for the current generation of learners, informed and personal choice in learning approaches is expected 
(Mercado, 2015; Philip, 2010). As language educators, we should encourage students to find ways to 
incorporate language learning into their everyday lives, using “an adaptive pedagogy that would situate 
language and culture as lived practice as a central organizing principle of foreign language study” (Dubreil 
& Thorne, 2017, p. 6). That includes connecting learning experiences in the classroom to those outside, 
both online and face-to-face (Kasper & Wagner, 2018). 
References 
Ackerley, K. (2017). Effects of corpus-based instruction on phraseology in learner English. Language 
Learning & Technology, 21(3), 195–216. 
Allan, R. (2009). Can a graded reader corpus provide ‘authentic’ input? ELT Journal, 63(1), 23–32. 
Arnold, N. (2009). Online extensive reading for advanced foreign language learners: An evaluation study. 
Foreign Language Annals, 42(2), 340–366. 
Behney, J., Spinner, P., & Gass, S. M. (2017). Salience in second language acquisition and related fields. 
In S. M. Gass, P. Spinner, & J. Behney (Eds.), Salience in second language acquisition (pp. 1–18). 
London, UK: Routledge. 
Bisson, M. J., Van Heuven, W. J., Conklin, K., & Tunney, R. J. (2013). Incidental acquisition of foreign 
language vocabulary through brief multi-modal exposure. PLoS One, 8(4), 1–7. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0060912 
Blyth, C. (2014). Exploring the affordances of digital social reading for L2 literacy: The case of eComma. 
In J. Guikema & L. Williams (Eds.), Digital literacies in foreign and second language education (pp. 
201–226). San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Boers, F., Warren, P., He, L., & Deconinck, J. (2017). Does adding pictures to glosses enhance 
vocabulary uptake from reading? System, 66, 113–129. 
Boulton, A., & Cobb, T. (2017). Corpus use in language learning: A meta-analysis. Language Learning, 
67(2), 348–393. 
Brown, J., & Eskenazi, M. (2004). Retrieval of authentic documents for reader-specific lexical practice. 
In Proceedings of InSTIL/ICALL Symposium 2004. Retrieved from 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.68.6223 
Brown, R., Waring, R., & Donkaewbua, S. (2008). Incidental vocabulary acquisition from reading, 
reading-while-listening, and listening to stories. Reading in a Foreign Language, 20, 136–163. 
Carrol, G., & Conklin, K. (2015). Cross language priming extends to formulaic units: Evidence from eye 
tracking suggests that this idea “has legs.” Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 20(2), 299–317. 
Chen, C. N., Chen, S. C., Chen, S. H. E., & Wey, S. C. (2013). The effects of extensive reading via e-
books on tertiary level EFL students’ reading attitude, reading comprehension, and vocabulary. 
Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, 12(2), 303–312. 
Robert Godwin-Jones 13 
 
Chinkina, M., & Meurers, D. (2016). Linguistically aware information retrieval: Providing input 
enrichment for second language learners. In Proceedings of the 11th workshop on innovative use of 
NLP for building educational applications (pp. 188–198). San Diego, CA: Association for 
Computational Linguistics. Retrieved from http://m–mitchell.com/NAACL-
2016/BEA/pdf/BEA1121.pdf 
Chukharev-Hudilainen, E., & Klepikova, T. A. (2016). The effectiveness of computer-based spaced 
repetition in foreign language vocabulary instruction: A double-blind study. CALICO Journal, 33(3), 
334–354. 
Chun, D. M. (2011). CALL technologies for L2 reading post Web 2.0. In L. Ducate & N. Arnold (Eds.), 
Present and future promises of CALL: From theory and research to new directions in language 
teaching (pp. 131–170). San Marcos, Texas: CALICO. 
Churchill, E. (2007). A dynamic systems account of learning a word: From ecology to form relations. 
Applied Linguistics, 29(3), 339–358. 
Cole, J., & Vanderplank, R. (2016). Comparing autonomous and class-based learners in Brazil: Evidence 
for the present-day advantages of informal, out-of-class learning. System, 61, 31–42. 
Coxhead, A. (2015). Vocabulary research and pedagogy: Introduction to the special issue. Language 
Teaching Research, 19(6), 641–644. 
Crossley, S., Kyle, K., & Salsbury, T. (2016). A usage‐based investigation of L2 lexical acquisition: 
The role of input and output. The Modern Language Journal, 100(3), 702–715. 
Dao, T. N. (2014). Using internet resources for extensive reading in an EFL context. Hawaii Pacific 
University TESOL Working Papers, 12, 72–95. 
Daskalovska, N. (2015). Corpus-based versus traditional learning of collocations. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 28(2), 130–144. 
Day, R., & Robb, T. (2015). Extensive reading. In D. Nunan & J. Richards (Eds.), Language learning 
beyond the classroom (pp. 19–28). London, UK: Routledge. 
de Burgh-Hirabe, R., & Feryok, A. (2013). A model of motivation for extensive reading in Japanese as a 
foreign language. Reading in a Foreign Language, 25(1), 72–93. 
Dubreil, S., & Thorne, S. L. (2017). Social pedagogies and entwining language with the world. In S. 
Dubreil & S. L. Thorne (Eds.), Engaging the world: Social pedagogies and language learning (pp. 1–
11). Boston, MA: Cengage. 
Elgort, I. (2011). Deliberate learning and vocabulary acquisition in a second language. Language 
Learning, 61(2), 367–413. 
Elgort, I. (2017). Technology-mediated second language vocabulary development: A review of trends in 
research methodology. CALICO Journal, 35(1), 1–29. 
Ellis, N. C. (2017). Cognition, corpora, and computing: Triangulating research in usage‐based language 
learning. Language Learning, 67(S1), 40–65. 
Elman, J. L. (2011). Lexical knowledge without a lexicon? The Mental Lexicon, 6(1), 1–33. 
Eskildsen, S. W. (2018). ‘We’re learning a lot of new words’: Encountering new L2 vocabulary outside of 
class. The Modern Language Journal, 102, 46–63. 
Eskildsen, S. W., & Majlesi, A. R. (2018). Learnables and teachables in second language talk: Advancing 
a social reconceptualization of central SLA tenets. Introduction to the special issue. The Modern 
Language Journal, 102, 3–10. 
14 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Eskildsen, S. W., & Theódórsdóttir, G. (2015). Constructing L2 learning spaces: Ways to achieve 
learning inside and outside the classroom. Applied Linguistics, 38(2), 143–164. 
Eskildsen, S. W., & Wagner, J. (2015). Embodied L2 construction learning. Language Learning, 65(2), 
268–297. 
Garner, J., & Crossley, S. (2018). A latent curve model approach to studying L2 n-gram development. 
The Modern Language Journal, 102(3), 494–511. 
Gattegno, C. (1963). Teaching foreign languages in school, The silent way. New York, NY: Educational 
Solutions. 
Ghadirian, S. (2002). Providing controlled exposure to target vocabulary through the screening and 
arranging of texts. Language Learning & Technology, 6(1), 147–164. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2001). Tools and trends in corpora use for teaching and learning. Language Learning 
& Technology, 5(3), 7–12. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2010). Literacies and technologies revisited. Language Learning & Technology, 14(3), 
2–9. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2015). The evolving roles of language teachers: Trained coders, local researchers, 
global citizens. Language Learning & Technology, 19(1), 10–22. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2016a). Augmented reality and language learning: From annotated vocabulary to 
place-based mobile games. Language Learning & Technology, 20(3), 9–19. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2016b). Integrating technology into study abroad. Language Learning & Technology, 
20(1), 1–20. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2017a). Data-informed language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 21(3), 
9–27. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2017b). Scaling up and zooming in: Big data and personalization in language learning. 
Language Learning & Technology, 21(1), 4–15. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2017c). Smartphones and language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 
21(2), 3–17. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2018a). Chasing the butterfly effect: Informal language learning online as a complex 
system. Language Learning & Technology, 22(2), 8–27. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2018b). Using mobile devices in the language classroom. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Hadley, G., & Charles, M. (2017). Enhancing extensive reading with data-driven learning. Language 
Learning & Technology, 21(3), 131–152. 
Hanf, A. (2015). Resourcing authentic language from television series. In D. Nunan & J. Richards (Eds.), 
Language learning beyond the classroom (pp. 138–148). London, UK: Routledge. 
Hauser, E. (2017). Learning and the immediate use (fulness) of a new vocabulary item. The Modern 
Language Journal, 101(4), 712–728. 
Horst, M. (2005). Learning L2 vocabulary through extensive reading: A measurement study. The 
Canadian Modern Language Review, 61, 355–382. 
Hsiao, I. Y., Lan, Y. J., Kao, C. L., & Li, P. (2017). Visualization analytics for second language 
vocabulary learning in virtual worlds. Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 20(2), 161–175. 
Hsu, C., & Ou Yang, F.-C. (2013). A vocabulary learning tool for L2 undergraduates reading science and 
technology textbooks. International Journal of Science Education, 35(7), 1110–1138. 
Robert Godwin-Jones 15 
 
Hu, H. C. M., & Nassaji, H. (2016). Effective vocabulary learning tasks: Involvement load hypothesis 
versus technique feature analysis. System, 56, 28–39. 
Jensen, S. H. (2017). Gaming as an English language learning resource among young children in 
Denmark. CALICO Journal, 34(1), 1–19. 
Kasper, G., & Wagner, J. (2018). Epistemological reorientations and L2 interactional settings: A 
postscript to the special issue. The Modern Language Journal, 102, 82–90. 
Khezrlou, S., Ellis, R., & Sadeghi, K. (2017). Effects of computer-assisted glosses on EFL learners’ 
vocabulary acquisition and reading comprehension in three learning conditions. System, 65, 104–116. 
Kim, M., Crossley, S. A., & Kyle, K. (2018). Lexical sophistication as a multidimensional phenomenon: 
Relations to second language lexical proficiency, development, and writing quality. The Modern 
Language Journal, 102(1), 120–141. 
Kramsch, C. (2002). Introduction: How can we tell the dancer from the dance? In C. Kramsch (Ed.), 
Language acquisition and language socialization: Ecological perspectives (pp. 1–30). London, UK: 
Continuum. 
Kramsch, C. (2003). Language acquisition and language socialization: Ecological perspectives. New 
York, NY: Bloomsbury. 
Krashen, S. (1989). We acquire vocabulary and spelling by reading: Additional evidence for the input 
hypothesis. The Modern Language Journal, 73(4), 440–464. 
Lan, Y. J. (2013). The effect of technology-supported co-sharing on L2 vocabulary strategy development. 
Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 16(4), 1–16. 
Lan, Y. J., Fang, S. Y., Legault, J., & Li, P. (2015). Second language acquisition of Mandarin Chinese 
vocabulary: Context of learning effects. Educational Technology Research and Development, 63(5), 
671–690. 
Lantolf, J. P., & Thorne, S. L. (2006). Sociocultural theory and the genesis of second language 
development. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Lee, H., Warschauer, M., & Lee, J. H. (2017). The effects of concordance-based electronic glosses on L2 
vocabulary learning. Language Learning & Technology, 21(2), 32–51. 
Li, S. (2017). Using corpora to develop learners’ collocational competence. Language Learning & 
Technology, 21(3), 153–171. 
Lin, P. M. (2012). Sound evidence: The missing piece of the jigsaw in formulaic language research. 
Applied Linguistics, 33(3), 342–347. 
Lin, P. M. (2014). Investigating the validity of internet television as a resource for acquiring L2 formulaic 
sequences. System, 42, 164–176. 
Lin, P. M., & Siyanova-Chanturia, A. (2014). Internet television for L2 vocabulary learning. In D. Nunan 
& J. Richards (Eds.), Language learning beyond the classroom (pp. 149–158). London, UK: 
Routledge. 
Liu, P. L. (2016). Mobile English vocabulary learning based on concept-mapping strategy. Language 
Learning & Technology, 20(1), 128–140. 
Lowie, W. (2013). Dynamic systems theory approaches to second language acquisition. In C. Chapelle 
(Ed.), The encyclopedia of applied linguistics (pp. 1806–1813). Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
Ma, Q. (2017). A multi-case study of university students’ language-learning experience mediated by 
mobile technologies: A socio-cultural perspective. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 30(3–4), 
183–203. 
16 Language Learning & Technology 
 
MacWhinney, B. (2015). Multidimensional SLA. In T. Cadierno & S. W. Eskildsen (Eds.), Usage-based 
perspectives on second language learning (pp. 19–48). Amsterdam, Netherlands: Walter de Gruyter. 
Marefat, F., & Hassanzadeh, M. (2016). Applying form-focused approaches to L2 vocabulary instruction 
through podcasts. Language Learning & Technology, 20(3), 107–127. 
Mercado, L. A. (2015). Integrating classroom learning and autonomous learning. In D. Nunan & J. 
Richards (Eds.), Language learning beyond the classroom (pp. 190-201). London, UK: Routledge. 
Nakata, T. (2011). Computer-assisted second language vocabulary learning in a paired- associate 
paradigm: A critical investigation of flashcard software. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 
24(1), 17–38. 
Nation, I. S. P. (2007). The four strands. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 1, 1–12. 
Newgarden, K., & Zheng, D. (2016). Recurrent languaging activities in World of Warcraft: Skilled 
linguistic action meets the Common European Framework of Reference. ReCALL, 28(3), 274–304. 
Nikiforovs, P., & Bledaite, L. (2012), Personalized sequential language vocabulary learning 
recommender system. Retrieved from https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/d901/ 
b5dcf47db028f1e56b60b931b72d8767cb6a.pdf 
Nunan, D., & Richards, J. (2015). Language learning beyond the classroom. London, UK: Routledge. 
Ortega, L. (2015). Usage-based SLA: A research habitus whose time has come. In T. Cadierno & S. W. 
Eskildsen (Eds.), Usage-based perspectives on second language learning (pp. 353–373). Amsterdam, 
Netherlands: Walter de Gruyter. 
Ortega, L. (2017). New CALL–SLA research interfaces for the 21st century: Towards equitable 
multilingualism. CALICO Journal, 34(3), 285–316. 
Otto, S. E. (2017). From past to present: A hundred years of technology for L2 learning. In C. Chapelle & 
S. Sauro (Eds.), The handbook of technology and second language teaching and learning (pp. 10–
25). New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons. 
Pellicer-Sánchez, A. (2016). Incidental L2 vocabulary acquisition from and while reading: An eye-
tracking study. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 38(1), 97–130. 
Pellicer-Sánchez, A., & Siyanova-Chanturia, A. (2018). Eye movements in vocabulary research. ITL-
International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 169(1), 5–29. 
Perez, M. M., Van Den Noortgate, W., & Desmet, P. (2013). Captioned video for L2 listening and 
vocabulary learning: A meta-analysis. System, 41(3), 720–739. 
Peters, E., Heynen, E., & Puimege, E. (2016). Learning vocabulary through audiovisual input: The 
differential effect of L1 subtitles and captions. System, 63, 134–148. 
Philip, G. I. L. L. (2010). Classroom concordancing in the 21st century: The new generation. Language 
Forum, 36(1–2), 15–33. 
Pilán, I., Vajjala, S., & Volodina, E. (2016). A readable read: Automatic assessment of language learning 
materials based on linguistic complexity. International Journal of Computational Linguistics and 
Applications, 7(1), 143–159. Retrieved from http://www.ijcla.bahripublications.com/2016-1/IJCLA-
2016-1-pp-143-159-preprint.pdf 
Pino-Silva, J. (2006). Extensive reading through the internet: Is it worth the while? The Reading Matrix, 
6(1), 85–96. 
Ro, E. (2013). A case study of extensive reading with an unmotivated L2 reader. Reading in a Foreign 
Language, 25(2), 213–233. 
Robert Godwin-Jones 17 
 
Rodgers, M. P. H., & Webb, S. (2011). Narrow viewing: The vocabulary in related television programs. 
TESOL Quarterly, 45(4), 689–717. 
Rott, S. (1999). The effect of exposure frequency on intermediate language learners’ incidental 
vocabulary acquisition through reading. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 21, 589–619. 
Rouhi, A., & Mohebbi, H. (2013). Glosses, spatial intelligence, and L2 vocabulary learning in multimedia 
context. 3L: Language, Linguistics, Literature, 19(2), 75–87. 
Rousse-Malpat, A., & Verspoor, M. (2018). Foreign language instruction from a dynamic usage-based 
(DUB) perspective. In A. E. Tyler, L. Ortega, M. Uno, & H. I. Park (Eds.), Usage-inspired L2 
instruction: Researched pedagogy (pp. 55–73). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Schmidt, R. W. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 
11(2), 129–158. 
Scholz, K., & Schulze, M. (2017). Digital-gaming trajectories and second language development. 
Language Learning & Technology, 21(1), 99–119. 
Shin, Y. K., & Kim, Y. (2017). Using lexical bundles to teach articles to L2 English learners of different 
proficiencies. System, 69, 79–91. 
Shintaku, K. (2016). The interplay of game design and pedagogical mediation in game-mediated Japanese 
learning. International Journal of Computer-Assisted Language Learning and Teaching, 6(4), 36–55. 
Sinclair, J. M. (1991). Corpus, concordance, collocation. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Sockett, G. (2014). The online informal learning of English. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Sockett, G., & Kusyk, M. (2015). Online informal learning of English: Frequency effects in the uptake of 
chunks of language from participation in web-based activities. In T. Cadierno & S. W. Eskildsen 
(Eds.), Usage-based perspectives on second language learning (pp. 153–177). Amsterdam, 
Netherlands: Walter de Gruyter. 
Stanley, P. (2015). Talking to strangers: Learning Spanish by using it. In D. Nunan & J. Richards (Eds.), 
Language learning beyond the classroom (pp. 244–252). London, UK: Routledge. 
Sternberg, R. J. (1987). Most vocabulary is learned from context. In M. McKeown & M. Curtis, The 
nature of vocabulary acquisition (pp. 89–106). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Sun, Y.-C. (2003). Extensive reading online: An overview and evaluation. Journal of Computer Assisted 
Learning, 19, 438–446. 
Sundqvist, P., & Sylvén, L. K. (2016). Extramural English in teaching and learning. London, UK: 
Palgrave Macmillan.  
Sung, Y. T., Lin, W. C., Dyson, S. B., Chang, K. E., & Chen, Y. C. (2015). Leveling L2 texts through 
readability: Combining multilevel linguistic features with the CEFR. The Modern Language Journal, 
99(2), 371–391. 
Svennevig, J. (2018). “What’s it called in Norwegian?” Acquiring L2 vocabulary items in the workplace. 
Journal of Pragmatics, 126, 68–77. 
Sylvén, L. K., & Sundqvist, P. (2012). Gaming as extramural English L2 learning and L2 proficiency 
among young learners. ReCALL, 24(3), 302–321. 
Tanaka, M. (2017). Examining EFL vocabulary learning motivation in a demotivating learning 
environment. System, 65, 130–138. 
Theódórsdóttir, G. (2018). L2 teaching in the wild: A closer look at correction and explanation practices 
in everyday L2 interaction. The Modern Language Journal, 102, 30–45. 
18 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Theódórsdóttir, G., & Eskildsen, S. W. (2011). The use of English in everyday Icelandic as a second 
language: Establishing intersubjectivity and doing learning. Nordand, 6, 59–85. 
Thoms, J., & Poole, F. (2017). Investigating linguistic, literary, and social affordances of L2 collaborative 
reading. Language Learning & Technology, 21(2), 139–156. 
Thoms, J., Sung, K. Y., & Poole, F. (2017). Investigating the linguistic and pedagogical affordances of an 
L2 open reading environment via eComma: An exploratory study in a Chinese language course. 
System, 69, 38–53. 
Tyler, A. E., & Ortega, L. (2016). Usage-based approaches to language and language learning: An 
introduction to the special issue. Language and Cognition, 8(3), 335–345. 
Tyler, A. E., & Ortega, L. (2018). Usage-inspired L2 instruction: An emergent, researched pedagogy. In 
A. E. Tyler, L. Ortega, M. Uno, & H. I. Park (Eds.), Usage-inspired L2 instruction: Researched 
pedagogy (pp. 3–26). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
van Lier, L. (2004). The semiotics and ecology of language learning. Utbildning & Demokrati, 13(3), 79–
103. 
Vanderplank, R. (1988). The value of teletext subtitles in language learning. ELT Journal, 42(4), 272–
281. 
Vanderplank, R. (2016). ‘Effects of’ and ‘effects with’ captions: How exactly does watching a TV 
programme with same-language subtitles make a difference to language learners? Language 
Teaching, 49(2), 235–250. 
Vyatkina, N. (2016). Data-driven learning for beginners: The case of German verb–preposition 
collocations. ReCALL, 28(2), 207–226. 
Walters, J. (2015). Carrying vocabulary learning outside the classroom. In D. Nunan & J. Richards (Eds.), 
Language learning beyond the classroom (pp. 39–48). London, UK: Routledge. 
Waring, R., & McLean, S. (2015). Exploration of the core and variable dimensions of extensive reading 
research and pedagogy. Reading in a Foreign Language, 27(1), 160–167. 
Waring, R., & Takaki, M. (2003). At what rate do learners learn and retain new vocabulary from reading 
a graded reader. Reading in a Foreign Language, 15(2), 130–163. 
Webb, S. (2007). The effects of repetition on vocabulary knowledge. Applied Linguistics, 28, 46–65. 
Webb, S. (2009). The effects of pre-learning vocabulary on reading comprehension and writing. The 
Canadian Modern Language Review, 65, 441–470. 
Webb, S. (2010). A corpus driven study of the potential for vocabulary learning through watching 
movies. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 15(4), 497–519. 
Webb, S. (2011). Selecting television programs for language learning: Investigating the television 
programs from the same genre. International Journal of English Studies, 11(1), 117–135. 
Webb, S., & Chang, A. C. (2015). Second language vocabulary learning through extensive reading with 
audio support: How do frequency and distribution of occurrence affect learning? Language Teaching 
Research, 19(6), 667–686. 
Wilton, A., & Ludwig, C. (2017). Multilingual linguistic landscapes as a site for developing learner 
autonomy. In G. Murray & T. Lamb (Eds.), Space, place, and autonomy in language learning (pp. 
76–93). London, UK: Routledge. 
Robert Godwin-Jones 19 
 
Xia, M., Kochmar, E., & Briscoe, T. (2016). Text readability assessment for second language learners. In 
Proceedings of the 11th workshop on innovative use of NLP for building educational applications, 
(pp. 12–22). San Diego, CA: Association for Computational Linguistics. Retrieved from 
http://www.anthology.aclweb.org/W/W16/W16-0502.pdf 
Yeh, H. C., Hung, H. T., & Chiang, Y. H. (2017). The use of online annotations in reading instruction and 
its impact on students’ reading progress and processes. ReCALL, 29(1), 22–38. 
Zhao, H., & MacWhinney, B. (2018). The instructed learning of form–function mappings in the English 
article system. The Modern Language Journal, 102(1), 99–119. 
Zheng, Y. (2016). The complex, dynamic development of L2 lexical use: A longitudinal study on Chinese 
learners of English. System, 56, 40–53. 
