Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2018, Volume 22, Issue 1 
pp. 16–26 
LANGUAGE TEACHING AND TECHNOLOGY FORUM  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Jia Yang, Chengxu Yin, & Wei Wang 
 
 
Flipping the classroom in teaching 
Chinese as a foreign language 
Jia Yang, University of Dayton 
Chengxu Yin, University of Notre Dame 
Wei Wang, University of Notre Dame 
Abstract 
Through an in-depth analysis of quantitative and qualitative data, this article offers a case study of the 
advantages and challenges in the application of the flipped learning approach in the instruction of 
Chinese as a foreign language at the beginning level. Data were collected from two first-year Chinese 
classes (one in traditional and the other in flipped format) to investigate whether there were statistically 
significant differences in learning outcomes and students’ levels of satisfaction between the two classes. 
Final exam and oral test scores showed that students in the flipped class performed better in speaking, 
since more time was devoted to meaningful interactions in class. As indicated in the results of the end-of-
the-semester questionnaire, these students also gave higher average ratings on three aspects of their 
learning experience: level of required self-directedness, amount of practice in class, and stimulation of 
interest in the subject. 
Keywords: Blended Learning and Teaching, Instructional Design, Less Commonly Taught Languages 
Language(s) Learned in this Study: Chinese 
APA Citation: Yang, J., Yin, C. X., & Wang, W. (2018). Flipping the classroom in teaching Chinese as a 
foreign language. Language Learning & Technology, 22(1), 16–26. https://dx.doi.org/10125/44575 
Introduction 
Flipped learning is defined as follows: 
a pedagogical approach in which direct instruction moves from the group learning space to the 
individual learning space, and the resulting group space is transformed into a dynamic, interactive 
learning environment where the educator guides students as they apply concepts and engage 
creatively in the subject matter.” (Flipped Learning Network, 2014, p. 1). 
The repurposing of class time enables students to “inquire about lecture content, test their skills in 
applying knowledge, and interact with one another in hands-on activities” (EDUCAUSE, 2012, p. 1). 
With promising potentials, flipped learning has gained rapid momentum in higher education in recent 
years. A large portion of research that uses surveys with Likert scale and free text responses has shown 
increased student satisfaction with the flipped learning approach (e.g., Butts, 2014; Critz & Wright, 2013; 
Davies, Dean, & Ball, 2013; Mason, Schuman, & Cook, 2013; Prober & Khan, 2013; Yeung & O’Malley, 
2014). The flipped approach has also brought about an increase of academic performances as indicated by 
improved examination results, overall improved post-test scores, or higher course grades compared to 
classes in previous semesters (Ferreri & O’Connor, 2013; Mason et al., 2013; Missildine et al., 2013; 
Pierce & Fox, 2012). An increase of class attendance was observed in previous research (McLaughlin et 
al., 2013) as well. McLaughlin et al. (2013) also reported that preference for the flipped classroom format 
increased from 41 students (27.3%) to 126 students (84.6%) after the students had engaged in the flipped 
approach for one semester. Feedback from student course evaluations identified opportunities for 
Jia Yang, Chengxu Yin, and Wei Wang 17 
 
developing communicative skills, preferences for teamwork, and an increase in active learning in the 
flipped approach (Ferreri & O’Connor, 2013; Strayer, 2012). However, the same studies also found that 
students have some negative views on the flipped learning approach, despite their improved grades. For 
example, Ferreri & O’ Connor (2013) found that course evaluations of the flipped approach included 
more negative comments related to the grading of assessments and the amount of pre-reading assignments. 
Strayer (2012) found that students experienced a higher level of unpredictability and unsettled feelings 
when adjusting themselves to the learning tasks in the flipped approach and had difficulties making in-
class connections with the online learning component. Furthermore, in a survey investigating college 
students’ readiness of flipped learning approach, only 39% of the 84 participants agreed that the flipped 
learning approach met their learning needs (Hao, 2016). Thus far, research on students’ satisfaction with 
the flipped learning approach has been inconclusive. 
Research has begun to emerge on the application of flipped learning in the field of foreign language 
instruction. A report on such application for English as a foreign language students’ learning of English 
idioms indicated that it enhanced students’ motivation and ability to use English idioms more actively 
(Chen-Hsieh, Wu, & Marek, 2016). An investigation (Hung, 2015) of the possible impacts of flipped 
learning on English language learners’ academic achievements, attitudes toward the learning experiences, 
and efforts devoted to the course indicated that the flipped approach enabled students to (a) achieve better 
learning outcomes as measured by three end-of-lesson assessments, (b) develop better attitudes toward 
learning based on the results of a learning experience questionnaire, and (c) engage themselves more in 
the learning as measured by the lesson study logs that tracked students out-of-class study time and effort. 
However, this study only reported that students from the flipped class received higher overall grades in 
the lesson assessments than the students from the non-flipped class did, without further discussion of 
which specific language skills (e.g., listening, speaking, reading, and writing) could be better developed 
through the use of the flipped approach. 
Research on flipped learning has not been limited to L2 English courses. Watanabe (2014) examined 163 
university students’ experiences of viewing pre-learning video clips online in an intermediate-level 
Japanese language course in Australia. Records of students’ video access were analyzed to gauge their 
engagement with the video clips. Each pre-learning video clip was created with Microsoft PowerPoint 
with a voice-over in Japanese to explain the key grammar structures. Online quizzes accompanied each 
video clip, though students were not required to finish them. Watanabe reported that only 10% of the 
subjects regularly viewed the video before the class, and only those who found the contents of the video 
clips useful became dedicated viewers who watched the entire video clip. He then suggested that 
classroom activities should effectively integrate with the content presented in the video clips to encourage 
previewing. 
So far, few formal data have emerged to show the effect of flipped learning on certain student populations, 
such as beginning learners of a foreign language other than English. In light of students’ mixed 
perceptions of flipped learning, there is a need for stronger evidence in evaluating the effects of flipped 
learning on the improvement of each of the four language skill areas (speaking, listening, reading, and 
writing). Efforts should also be made to explore the effective methods for evaluating flipped learning and 
ways to increase students’ engagement with the video clips outside of class (Haladyna, Downing, & 
Rodriguez, 2002; Watanabe, 2014). Through a case study with in-depth analysis of quantitative and 
qualitative data, this article aims to explore the advantages and challenges of applying the principles of 
flipped learning in the instruction of Chinese as a foreign language at the college level. The case that 
serves as the object of our study is the flipped first-year Chinese class at a Midwest university in the 
United States, first taught in the 2015–2016 academic year. 
Course Design and Implementation 
Our design philosophy had two theoretical foundations: Bloom’s revised taxonomy of cognitive process 
(Krathwohl, 2002) and Vygotsky’s (1978/2005) socio-cultural theory. The former is a framework created 
18 Language Learning & Technology 
 
by Bloom, Englehart, Furst, Hill, and Krathwohl (1956) for classifying statements of what students are 
expected to learn after receiving the instruction and has been often used for designing educational training 
and learning processes. A revised taxonomy is proposed by Anderson and Krathwohl (2001) to reflect a 
more active form of thinking. It suggests that any learning objectives of a unit or course can be analyzed 
in two dimensions: knowledge and cognitive process. The knowledge dimension includes four types of 
knowledge that learners may be expected to acquire or develop: (a) factual knowledge, such as knowledge 
of specific elements and details or knowledge of terminology; (b) conceptual knowledge, such as 
knowledge of principles and generalization, classifications and categories, theories, models, and 
structures; (c) procedural knowledge , for example, knowledge of subject-specific skills and criteria for 
determining when and how to use appropriate procedures; and (d) metacognitive knowledge, such as 
knowledge of strategies. The cognitive process dimension reflects thinking skills with different levels of 
cognitive complexity, such as remembering, understanding, applying, analyzing, evaluating, and creating. 
As pointed by Vygotsky’s (1978/2005) socio-cultural theory, learning is just as much a social process as a 
cognitive process. A social environment for learning provides the expert access and cultural tools needed 
to help students arrive at the highest level of proficiency at the right time. Therefore, social learning 
activities are more effective in instructing higher-level cognitive processes, such as analyzing, creating, 
and evaluating, while lower-level cognitive processes can be taught through self-paced learning. Previous 
empirical studies showed that some types of knowledge, such as the knowledge of basic facts and 
foundational information, can be learned best through exposure and repetition (Geary, 2007, 2008). 
Accordingly, most factual knowledge and conceptual knowledge can be learned via self-paced e-learning, 
which provides the opportunities of multi-mode exposure and self-paced repetition. 
Our conceptual framework for analyzing the learning content is indicated in Table 1. The shaded area was 
delivered via self-paced e-learning, while the transparent area was mainly instructed through social 
learning activities in a face-to-face classroom. Specifically, online learning sessions were designed for 
students to understand and remember new vocabulary and grammar items. Online quizzes were used to 
test if students were able to apply and analyze the factual and conceptual knowledge of the new grammar 
items and vocabulary. Class time was mainly devoted to higher-level cognitive processes, such as analysis, 
application, evaluation, and creation. 
Table 1. The Analysis of the Learning Content 
Knowledge 
Dimension 
Cognitive Process Dimension 
Remember Understand Apply Analyze Evaluate Create 
Factual 
Knowledge 
List Summarize Respond Select Check Generate 
Conceptual 
Knowledge 
Recognize Classify Provide Differentiate Determine Assemble 
Procedural 
Knowledge 
Recall Clarify Carry Out Integrate Judge Design 
Metacognitive 
Knowledge 
Identify Predict Use Deconstruct Reflect Create 
Note. This table is adapted from Anderson and Krathwohl (2001, pp. 67–68). 
Our regular first-year Chinese class employed the lecture–drill format, with students attending larger 
lecture based grammar sessions on Tuesdays and Thursdays, and smaller drill sessions on Mondays, 
Wednesdays, and Fridays. All class sessions used the face-to-face format. In the flipped first-year Chinese 
class, students met four times per week (Monday through Thursday). Grammar lectures were replaced by 
online self-learning sessions (an equivalent of one credit). Both regular and flipped class were intensive 5-
credit beginning level classes taught by the same instructors over the course of a year. One of the 
Jia Yang, Chengxu Yin, and Wei Wang 19 
 
instructors was also one of the researchers of the article. Both classes used the identical teaching materials, 
except that in the lecture-based grammar sessions of the regular classes, the instructors improvised some 
examples based on the interactions with the students in class. Students enrolled in either class voluntarily 
according to their schedules. 
  
Figure 1. The main tasks and activities of the flipped class. 
The main tasks and activities of the flipped class are summarized in Figure 1. Before each class, students 
were required to watch an online video clip created via Camtasia. Each video clip introduced students to 
the new vocabulary and grammar items of that class and was no longer than 10 minutes. The decision on 
the length of the video was made in light of research that has shown that “the novelty of any stimulus 
tends to wear off after about 10 minutes, and as a result, learners tend to check out after 10 minutes of 
exposure to new content” (Goodwin & Miller, 2013, p. 79). Videos for each lesson provided clear 
pronunciation of vocabulary and lucid explanation of grammar. Students posted their questions on an 
online discussion board and were encouraged to reply to each other’s questions. When there was no 
response, the instructor stepped in to make sure that each question was well addressed. This time-saving 
practice eliminated the need for the instructor to email each individual student to answer his or her 
questions. It also increased the interaction between students and fostered social learning among them. 
 
Flipped Class
Online Learning
Asynchronous
Grammar & 
Vocabulary 
Videos
Online Quizzes
Synchronous
WeChat 
Assignments
Classroom 
Learning
Language 
Practice & 
Problem Solving
20 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Figure 2. An online quiz to test students’ understanding of the new grammar items. 
After watching each of the video clips, students were required to complete an online quiz (see Figure 2) to 
test their understanding of the content of the video clip. The quizzes were delivered through the course 
management system, Sakai; the scores counted as 5% of the final grade. Students were notified of their 
grades right after submitting their answers. WeChat, a mobile messaging app, was employed to foster the 
after-class learning. At least once a week, students chatted with the instructor via WeChat’s audio 
messaging feature at a designated time slot outside of class. Students engaged in a dialog with the 
instructor based on a given scenario or topic related to the course content. Instant feedback was provided 
by the instructor via audio messaging in each chatting session, lasting 5–10 minutes. 
Data Collection 
To examine the effects of the flipped approach on students’ learning of Chinese as a foreign language, we 
collected data from students in both traditional and flipped classes with regard to the following: (a) final 
exams and oral tests, (b) students’ perceptions of the flipped learning experience, and (c) in-class 
observations by the instructors. The data were used in researching whether there were any statistical 
differences in learning outcomes and student satisfaction between the flipped class and the traditional 
class. There were a total of 17 students involved in the fall semester of 2015, with eight in the flipped 
class and nine in the traditional class. Right before the semester started, all students took a Chinese 
placement test with both written and oral exams, as well as the Oxford Language Aptitude Test. The 
written exam of the placement test consists of three parts: grammar, reading, and composition. The oral 
exam required students to answer a number of questions initiated by the instructor to assess their oral 
language ability. The Oxford Language Aptitude Test was used to assess students’ ability to analyze how 
languages work, as the outcome of this test is not affected by students’ prior knowledge of any particular 
language (Langslow, 1996). A two-tailed independent t-test was conducted to determine whether there 
were differences between students from the two classes in their scores of each section of the placement 
test (grammar, reading, composition, and oral exam) and the Oxford Language Aptitude Test. The mean 
scores of placement test and the Oxford Language Aptitude test from the two classes are shown in Table 2. 
There were no significant differences between the two groups of students in their scores of grammar (t =  
-1.81, p = .09), reading (t = -0.93, p = .37), composition (t = -0.52, p = .61) and oral exam (t = -0.62, p 
= .54). The results of the Oxford Language Aptitude Test also did not show significant differences (t =  
-0.29, p = .78) in students’ language learning aptitude. 
Table 2. Mean Scores for the Placement Test and the Oxford Aptitude Test 
 Placement Test The Oxford 
Aptitude Test Grammar Reading Composition Oral Exam 
Traditional 19.22 15.33 15.00 16.67 25.89 
Flipped 24.38 18.50 15.75 17.25 27.13 
Students also completed a background questionnaire. The background questionnaire gathered information 
on students’ demographics such as their age, major, native language, and exposure to other languages, as 
well as information concerning their previous e-learning experience and computer use (especially with 
regard to the ratio of their work and recreational time on the computer). The backgrounds of students in 
the two classes turned out to be quite similar. All the participants were native English speakers. Eight out 
of the nine in the traditional class were freshmen; one was a sophomore. Seven out of the eight in the 
flipped class were freshman; one was a sophomore. The students were similar in terms of experience and 
comfort with technology and access to computers. The average amount of time students spent on 
computer per day was also similar: 4.6 hours for those in the flipped class and 4.3 hours in the traditional 
Jia Yang, Chengxu Yin, and Wei Wang 21 
 
class. Those in the traditional class used about 63% of their computer time for school work and job-
related activities while those in the flipped class spent around 68% of their computer time for the same 
purpose. None of the students had experience with flipped learning before. 
At the end of the first semester, students in both classes took identical written final exams and oral tests. 
The final exam included listening, reading, and writing sections to measure their learning in the target 
language. The listening section was composed of 10 multiple-choice questions based on one passage and 
one dialogue. The reading section contained two passages, and each passage had 5 multiple-choice 
questions. The writing section required students to write a paragraph using given grammar structures with 
at least 70 Chinese characters. In the oral test, students answered the questions initiated by the instructor 
to test their uses of the instructed grammar items. 
All tests were re-graded for the purposes of this study so that the same criteria were used for all scorings. 
Two Chinese instructors who had more than 5 years of teaching experiences and who did not know about 
the purpose of the study graded the writings produced by the students following a rubric measuring 
content, organization, use of transitions, syntactic complexity and variety, grammatical accuracy, and 
character errors. The inter-rater reliability of their grading was .98. The two instructors also graded the 
recorded oral tests based a rubric measuring comprehensibility, fluency, vocabulary usage, syntax and 
grammar, and pronunciation, and reached an inter-rater reliability of .99. Scores of both the final exam 
and the oral test were used to compare the learning outcomes of students in the two classes. A 
questionnaire was distributed at the end of the semester to solicit information from students about their 
perceptions of the learning experience. Results of the questionnaire and instructors’ class observations 
were mainly used to gauge student satisfaction levels. 
Results 
Students’ Test Results 
We compared students’ mean test scores for each of the four skills: listening, speaking, writing, and 
reading. We also compared the breakdowns of the writing scores and the speaking scores according to 
their respective grading rubrics. The statistical descriptions of the test scores for the four skills are 
summarized in Table 3. Students in the flipped class received higher mean scores in speaking, writing, 
and reading than their counterparts in the traditional class did. Due to the small sample size and non-
normal distribution of most of the data from the two classes, Mann-Whitney U tests (a non-parametric 
method) were adopted to make further comparisons. The test results showed a significant difference (U = 
18.50, p = .048) between the speaking test scores of the two groups, while no significant differences were 
found in the reading and writing test scores of the two groups. 
Table 3. Statistical Description of the Test Scores for Listing, Speaking, Writing, and Reading 
Variable Group N M SD SEM 
Listening Traditional 9 23.66 2.18 0.73 
Flipped 8 23.50 2.51 0.89 
Speaking Traditional 9 46.18 3.05 1.02 
Flipped 8 48.54 0.86 0.30 
Writing Traditional 9 25.15 2.24 0.75 
Flipped 8 26.64 0.95 0.34 
Reading Traditional 9 19.78 0.67 0.22 
Flipped 8 20.00 0.00 0.00 
22 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Mann-Whitney U tests were also conducted to further analyze whether the students in the two classes 
performed differently in terms of the six rubric categories for speaking (see Table 4). A significant 
difference was found in the scores of speech comprehensibility between the two classes (U = 16.00, p 
= .02). The flipped class (Mdn = 10.00, mean rank = 11.50) performed better in speech comprehensibility 
than the traditional class (Mdn = 8.95, mean rank = 6.78). The overall results suggest that students in the 
flipped class outperformed those in the traditional class in speech comprehensibility, though there were 
no significant differences in the scores of other five speaking rubric categories. 
Table 4. Statistical Description of the Test Scores for Each of the Speaking Rubric Categories 
Variable Group N M SD SEM 
Comprehensibility Traditional 9 8.91 0.79 0.26 
 Flipped 8 9.69 0.62 0.22 
Fluency Traditional 9 9.38 0.56 0.19 
 Flipped 8 9.83 0.14 0.05 
Vocabulary Traditional 9 9.63 0.58 0.19 
 Flipped 8 9.94 0.16 0.06 
Syntax Traditional 9 9.22 0.86 0.29 
 Flipped 8 9.69 0.29 0.10 
Pronunciation Traditional 9 9.03 0.55 0.18 
 Flipped 8 9.39 0.31 0.11 
Similarly, Mann-Whitney U tests were carried out to further test whether participants in the two classes 
performed differently in terms of the six writing rubric categories (see Table 5). The results showed that 
there was a significant difference (U = 16.00, p = .02) between the two groups in the scores of syntactic 
complexity and variety. The flipped class (Mdn = 4.45; mean rank = 11.50) scored higher on syntactic 
complexity and variety than the traditional class (Mdn = 4.00; mean rank = 6.78). This suggests that 
flipped class students performed significantly better than the students in the traditional class in generating 
complex and various sentences. However, no significant differences were found between the two groups 
in the scores of other five writing rubric categories. 
Table 5. Statistical Description of the Test Scores for Each of the Writing Rubric Categories 
Variable Group N M SD SEM 
Content Traditional 9 4.57 0.30 0.01 
Flipped 8 4.53 0.37 0.13 
Organization Traditional 9 4.24 0.41 0.14 
Flipped 8 4.59 0.14 0.05 
Transition Traditional 9 4.03 0.39 0.13 
Flipped 8 4.24 0.28 0.10 
Syntactic Complexity 
and Variety 
Traditional 9 4.15 0.30 0.10 
Flipped 8 4.48 0.12 0.04 
Accuracy Traditional 9 4.02 0.77 0.26 
Flipped 8 4.49 0.41 0.15 
Characters Traditional 9 4.14 0.68 0.23 
Jia Yang, Chengxu Yin, and Wei Wang 23 
 
Flipped 8 4.33 0.93 0.33 
Students’ Satisfaction with the Course 
Students’ satisfaction with the course was measured at the end of the semester with a questionnaire that 
contained twelve items: course clarity, meeting of expectations, course organization, out-of-class working 
time, amount of practice in class, interactions in class, students’ self-directedness, feedback received, 
effectiveness of the instruction, stimulation of students’ interests, creation of a supporting learning 
environment, and willingness to recommend the course to other students. The questionnaire used a 5-
point Likert scale, ranging from 1 (Strongly Disagree) to 5 (Strongly Agree). As shown in Figure 3, on 
average, the flipped class students rated three items relatively higher than the traditional class students: 
the amount of practice in class, the level of the self-directedness, and their stimulation of interest in the 
subject. They also had slightly higher mean ratings on the items of course clarity, feedback, and 
willingness to recommend the course. To determine if there were statistical differences between the two 
classes’ satisfactions, Mann-Whitney U tests were conducted, again due to the small sample size and the 
non-normal distribution of the data. No significant differences were found between the two groups in 
terms of their ratings on any of the twelve items in the questionnaire. 
Clarity Expectation Organizaion Outofclasstime Practiceinclass Interaction Selfdirectionedness Feedback Effectiveness Stimulation Supportive Recommending
Traditional 4.556 4.667 4.556 3.556 4.000 4.667 4.111 4.111 4.667 4.111 4.667 4.111
Flipped 4.625 4.625 4.250 3.625 4.750 4.500 4.625 4.125 4.625 4.500 4.625 4.375
0.000
0.500
1.000
1.500
2.000
2.500
3.000
3.500
4.000
4.500
5.000
 
Figure 3. The average ratings on the items of the course satisfaction questionnaire. 
Discussion 
The flipped learning approach is predicated on the premise that active learning in the classroom can be 
enhanced by shifting lower-level cognitive processes (e.g., understanding and remembering) to self-paced 
online learning, while class time can be devoted to higher-level cognitive process, such as application, 
analysis, evaluation, and creation. The validity of this premise is confirmed by our study: students in the 
flipped class outperformed those in the traditional class students in speaking, since more time was 
devoted to meaningful interactions in class. 
Classroom observations and the end-of-the-semester questionnaire results also indicate that the flipped 
learning approach increased students’ engagement. On the questionnaire, they gave higher average ratings 
than those in the traditional class on three aspects of their learning experience: level of required self-
directedness, the amount of practice in class, and the stimulation of interests in the subject. Instructors of 
the two classes also reported that students in the flipped class were better prepared for classroom practice. 
Students’ comments from the flipped class in the course evaluation further confirmed their sense of 
ownership of the learning process and their appreciation of the flexible and individually-paced learning: 
I can review or preview lessons as often as I want. The videos are always posted so I can use them to 
24 Language Learning & Technology 
 
refer back to. 
I enjoy not having class 5 days a week and the flexibility of this class. 
It is nice to be able to watch a video and then prove you understand concepts. The concepts are 
presented very well. I understand material very well after watching the videos usually. 
In implementing the flipped learning approach, we also faced a set of distinct challenges and learned 
valuable lessons. First, the flipped language class may not be a good fit for all, as different students have 
different learning styles. Expectations regarding the amount of time needed for out-of-class activities need 
to be conveyed to and understood clearly by students. A screening process is desirable, so as to admit 
students who are self-motivated and who are good at time management and self-regulated learning. To 
help cultivate the sense of responsibility on the part of the students outside of the face-to-face contact 
time, training sessions on good study habits may be necessary at the beginning of the course. 
Second, in designing the course, one should have a general sense of the kind of problems students might 
encounter when engaging with online learning content, though some problems are hard to predict at the 
design phase. Additional time and technological support might be required for instructors to solve all 
kinds of unexpected problems during teaching. 
Third, with valuable classroom hours freed up from the explanations of grammar, instructors faced the 
challenge of restructuring their teaching plans so as to use the classroom time most effectively and 
productively. There was a need to rework existing resources to integrate seamlessly the online learning 
content with the classroom instruction. 
Lastly, mechanisms should be set up to monitor students’ learning outside of class. The flipped learning 
approach is most effective when all students complete the online study session before class. A single 
unprepared student could significantly slow down the class pace. Although the length of time students 
stayed at the designated website and the frequency of their visits could be tracked, we could not know for 
sure that they were always doing what they are supposed to do during those times. Our online quizzes 
were designed to ensure that students completed the online learning session beforehand. Those quizzes 
functioned as a low-stake, formative assessment to help students determine if they had understood the 
concepts introduced in the online video and to facilitate the delivery of feedback on their understanding. 
However, those quizzes tended to be rigid in that there could be only one answer to a given question, 
though in real life, the same meaning or message could have been conveyed in different ways. Therefore, 
convergent questions worked better than divergent questions for those quizzes. 
Conclusion 
Our study, though rather limited in scope, is meant to stimulate discussion of flipped learning in foreign 
languages generally and in Chinese particularly. In the future, data from a wider range of courses at 
different levels will provide fruitful ground to explore a variety of issues, such as the seamless integration 
of classroom activities with online learning sessions and ways to foster individual students’ self-learning 
ability for better adaptation to the flipped learning approach. Research on these issues will help us 
continue to adjust to various challenges of using the flipped approach in the field of foreign language 
instruction. 
References 
Anderson, L. W., & Krathwohl, D. R. (Eds.). (2001). A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing: A 
revision of Bloom’s taxonomy of educational objectives. New York, NY: Longman. 
Bloom, B. S., Englehart, M. Furst, E., Hill, W., & Krathwohl, D. (1956). The problems of classifying 
educational objectives and test exercises. In B. S. Bloom (Ed.), Taxonomy of educational objectives, 
Handbook I: Cognitive domain (pp. 44–60). Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley Longman. 
Jia Yang, Chengxu Yin, and Wei Wang 25 
 
Butts, A. (2014). Student views on the use of a flipped classroom approach: Evidence from Australia. 
Business Education & Accreditation, 6(1), 33–43. 
Chen Hsieh, J. S., Wu, W. C. V., & Marek, M. W. (2016). Using the flipped classroom to enhance EFL 
learning. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 30(1–2), 1-21. 
Critz, C., & Wright, D. (2013). Using the flipped classroom in graduate nursing education. Nurse 
Educator, 38(5), 210–213. 
Davies, R., Dean, D., & Ball, N. (2013). Flipping the classroom and instructional technology integration 
in a college-level information systems spreadsheet course. Education Technical Research 
Development, 61, 563–580. 
EDUCAUSE. (2012). 7 Things you should know about flipped classrooms. Retrieved from 
https://library.educause.edu/~/media/files/library/2012/2/eli7081-pdf.pdf  
Ferreri, S. F., & O’Connor, S. K. (2013). Instructional design and assessment: Redesign of a large lecture 
course into a small-group learning course. American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education, 77(1), 1–
9. 
Flipped Learning Network. (2014). The four pillars of F-L-I-P. Retrieved from 
http://flippedlearning.org/definition-of-flipped-learning/ 
Geary, D. C. (2007). Educating the evolved mind: Conceptual foundations for an evolutionary 
educational psychology. In J. S. Carlson & J. R. Levin (Eds.), Educating the evolved mind (Vol. 2, pp. 
1–99). Greenwich, CT: Information Age. 
Geary, D. C. (2008). An evolutionarily informed education science. Educational Psychologist, 43, 179–
195. 
Goodwin, B., & Miller, K. (2013). Research says evidence on flipped classrooms is still coming in. 
Educational Leadership, 70(6), 78–80. 
Haladyna, T., Downing, S., & Rodriguez, M. (2002). A review of multiple-choice item writing guidelines 
for classroom assessment. Applied Measurement in Education, 15, 309–334. 
Hao, Y. (2016). Exploring undergraduates’ perspectives and flipped learning readiness in their flipped 
classrooms. Computers in Human Behavior, 59, 82–92. 
Hung, H. (2015). Flipping the classroom for English language learners to foster active learning. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 28(1), 81–96. 
Krathwohl, D. R. (2002). A revision of Bloom's taxonomy: An overview. Theory into Practice, 41(4), 
212–218. 
Langslow, D. R. (1996). Notes on some aims and assumptions of classical language courses at University 
Oxford Language Aptitude Test. In S. J. Deacy (Ed.), Bulletin of the council of university classical 
department (Vol. 25, pp. 3–9). London, UK: Roehampton University. 
Mason, G., Shuman, T., & Cook, K. (2013). Comparing the effectiveness of an inverted classroom to a 
traditional classroom in an upper-division engineering course. IEEE Transactions on Education, 
56(4), 430–435. 
McLaughlin, J., LaToya, G., Esserman, D., Davidson, C., Glatt, D., Roth, M., Gharkholonarehe, N., & 
Mumper, R. (2013). Instructional design and assessment: Pharmacy student engagement, performance, 
and perception in a flipped satellite classroom. American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education, 77(9), 
1–8. 
Missildine, K., Fountain, R., Summers, L., & Gosselin, K. (2013). Flipping the classroom to improve 
student performance and satisfaction. Journal of Nursing Education, 52(10), 597–599. 
26 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Pierce, R., & Fox, J. (2012). Instructional design and assessment: Vodcasts and active learning exercises 
in a “flipped classroom” model of a renal pharmacotherapy module. American Journal of 
Pharmaceutical Education, 76(10), 1–5. 
Prober, C., & Khan, S. (2013). Medical education reimagined: A call to action. Academic Medicine, 88, 
1407–1410. 
Strayer, J. (2012). How learning in an inverted classroom influences cooperation, innovation, and task 
orientation. Learning Environments Research, 15, 171–193. 
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Interaction between learning and development. In M. Gauvain & M. Cole (Eds.), 
Readings on the development of children (pp. 34–41). New York, NY: Scientific. 
Watanabe, Y. (2014). Flipping a Japanese language classroom: Seeing its impact from a student survey 
and YouTube analytics. In Proceedings of ascilite2014 Rhetoric and Reality: Critical perspectives on 
educational technology (pp. 761–765). Dunedin, New Zealand. Retrieved from 
http://ascilite.org/conferences/dunedin2014/files/concisepapers/325-Watanabe.pdf 
Yeung, K., & O’Malley, P. J. (2014). Making “the flip” work: Barriers to and implementation strategies 
for introducing flipped teaching methods into traditional higher education courses. New Directions, 
10(1), 59–63. 
About the Authors 
Jia Yang is an Assistant Professor at the University of Dayton. Her current research interests include 
Chinese language pedagogy, computer-assisted language learning, and cross-cultural communication. 
E-mail: jyang2@udayton.edu 
Chengxu Yin is an Associate Teaching Professor at the University of Notre Dame. She specializes in 
Chinese language pedagogy. Her current research interests are in the design and implementation of hybrid 
Chinese courses and the use of technology in Chinese language teaching. 
E-mail: cyin@nd.edu 
Wei Wang is an Assistant Professional Specialist in East Asian Language and Cultures at the University 
of Notre Dame. Her research interests include Chinese pedagogical grammar and the application of 
technology in teaching Chinese as a foreign language. 
E-mail: wei.wang.235@nd.edu  
