Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2018, Volume 22, Issue 3 
pp. 20–32 
LANGUAGE TEACHING AND TECHNOLOGY FORUM  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Jian Liao & Xiaofei Lu 
 
 
Exploring the affordances of telepresence robots 
in foreign language learning 
Jian Liao, The Pennsylvania State University and Southwest University 
Xiaofei Lu, The Pennsylvania State University 
Abstract 
The importance of authentic communicative practices in foreign language (FL) learning has long been 
recognized. However, most FL learners lack adequate access to authentic communicative environments in 
the target language. In this article, we propose the use of telepresence robots as a potential solution to 
bridge this gap. Telepresence robots can be controlled by remote language learners online, enabling them 
to gain virtual access to authentic environments in the target language and to interact with native speakers 
in those environments in real time. In this exploratory study, three English learners and a native-speaker 
of American English participated in a campus tour activity using a telepresence robot. We examined the 
experience of our participants and the conversational features of their telepresence interactions through 
analyses of the interview data, field notes, and transcripts of conversations captured on video. Our findings 
show that telepresence robots have substantial potential for promoting FL learning by providing authentic 
communicative practice for remote language learners. The findings have useful implications for informing 
future research design. 
Keywords: Computer-Mediated Communication, Language Learning Strategies, Distance and Open 
Learning and Teaching, Telecollaboration 
Language(s) Learned in This Study: English 
APA Citation: Liao, J., & Lu, X. (2018). Exploring the affordances of telepresence robots in foreign 
language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 22(3), 20–32. https://doi.org/10125/44652 
Introduction 
The importance of authentic communicative practices in foreign language (FL) learning has long been 
recognized. Authentic communicative practices provide meaningful contexts that motivate learners and 
assist them in understanding the meaning of knowledge (Edelson & Reiser, 2006). In the absence of such 
practices, learners demonstrating adequate language skills in standardized testing situations may not be able 
to successfully apply those skills in authentic communicative situations (Larsen-Freeman, 2013). 
Unfortunately, most FL learners lack adequate access to authentic communicative environments in the 
target language. Researchers have used various virtual presence technologies to facilitate interaction 
between FL learners and speakers in target language communities, such as video conferencing systems 
(e.g., Yen, Hou, & Chang, 2015) and virtual reality (VR) environments (e.g., Lan, 2015). However, these 
technologies fall short in enabling learners to feel physically present in and to explore diverse real-world 
environments of target language use. To bridge this gap, we propose a solution that uses a telepresence 
robot—a remote-controlled, wheeled device with a display and camera—to enable FL learners to gain 
virtual access to authentic communicative environments in the target language and engage in real-time 
interaction with speakers in those environments. 
The term telepresence, first coined by Minsky (1980), refers to a set of technologies that give remote 
participants the feeling of being present at a different location. Compared to other robots, telepresence 
robots provide opportunities for interpersonal communication with people at different places, rather than 
interaction between humans and robots with artificial intelligence. Telepresence robots have been used in 
Jian Liao and Xiaofei Lu 21 
 
various domains, such as providing home care assistance for elderly people (Michaud et al., 2007), changing 
the dynamics of a blended learning design studio class (Bell, Cain, Peterson, & Cheng, 2016) and 
facilitating virtual school attendance by students with physical disabilities (Newhart & Olson, 2017). In the 
field of FL learning, a few studies reported that the application of telepresence robots in classroom settings 
significantly improved learner interest, confidence, and motivation (e.g., Kwon, Koo, Kim, & Kwon, 2010; 
Tanaka, Takahashi, Matsuzoe, Tazawa, & Morita, 2014). Research into the application of telepresence 
robots in FL learning in real-life settings, however, has not yet emerged. As a first step toward 
understanding the potential of using telepresence robots for providing authentic communicative practices 
for FL learners, this exploratory study examines the experiences of four participants in a campus tour 
activity facilitated by a telepresence robot and the features of their telepresence interactions. 
Theoretical Background 
Communicative Practices 
From the dialogic view of language and learning (Bakhtin, 1981), language is organized dialogically at the 
level of utterance, which is both context shaped and context renewing (Goodwin & Heritage, 1990). As 
Volosinov (1973) put it, “the real unit in language that is implemented in speech … is not the individual, 
isolated monologic utterance, but the interaction of at least two utterances—in a word, dialogue” (p. 117). 
He further argued that “language acquires life and historically evolves precisely here, in concrete verbal 
communication, and not in the abstract linguistic system of language forms, nor in the individual psyche of 
speakers” (p. 95). Based on this view, communicative practices play a critical role in language learning, as 
it is through engagement in such practices that learners acquire the meanings and functions of language 
forms in context. In reality, however, most FL learners have few opportunities to engage in communicative 
practices with speakers in the target language community. According to the International Association of 
Language Centers, only 0.25% of FL learners are able to travel to target-language countries for educational 
purposes (International Association of Languages Centres, 2016). It is thus important to find alternative 
ways to provide communicative practices for FL learners. 
Authenticity in Language Learning 
Authenticity in language learning refers to the resemblance between what learners are exposed to in learning 
and what their future language use practices will be like (Gilmore, 2007). Taylor (1994) distinguished three 
facets of authenticity (i.e., authenticity of language, task, and situation), which were subsequently 
elaborated on by other researchers. In general, authentic language, tasks, and situations refer to language 
input that serves real-life communicative purposes (Lee, 1995), tasks that bear real-world relevance and 
reflect professional skills students will need after graduation (Strobel, Wang, Weber, & Dyehouse, 2013), 
and situations that resemble real situations of social interaction in daily life (Strobel et al., 2013), 
respectively. These facets should not be viewed in isolation, as authenticity is a function of many factors 
all at once, including not only the language but also “the participants, the use to which language is put, the 
setting, the nature of the interaction, and the interpretation the participants bring to both the setting and the 
activity” (Taylor, 1994, p. 4). 
Virtual Presence Technologies and Computer-Assisted Language Learning 
Technologies that can create virtual presence or experiences, including video conferencing systems, VR 
environments, and telepresence robots, have been utilized to support FL learning. For example, Lan (2015) 
found that the usage of virtually immersive contexts in English as a foreign language (EFL) learning 
provided ubiquitous learning opportunities and game-like scenarios and led to enhanced learner 
performances. Jauregi and Bañados (2008) employed Adobe Connect to enable virtual interaction between 
Spanish as a foreign language learners and native-speaker Spanish teachers and identified positive impacts 
on learning outcome, learner motivation, and cultural understanding. Yen et al. (2015) reported that using 
Skype to facilitate the application of role-playing strategy significantly enhanced EFL learners’ speaking 
skills. A few studies applied telepresence robots in FL classrooms and observed significant improvement 
22 Language Learning & Technology 
 
in learner interest, confidence, and motivation (Kwon et al., 2010; Tanaka et al., 2014). 
Despite the reported benefits, current applications of virtual presence technologies have their drawbacks 
when it comes to providing learners with authentic communicative practices. Falconer (2013) reported that 
characters in VR learning environments are typically depicted in an unrealistic cartoonish style, that the 
physical environments lack details, and that tasks are designed artificially. Research on language learning 
via video conferencing systems and telepresence robots has to date been restricted to classroom, office, or 
home settings (e.g., Kwon et al., 2010; Tanaka et al., 2014; Yen et al., 2015). This limits the types of real-
world environments learners are exposed to and the conversational topics that could have naturally arisen 
from more diverse contexts. Collectively, these drawbacks result in the lack of authenticity. In our view, 
telepresence robots have the potential to bring about a greater degree of authenticity in all three facets 
discussed above if used to allow leaners to interact with speakers in the target language community in more 
diverse real-world environments for genuine communicative purposes. 
Research Questions 
This exploratory study constitutes a first step toward understanding the potential of using telepresence 
robots to provide authentic communicative practices for remote FL learners. The specific research questions 
addressed are as follows: 
1. What are the perceived benefits of using telepresence robots in FL learning outdoors? 
2. What are the perceived challenges of using telepresence robots in FL learning outdoors? 
3. How can we refine the design of tasks to address the perceived challenges? 
Methodology 
Participants 
The data in this study were collected over one week in April 2015. The purposeful sampling strategy was 
adopted to select adult EFL learners with the plan to study overseas and with no prior experience in living 
abroad, as the campus tour activity (described below) would be directly relevant to them. Three Chinese 
EFL learners residing in China (Xiu, Xian, and Gou) were recruited as remote participants (see Table 1); 
Coleman, a male native speaker of American English enrolled in a graduate program at the university 
chosen as the research site, was recruited as the local participant (all names are pseudonyms). 
Table 1. Demographic Information of Remote Participants 
Pseudonym Gender Age Occupation English Proficiency Years Studying English 
Gou Male 24 Graduate student Intermediate 12 
Xian Female 28 Government employee Intermediate 9 
Xiu Female 24 Graduate student Advanced 12 
Technical Settings 
Romo, a small telepresence robot,1 was used in this study. Despite its relatively small size, Romo has most 
functionalities that other telepresence robots have. Romo allows learners to control its movement via a 
mobile app, to adjust the view angle of its camera by tilting the smartphone, to see what it captures on the 
screen of the smartphone, and to start a live video chat with the camera. We used the 4G network on an 
iPhone to connect Romo to the Internet. 
Procedure 
The research site was the campus of a large public university in the Eastern United States. The general goal 
Jian Liao and Xiaofei Lu 23 
 
of the activity was to have the native speaker participant introduce the buildings, history, and culture of the 
campus to the remote EFL learners as a campus tour guide; the EFL learners would then report what they 
learned at the end of the activity. The actual activity consisted of three phases: pre-task, task, and review. 
Each learner completed the task with the native speaker one-on-one in approximately two hours. In the pre-
task, the native speaker and the learner spent half an hour video-chatting on QQ, a popular chat app, to get 
familiar with each other; the native speaker also oriented the learner to the whole task. In the task phase, 
the learner controlled Romo to participate in a 1-hour campus tour guided by the native speaker, who 
introduced the history and culture of the buildings along the tour route. Figure 1 and Figure 2 demonstrate 
the robot interface and the mode of communication between the native speaker and the learner. Figure 3 
shows the campus tour route. In the last phase, the learners orally reported what they had learned at the end 
of the tour. They were then interviewed about their experiences with the task. The native speaker participant 
was interviewed after all three learners had completed the task. 
 
Figure 1. Communication via a telepresence robot. 
 
Figure 2. The Interface on the screen of the robot. 
24 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 3. The route of the activity. 
Data Collection and Analysis 
Throughout the data collection period, four interviews (see Appendix) were conducted, recorded, and 
transcribed by the first author: three with the EFL learners in Chinese and one with the native speaker in 
English. The interviews with the learners were translated into English and the translations were 
crosschecked by the two authors to ensure accuracy. Ten pages of field notes were taken by the first author 
to document researcher observation of the benefits and challenges manifested in the activity and to 
triangulate the interview data. The interview transcripts and field notes were analyzed qualitatively by the 
two authors using Atlas.ti, following the method McMillan (2012) describes. Specifically, the transcripts 
and notes were read through and words, phrases, or sentences relevant to the research questions were 
marked up as codes. The coding scheme went through several iterations of merging and splitting, until we 
were confident that each code could not be further split or merged with other codes. Finally, all codes were 
categorized into different themes. 
In addition, six hours of video interactions were recorded, among which three hours were interactions 
between the EFL learners and the native speaker via the telepresence robot during the campus tour task. 
The telepresence conversations were transcribed and analyzed by the first author using the Computerized 
Language Analysis programs (MacWhinney, 2000). The results of this analysis were used to triangulate 
those from the coded data. 
Findings 
Five themes emerged from the 21 codes identified in the field notes and interview transcripts, as shown in 
Table 2.  
Jian Liao and Xiaofei Lu 25 
 
Table 2. Themes and Codes 
Theme Code Description Example 
Emotions Exciting Participants feeling 
excited 
The real cool thing is obviously the interaction 
and the use of technology to actually experience 
real things. 
Gaming Participants feeling 
game-like experiences 
This robot makes me feel like manipulating a 
virtual person walking in a virtual world. This is 
somewhat similar to manipulating a character in 
a game hanging around in a virtual world. 
Relaxing Participants feeling 
relaxed 
I feel the way we used it today is more relaxing... 
Challenging Participants feeling 
challenged 
I feel it is more challenging considering my 
English ability. 
Authentic 
Learning 
Experience 
Real 
environment 
Experiencing another 
real world via the robot 
Meanwhile, I know the world where the robot is 
walking is a real world. 
Social 
presence 
Feeling present in a 
remote place 
I feel as if I was hiding in a corner watching the 
foreigners and experiencing many things. 
Emerging 
topics 
Naturally emerged 
topics 
I feel that there are more topics to talk about when 
immersed in the environment. 
Cultural 
learning 
Learning about another 
culture 
(Learning in this way) provides an opportunity to 
learn something about foreign culture. 
Learner-
Centered 
Activities 
Learner 
agency 
Learning in an active 
way 
When watching the introduction videos or 
photographs of campuses online, I can only 
receive information passively. With the robot, I 
can explore the campus actively… 
Self-impact The activity is related 
to students’ personal 
experience 
Especially for college students, it will be very 
attractive to know something about the lives of 
students of their age abroad or something related 
to their majors. 
Learner 
difference 
Inter-learner differences The first student seemed more interested in seeing 
the campus …, and the other two students seemed 
really enjoying driving around by themselves. 
Disorientatio
n 
Difficulty in locating 
position  
When I was operating the robot, it was hard for 
me to find the destination since I’m not familiar 
with the campus. 
Technical 
Issues 
Network 
connection 
Issues caused by poor 
network connection 
Also I mean the lag is there, right? It’s a bit of a 
problem… 
Robot size Small size of the robot Colman had to crouch down to talk to Xiu. 
Robot speed Slow speed of the robot As the robot walks slower than human beings, 
Colman had to hold the robot while we were 
heading there. 
Robot sound 
volume 
Low sound volume of 
the robot 
There were times in the tour when I had to talk 
pretty loudly to make sure the student can hear 
me. 
26 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Reflections 
on the screen 
Display issue caused by 
strong sunlight  
When the robot is being ridden in strong sunlight, 
it is a little hard to see Xiu’s face on the screen. 
Body 
language 
Difficulty to convey 
body language 
I could use gesture and body language when I talk 
to other foreigners face-to-face. I feel it lacks a 
way to communicate. 
Practical 
Concerns 
Privacy 
issues 
Concern for privacy 
issues 
If you don’t videotape, you can conduct this study 
indoors or in a lot of places outdoors. 
Teacher 
resource 
Concern for the lack of 
native-speaker teachers 
The first issue is if there are enough native-
speaker teachers. 
Difference 
from 
classroom 
learning 
Comparison to learning 
in the classroom 
When listening to a lesson in the classroom, I 
focus on something else, like grammar or 
vocabulary. When using the robot, I need to focus 
on how to express my ideas more accurately. 
Emotions and Motivation 
The EFL learners and the native speaker experienced positive emotions, as expressed using such words as 
excited, cool, and interesting during the activities. Coleman noted the following in his interview: 
It was really cool to see the students’ reactions… Students’ reactions were really impressive. I think all 
three of them. There were moments that they just seemed really excited to interact with me or just 
interact with the environment. And it really shocked me that their interaction with the environment 
made it really interesting. 
Gou explained the reason he experienced positive emotion from the perspective of gaming in his interview. 
This robot makes me feel like manipulating a virtual person walking in a virtual world. This is 
somewhat similar to manipulating a character in a game hanging around in a virtual world. 
Meanwhile, I know the world where the robot is walking is a real world. It feels like a game experience 
but what I am experiencing is a real world. This makes me excited. 
Nevertheless, some learners experienced some stress during the activity. For example, Xian mentioned that 
she felt her English ability was not good enough to communicate with the native speaker fluently. However, 
both Xian and the native speaker indicated that this challenge could be alleviated by better preparing 
learners before the activity (e.g., by having them watch some introductory videos about the campus). 
Authentic Learning Experience 
Authentic learning experiences were created by making learners feel they engaged in the activity as if they 
were physically on campus. Xian indicated in her interview that she felt as if she were physically present 
on campus as a student talking to Coleman. 
When he (Coleman) took me around, it felt like a teacher guiding a student, and I paid attention to 
everything he said. 
Gou mentioned a similar experience in his interview. 
As for my other experiences, the most interesting thing is to see the real environment abroad, which is 
very different from what we have experienced domestically. 
In terms of the benefits of learning in an authentic environment, Xiu’s comment in her interview below 
illustrates how the environment provided a rich and unique language context to facilitate her acquisition of 
the precise meaning of a culture-related word. 
Xiu: In our English class at school, we also have a native speaker teacher here, but in China, it’s more 
difficult to come up with examples to illustrate the meaning of something specific to her culture. For 
Jian Liao and Xiaofei Lu 27 
 
example, when Coleman told me something about the word quod? I forgot the exact word… 
Interviewer: Quad? 
Xiu: When he wanted to introduce something like that, he would say, “see it’s over there”. It was more 
situated and more precise. Because of the large cultural gap, it’s just more difficult to explain things 
like this in China. 
The following exchange between Xiu and Coleman (transcribed from the video interactions) can triangulate 
Xiu’ points mentioned above (see Figure 4). Jefferson’s (2004) transcription system is used here to mark 
pauses, voice pitch, and non-verbal gestures. 
1  COL*: so:,(.){what can you see there = can you see: 
2                           {((RH points at the quad and then gazes at XIU))  
3  XIU*: a v.. a a: (1.1) a plaza↑ or a square?  
4          >plaza↑, square?< 
5  COL*: yeah, yeah, that’s a good way >to describe it<,  
6          a pla:za or square like what i said  
7  we we usually call this a qua:d right? kweu yew ey dee= 
8  XIU*:   =oh↑, [quad 
9  COL*:             [yeah, i told you >about this before<  
10  so, this is uhm this is really normal for: university  
11  campuses right? 
 
Figure 4. Learning the meaning of the word quad. 
Xiu’s example of the word quad explicates her view on the usefulness of the physical context for the 
acquisition of the precise meaning of this word, which could be harder to learn in the traditional classroom 
setting. Therefore, the physical context around the telepresence robot is not just the background of the 
conversation, but provides a way to help learners understand the precise meaning of culture-specific 
idiomatic expressions in the target language. 
Another finding is that, along with the learning activities, the authentic environment around the telepresence 
robot triggered more natural conversational topics and helped the interlocutors organize the topics, as 
Coleman observed in his interview: 
I feel like the tour itself was pretty straightforward. When we were talking about doing this, I was 
28 Language Learning & Technology 
 
worried that the students would need like metrics or a worksheet or something to engage them in the 
tour, but actually it turned out it’s not necessary at all. Once we were moving around, it was very easy 
to have a conversation. 
Coleman’s comment indicates that the authentic physical environment, including the buildings and other 
objects encountered on the campus tour, allowed for conversational topics to emerge naturally as they 
moved along the route, making the activity more natural and closer to real-life communication than 
conversations in formal learning settings, where the conversational topics are often prescribed. 
Learner-Centered Activities 
The learning activities were largely learner-centered, as the telepresence robot allowed learners to decide 
how they wanted the activities to proceed and what they wanted to talk and learn about. Gou’s comment in 
his interview below illustrates how he could actively choose the learning content. 
The most impressive part of the experience was that I could control the robot myself. I could find a lot 
of videos and photos about university campuses online, but this project provides a robot that I can 
control, which gave me the freedom to see what I wanted to see. It is highly autonomous. When watching 
the introduction videos or photographs of campuses online, I can only receive information passively. 
With the robot, I can explore the campus actively, and that’s the most fun part of today’s activity. 
Gou’s comment shows that the ability to control the movement and view angle of the robot allowed him to 
actively explore the environment and choose conversational topics that he was interested in, making the 
learning process highly engaging. Gou’s interview transcript indicates how the match between the learning 
scenario and his personal interests was a motivating factor for him. 
Seeing how foreign college students of our age live, where they live, how they study, and how they eat, 
I feel as if I was hiding in a corner watching the foreigners and experiencing many things. … Especially 
for college students, it will be very attractive to know something about the lives of students of their age 
abroad or something related to their majors. 
Coleman also commented on the match between the activity and the learners’ interests and the importance 
of taking learners’ background and interests into account in activity design. 
It was a really good match between their background and interests and what we showed them today. 
But I think that would really depend on who you’re taking around. 
A drawback of the activity was that learners might feel disoriented when exposed to authentic learning 
environments without adequate guidance, as illustrated by Xiu’s comment below. 
When I was operating the robot, it was hard for me to find the destination since I’m not familiar with 
the campus. 
Technical Issues 
The learning activity generally proceeded smoothly, but there were a few minor issues caused by technical 
limitations. The most salient one was the occasional lags in streaming video and audio caused by unstable 
network connection, as observed by Gou in his interview: 
As for future improvement, the only thing I can think of is the Internet speed. I don’t know if it was 
because of the Internet connection on my side. The whole activity was well-organized, but due to the 
lag, I had some problems hearing the teacher, and occasionally the delay was severe. Other than that, 
the tour was really interesting. 
Other issues noted by the participants included the size, speed, sound volume, and the screen of the robot, 
largely due to Romo’s relatively small size. Most participants hoped the robots used for future studies could 
be taller and faster, with higher volume and a clearer display screen. 
A special issue caused by the size of the display screen was about the conveyance of body language. In 
Jian Liao and Xiaofei Lu 29 
 
particular, the small size of the screen made it difficult to see the gestures and body language of the 
interlocutor clearly, as illustrated by Xian’s comment in his interview below: 
The communication in our activity lacks one thing. I could use gesture and body language when I talk 
to other foreigners face-to-face. I feel it lacks a way to communicate [while using the telepresence 
robot]. 
Practical Concerns 
The participants also reported a few practical concerns regarding the use of telepresence robots for FL 
learning, including the privacy of other people who may be captured by the camera, limited availability of 
native speaker interlocutors, and the integration of this technology in traditional classroom settings. These 
concerns are discussed in the next section. 
Discussion 
The findings from our analyses of the field notes, interview transcripts, and telepresence conversations have 
well answered our research questions. 
Perceived Benefits of Using Telepresence Robots in Foreign Language Learning Outdoors 
Our results show that the telepresence robot provided a more authentic and interactive environment for 
communicative practices than other researched technologies such as VR environments (Falconer, 2013). 
Such an authentic conversational environment provided multiple benefits to the learners. First, exposing 
learners to and engaging them in such an authentic conversational environment facilitated their acquisition 
of the precise meanings of culture-related expressions in the language. Second, this environment allowed 
for conversational topics to emerge naturally, making the flow of the learning activity easy to organize for 
the participants. Third, the use of the telepresence robot motivated the learners by providing them with a 
game-like experience and learner-centered activities. As such, the learners all experienced positive 
emotions during the activities. Finally, the ability to control the movement of the robot and select learning 
content based on their own interests and learning needs allowed the learners to align the learning activity 
with their own zone of proximal development (ZPD; Lantolf & Thorne, 2006; Vygotsky, 1978), that is, the 
area between what they are able to do with and without expert guidance. 
Perceived Challenges of Using Telepresence Robots in Foreign Language Learning 
Outdoors 
The learners reported two major challenges posed by the outdoors activity with the telepresence robot. One 
challenge was the disorientation experienced by some learners in the new, open environment, and the other 
was the stress felt by some learners when communicating about certain impromptu topics that they felt they 
lacked the language skills to handle. On the one hand, these challenges can be seen as useful learning 
opportunities brought about by the activity. Authentic contexts of language use will necessarily include 
new environments, in which impromptu conversational topics will naturally emerge. Authentic 
communicative practices should thus ideally provide opportunities for exposing learners to such 
environments and impromptu topics. On the other hand, it is also important to help learners learn within 
their ZPD (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006). Giving learners the ability to control the movement and view angle of 
the telepresence robot and to self-select the learning content helped address some of the disorientation and 
stress. More importantly, the mediation (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006) or assistance the learners received from 
the native speaker supported both their learning about the new environment and their learning of new 
culture-specific expressions that were useful for talking in and about the environment. 
In terms of technical limitations, issues such as coverage and speed of wireless Internet connection and the 
size, speed, sound volume, and display quality of the telepresence robot could be largely resolved in the 
near future, considering the continued development of communication technology. Additionally, in cases 
where intrusion of other people’s privacy is of major concern, sites with active pedestrian traffic could be 
30 Language Learning & Technology 
 
avoided, more contained sites could be used and permission from those present could be sought, and the 
video capturing and recording function of the telepresence could be disabled. In this last case, observations 
or audio recording of participant interactions could be used as alternative data collection methods for 
research purposes. 
Implications for Future Research Design 
The findings of this study have useful implications for informing the design principles for future research 
on using telepresence robots for language learning, some of which we summarize tentatively below. 
• The activity site should be chosen based on instructional goals and student interest, with attention 
to privacy concerns. 
• To the extent possible, language learning activities should involve authentic tasks that happen 
naturally in actual environments of language use and that meet students’ learning needs. 
• A pre-task activity should be included to orient learners to the features of the telepresence robot 
and expectations of the language learning task and to build rapport between the learners and activity 
facilitators. 
• Activity facilitators should be aware of the instructional goals and students’ learning needs in 
choosing to maintain or change conversational topics during the activities. They should also be 
trained to pay attention to learner abilities and difficulties and to offer appropriate support to the 
leaners when difficulties arise. 
• The learning activity may be gamified to maximize learning motivation and engagement. 
Conclusion 
As an emerging technology, telepresence robots have substantial potential for promoting FL learning by 
providing remote language learners with virtual access to authentic physical and sociocultural contexts in 
a target language community. This study constitutes the first step toward understanding the ways in which 
authentic communicative practices facilitated by telepresence interaction may enhance or hinder language 
learners’ learning experiences. Our findings provide useful information for future designs of language 
learning activities that integrate telepresence interaction to promote FL learning. As a small-scale 
exploratory study, the number of participants was small. In own future work, we will conduct larger-scale 
studies to more systematically examine the affordances of telepresence interaction to support FL learning 
with more participants, more diverse environments and tasks, and richer data on learner perceptions and 
learning outcomes. 
Acknowledgements 
We wish to thank the participants of this study for their contribution and the anonymous reviewers of the 
manuscript for their helpful comments. Special thanks go to Zhi Zhou, who helped us recruit participants 
and videotape the activities. 
Notes 
1. For an introduction to Romo, see its Kickstarter page. 
References 
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: Four essays. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. 
Bell, J., Cain, W., Peterson, A., & Cheng, C. (2016). From 2D to Kubi to Doubles: Designs for student 
telepresence in synchronous hybrid classrooms. International Journal of Designs for Learning, 7(3), 
19–33. 
Jian Liao and Xiaofei Lu 31 
 
Edelson, D. C., & Reiser, B. J. (2006). Making authentic practices accessible to learners: Design 
challenges and strategies. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences 
(pp. 335–354). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Falconer, L. (2013). Situated learning in virtual simulations: Researching the authentic dimension in 
virtual worlds. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 24(3), 285–300. 
Gilmore, A. (2007). Authentic materials and authenticity in foreign language learning. Language 
Teaching, 40(2), 97–118. 
Goodwin, C., & Heritage, J. (1990). Conversation analysis. Annual Review of Anthropology, 19, 283–307. 
International Association of Languages Centres. (2016). Trends in the demand for foreign languages. 
Retrieved from https://www.ialc.org/ialc-study-travel-research-reports/2016-report/ 
Jauregi, K., & Bañados, E. (2008). Virtual interaction through video-web communication: A step towards 
enriching and internationalizing language learning programs. ReCALL, 20(2), 183–207. 
Jefferson, G. (2004). Glossary of transcript symbols with an introduction. In G. H. Lerner (Ed.), 
Conversation analysis: Studies from the first generation (pp. 13–31). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John 
Benjamins. 
Kwon, O. H., Koo, S. Y., Kim, Y. G., & Kwon, D. S. (2010). Telepresence robot system for English 
tutoring. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE workshop on advanced robotics and its social impacts (pp. 
152–155). New York, NY: IEEE. 
Lan, Y. J. (2015). Contextual EFL learning in a 3D virtual environment. Language Learning & 
Technology, 19(2), 16–31. 
Lantolf, J. P., & Thorne, S. L. (2006). Sociocultural theory and the genesis of second language 
development. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2013). Transfer of learning transformed. Language Learning, 63(S1), 107–129. 
Lee, W. Y. C. (1995). Authenticity revisited: Text authenticity and learner authenticity. ELT Journal, 
49(4), 323–328. 
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for analyzing talk. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
McMillan, J. H. (2012). Educational research: Fundamentals for the consumer (6th ed.). New York, NY: 
Harper Collins College Publishers. 
Michaud, F., Boissy, P., Labonte, D., Corriveau, H., Grant, A., Lauria, M., Cloutier, R., Roux, M.-A., 
Iannuzzi, D., & Royer, M.-P. (2007). Telepresence robot for home care assistance. In Proceedings of 
the 2007 AAAI spring symposium on multidisciplinary collaboration for socially assistive robotics 
(pp. 50–55). Palo Alto, CA: AAAI. 
Minsky, M. (1980). Telepresence. Omni, 45–51. Retrieved from https://web.media.mit.edu/~minsky/ 
papers/Telepresence.html 
Newhart, V. A., & Olson, J. S. (2017). My student is a robot: How schools manage telepresence 
experiences for students. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI conference on human factors in computing 
systems (pp. 342–347). New York, NY: ACM. 
Strobel, J., Wang, J., Weber, N. R., & Dyehouse, M. (2013). The role of authenticity in design-based 
learning environments: The case of engineering education. Computers & Education, 64, 143–152. 
Tanaka, F., Takahashi, T., Matsuzoe, S., Tazawa, N., & Morita, M. (2014). Telepresence robot helps 
children in communicating with teachers who speak a different language. In Proceedings of the 2014 
ACM/IEEE international conference on human-robot interaction (pp. 399–406). New York, NY: 
ACM. 
32 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Taylor, D. (1994). Inauthentic authenticity or authentic inauthenticity. TESL-EJ, 1(2), 1–11. 
Volosinov, V. N. (1973). Marxism and the philosophy of language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
Yen, Y. C., Hou, H. T., & Chang, K. E. (2015). Applying role-playing strategy to enhance learners’ 
writing and speaking skills in EFL courses using Facebook and Skype as learning tools: A case study 
in Taiwan. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 28(5), 383–406. 
Appendix. Interview Questions 
Interview Questions (Language Learner) 
1. How do you feel about the procedure of the activity? 
2. How do you feel about the interaction between you and the native speaker? 
3. How do you feel about the site of the activity? 
4. What are the differences between talking to others via a telepresence robot outdoors and face-to-
face interaction? 
5. What are the differences between talking to others via a telepresence robot outdoors and talking to 
others via other technology, such as Skype? 
6. Have you imagined yourself as an international student at an American university before? How 
about now? 
7. Did you feel any cultural differences between China and the US during the activities? 
8. Do you have any suggestions for improving the system? 
Interview Questions (Native Speaker) 
1. Do you have any experience in teaching English as a second language? 
2. Have you used any technology to improve you English before? 
3. How do you feel about the process of communication with others via this robot? 
4. What are the differences between talking to others via a telepresence robot outdoors and talking to 
others via Skype at home? 
5. Do you feel the telepresence robot is helpful for teaching a foreign language or not? 
6. Do you have any suggestions for improving the system? 
About the Authors 
Jian Liao is a doctoral candidate in the Department of Learning and Performance Systems at The 
Pennsylvania State University. He is also a software engineer in the College of Online and Continuing 
Education at Southwest University, China. His research interests include computer-assisted language 
learning, emerging technologies, and informal learning. 
E-mail: jxl1089@psu.edu 
Xiaofei Lu is Associate Professor of Applied Linguistics and Asian Studies at The Pennsylvania State 
University, where he directs the graduate programs in the Department of Applied Linguistics. His research 
interests include computational linguistics, corpus linguistics, and intelligent computer-assisted language 
learning. He is the author of Computational methods for corpus annotation and analysis (2014, Springer). 
E-mail: xxl13@psu.edu 
