Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2018, Volume 22, Issue 3 
pp. 124–142 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Henriette L. Arndt & Robert Woore 
 
 
Vocabulary learning from watching YouTube videos 
and reading blog posts 
Henriette L. Arndt, University of Oxford 
Robert Woore, University of Oxford 
Abstract 
This study compared second language vocabulary acquisition from engagement with two different online 
media: written blog posts and video blogs. It also explored whether there were differences between which 
aspects of vocabulary knowledge (i.e., orthography, semantics, and grammatical function) were best 
learned from these media. The results showed that incidental vocabulary learning occurred in 
approximately equal amounts from reading blog posts and watching video blogs. There were some 
indications that different types of vocabulary knowledge were gained from the two types of media. The 
written blog entries promoted greater gains in orthographic knowledge than the videos. There was also 
tentative evidence that the videos promoted greater recall of the target words’ grammatical functions and 
greater recognition and recall of their meanings. 
Keywords: Reading, Social Networking, Virtual Environments, Vocabulary 
Language(s) Learned in This Study: English 
APA Citation: Arndt, H. L., & Woore. R. (2018).Vocabulary learning from watching YouTube videos and 
reading blog posts. Language Learning & Technology, 22(1), 124–142. https://doi.org/10125/44660 
Introduction 
Vocabulary knowledge is fundamental to comprehending and producing a second language (L2). Indeed, 
Alderson (2005, p. 88) concludes that “language ability is to a large extent a function of vocabulary size.” 
Consequently, acquiring vocabulary is a key challenge facing L2 learners, particularly in instructed contexts 
with limited language exposure (Green & Meara, 1995). 
Teachers and researchers often advocate reading as the most effective method for learning vocabulary 
outside of instructed contexts. Most importantly, reading is presumed to account for the acquisition of 
lower-frequency words. These words are not often taught explicitly and some researchers claim that learners 
are unlikely to derive them from sources such as day-to-day conversations or radio and television programs 
(Nation, 2001). However, technological advances have created new opportunities for interacting with the 
L2. There has been increasing research interest in informal second language learning (ISLL) through a 
variety of media primarily accessed online, such as music, television series, and blogs (e.g., Sockett, 2014; 
Sockett & Toffoli, 2012; Toffoli & Sockett, 2010). The current study contributes to this growing body of 
research by investigating (a) the extent to which watching video blogs (vlogs) and reading blog posts can 
support L2 vocabulary acquisition, and (b) whether the modality of the L2 input (audio-visual vs. written 
text) influences the amount and aspects of vocabulary knowledge gained. 
Theoretical Background 
Toffoli and Sockett (2010, p. 4) describe online ISLL as “unofficial, unscheduled, and impromptu,” that is, 
taking place not in formal learning environments, but through learners’ interactions with online media of 
their own choice in their free time. They suggest that these resources facilitate language learning by 
providing input, often in more than one modality (e.g., visual and auditory), and because the user’s inherent 
Henriette L. Arndt and Robert Woore 125 
 
interest in the content and desire to understand it leads to deep engagement with that input. This description 
of the mechanisms behind ISLL draws on Krashen’s (1981) comprehensible input hypothesis, as well as 
the theory of multi-channel communication (discussed in depth in Moore, Burton, & Myers, 2004), which 
lies at the heart of multimedia approaches to education, stating that encountering new information in various 
modalities facilitates learning. Because ISLL is not planned by the learners—who may or may not even be 
aware of its occurrence—connections can also be drawn to another prominent concept in L2 acquisition: 
incidental learning. 
Incidental Learning 
Researchers typically distinguish between incidental and intentional learning. While intentional learning is 
generally thought to occur when learners’ attention is focused on acquiring new language features (Nation, 
2001; Schmitt, 2000), some scholars use the term incidental learning to describe acquisition which occurs 
in the absence of a conscious intention to learn, or rather when learners’ attention is focused not on language 
learning, but on understanding the material they engage with (e.g., Hulstijn, 2001; Nation, 2001; Schmitt, 
2000). For this reason, incidental learning has also been described as a byproduct of communicative 
language tasks (Hulstijn, 2001). 
For example, learners may begin to acquire a new word when they encounter it in a text on a topic that 
interests them, using contextual information and background knowledge to infer its meaning. To be able to 
do this, learners need to have good comprehension of the overall text, which, in turn, requires a minimum 
lexical coverage (ratio of known and unknown words in the text). Research findings converge to indicate 
that a lexical coverage of about 95% provides learners with adequate comprehension and that this is attained 
by a vocabulary of about 5,000 word families (e.g., Adolphs & Schmitt, 2004; Hu & Nation, 2000; Laufer 
& Ravenhorst-Kalovski, 2010; Stæhr, 2008). 
In addition to this, scholars also widely agree that, to acquire a new word, learners must first notice it in the 
input (see the noticing hypothesis by Schmidt, 1990), which requires a certain degree of conscious attention. 
This implies that the difference between incidental and intentional learning cannot lie only in the presence 
or lack of attention. Therefore, the depth of processing theory by Craik and Lockhart (1972) suggests that 
the two types of learning differ quantitatively, not qualitatively: how deeply a specific linguistic feature is 
processed stands in direct relation to the extent of learning that results. Alternatively, Ellis (1999) proposed 
that the difference may lie in where learners place their focal and peripheral attention: in intentional 
learning, the focal attention is on the linguistic forms, whilst peripheral attention is given to understanding 
the overall message, and vice versa in incidental learning. 
In sum, it seems that a clear distinction between incidental and intentional learning is not easy to maintain 
based on attention allocation alone. Furthermore, operationalising attention-based definitions is 
problematic, because learners’ minds cannot be directly accessed to determine the focus of their attention 
(form or meaning) at any given moment. The current study therefore adopts Hulstijn’s (2001) 
operationalisation of incidental learning, which assumes that any learning resulting from engagement with 
L2 input is incidental when learners have not been forewarned that they will be tested on their language 
gains—and thus have no extrinsic reason to focus on language learning other than simply understanding 
the content. This operationalisation has been employed widely in previous research—and in most of the 
studies reviewed below—for its convenience. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that learners (including those 
in the current study) may, at certain moments, bring greater conscious attention to bear on unfamiliar words 
they encounter and that this may affect the extent and nature of any resulting vocabulary learning. 
Assessing Vocabulary Knowledge 
The question of what it means to know a word is also far from straightforward. First, extensive research 
demonstrates that vocabulary acquisition is an incremental process, whereby learners slowly build up 
knowledge of new words through repeated encounters over time, and that at least 10 such encounters are 
needed for measurable learning to occur (e.g., Waring & Takaki, 2003; Webb, 2007). Therefore, vocabulary 
knowledge cannot be assessed simply as an all-or-nothing construct (i.e., where a learner either knows the 
126 Language Learning & Technology 
 
word or does not). 
Second, researchers widely agree that lexical knowledge is complex and comprises more than just form–
meaning connections. Thus, a combination of tasks should be used to evaluate various dimensions of 
vocabulary knowledge (Henriksen, 1999). Nation’s (1990, 2001) well-known framework of vocabulary 
knowledge, for example, distinguishes knowledge of spoken and written forms, grammatical function, 
collocations, meaning, and constraints on word use. 
Third, it is generally accepted that receptive knowledge of a word (i.e. being able to understand it when 
encountering it in language input) is different from, and usually precedes, productive knowledge (i.e. being 
able to retrieve the appropriate word to express a certain meaning when speaking or writing; DeKeyser & 
Sokalski, 1996; Nation, 1990, 2001). Thus, learners may initially only recognise a word’s form but not 
know its associated meaning. But eventually, after passing through various phases of partial word 
knowledge, they may be able to produce its spoken and written forms and use the word appropriately in 
grammatical, semantic, and collocational contexts. 
In sum, vocabulary acquisition research should include tests that measure various aspects of receptive and 
productive vocabulary knowledge and that in some way account for partial knowledge. Nevertheless, 
presumably for methodological convenience, most previous studies have focused solely on learners’ ability 
to recognise word forms or meanings (for examples of studies taking a multidimensional approach to 
measuring lexical knowledge, see, Pigada & Schmitt, 2006; Waring & Takaki, 2003; Webb, 2007, 2008). 
As will be seen below, the current study attempts to address this limitation of previous research. 
Incidental Vocabulary Learning Research 
We mentioned earlier the importance often accorded to reading as a vehicle for vocabulary acquisition. 
Extensive research in this area indeed provides some evidence that large amounts of sustained written input, 
for example in extensive reading programs, can lead to substantial cumulative gains in vocabulary 
knowledge (e.g., Elley, 1991; Pigada & Schmitt, 2006; Zahar, Cobb, & Spada, 2001). However, it might 
be suspected that many learners do not read sufficiently in their L2 to achieve such sustained and extensive 
input (e.g., Waring, 2009). Therefore, numerous studies have also explored vocabulary acquisition through 
other media, with which learners may engage more readily: for example, films and television series (e.g., 
Hui, 2007; Markham, 1999; Vidal, 2003, 2011; Winke, Gass, & Sydorenko, 2010); songs and comic books 
(Milton, 2008); online role-playing games (Huang & Yang, 2012); and social network-based flash games 
(Çetin, Sözcü, & Kinay, 2012). However, only few studies to date have directly compared vocabulary 
learning through these different media. The current study addresses this gap and investigates whether the 
modality of the L2 input (audio-visual vs. written) affects the extent and nature of incidental vocabulary 
gains. To the authors’ knowledge, only two previous studies have directly compared vocabulary learning 
from these modalities: one by Neuman and Koskinen (1992) and another by Vidal (2011). As these form a 
key basis for the current investigation, we review them in detail below. 
The participants in the study by Neuman and Koskinen (1992) were 179 middle-school learners of L2 
English in the US. They had various first language (L1) backgrounds and were selected from an at risk 
population, their academic performance being on average 2–3 years below their grade-level peers. Over 
nine weeks, two groups of participants watched nine segments of a science TV show: one group with 
captions and one without. A third group listened to and read along with the same segments’ scripts. From 
each segment, judges chose what they perceived to be the 10 most difficult words (mainly academic 
vocabulary), which served as target words in a series of vocabulary tests. In the pre-test, participants self-
reported their knowledge of the target words (I know this word or I don’t know this word). Their lexical 
gains from the TV segments and scripts were then evaluated in several post-tests. First, each week, students 
were tested on form recognition of that week’s target words using a multiple-choice test. Second, the authors 
counted the number of occurrences of these target words and the concepts behind them (idea units) in the 
students’ weekly written homework assignments, to measure productive knowledge. Third, at 3-week 
intervals, participants completed a multiple-choice test in which they were required to select the sentences 
Henriette L. Arndt and Robert Woore 127 
 
in which the target words were used in their correct senses (sentence anomaly test). Finally, at the end of 
nine weeks, they completed a multiple-choice test assessing their ability to recognise the words’ meanings 
in context. On all tests (except one sentence anomaly test), the captioned video group scored significantly 
higher than both the no-caption group and the reading/listening group. The authors also found higher means 
for the no-caption group than for the reading/listening group on almost all measures (although statistical 
significance levels were not reported). 
Overall, the research by Neuman and Koskinen (1992) indicates that video materials can serve as useful 
input for incidental vocabulary learning and that this type of learning could lead to greater gains than 
reading in some receptive and productive aspects of vocabulary knowledge. It is unclear, however, whether 
the demonstrated lexical knowledge can be exclusively attributed to the video segments or scripts, because 
the participants could also have learned these words from other sources over the course of the study (e.g., 
in other school subjects). Furthermore, the generalisability of these results to other L2 learner populations 
is questionable, given that the participants were deemed at risk. 
A more recent study directly comparing incidental vocabulary learning from watching videos and reading 
was conducted by Vidal (2011). Her participants were 230 Spanish undergraduates learning English as a 
foreign language (EFL), divided into three treatment groups. Over three weeks, one group watched three 
videotaped academic lectures (14–15 minutes each), one read three academic texts on the same topics, and 
the control group received no treatment. The lectures and readings had the same content and target words; 
according to Vidal, only the style was slightly altered according to the medium. The 36 target words, from 
the University Word List (Guoyi & Nation, 1984), were repeated in each lecture or text between one and 
six times. Gains were assessed in pre-, post- and delayed post-tests (after one month) using a modified 
vocabulary knowledge scale (Wesche & Paribakht, 1996), which assessed form recognition, L2–L1 
translation, recall of meaning, and syntactic knowledge. The scale had been constructed and demonstrated 
to be reliable by Vidal (2003). The immediate post-test indicated that both the videos and readings resulted 
in significant vocabulary gains. Scores on the delayed post-test, although lower than those on the immediate 
post-test, were still significantly higher than pre-test scores, indicating a certain durability in these gains. 
The immediate gains of the reading group were significantly greater than those of the video group in all 
four aspects of knowledge tested. The reading group also showed significantly greater retention on the 
delayed post-test. However, the differences between the two groups was smaller for higher-proficiency 
participants, who may thus have been able to benefit equally from both media. There were no significant 
changes in the control group’s scores from the pre- to post-tests, indicating that the experimental groups’ 
gains could be attributed to the treatment. 
The extent to which Vidal’s (2011) results can be generalised to informal learning from other media is 
questionable. First, academic lectures are not representative of materials that L2 learners might typically 
engage with in their spare time. Second, the visual aspects of the videos used in this study are not 
specified—for example, whether they showed the lecturer or any pictures or slides. Vidal does not seem to 
attribute great effects to these visuals, referring to learning from the videotaped lectures as learning from 
listening. She does not discuss how the affordances of watching a videotaped lecture might differ from 
listening to an audiotape. 
It is important to note that the findings by Neuman and Koskinen (1992) and Vidal (2011) are contradictory: 
the former found greater vocabulary gains from watching a TV show than reading the scripts; the latter 
found greater gains from reading academic texts than watching video-taped lectures. There is, then, clearly 
a need for further studies that directly compare vocabulary learning from reading on the one hand, and from 
engaging with audio-visual media on the other. Furthermore, resulting from recent technological advances, 
many students now use a range of L2 media frequently in their everyday lives (including online video and 
texts; Sockett, 2014) which have been little studied to date, especially in direct comparison to each other 
and other media. The current study addresses these gaps in research and aims to help L2 learners and 
teachers gain a better understanding of ISLL. 
 
128 Language Learning & Technology 
 
This study was designed to address the following two research questions: 
1. Which medium (video blogs or written blog posts) leads to greater incidental vocabulary learning? 
2. Are there differences regarding which aspects of vocabulary knowledge are best learned from these 
media? 
Methodology 
The study took a quantitative, experimental approach but, unlike most prior research on incidental 
vocabulary learning, did not employ pre- and post-tests to assess learning gains. There are several 
disadvantages to the pre- and post-test methodology: First, pre-tests may be insufficiently sensitive, 
overlooking any partial knowledge of the target words that participants may already possess. Second, 
encountering the target words during pre-testing may itself contribute to their acquisition, calling into 
question whether any learning gains can really be attributed to the treatment. Finally, pre-testing may draw 
participants’ attention to the fact that the study is concerned with vocabulary acquisition, possibly leading 
them to try harder to learn new words encountered during the treatment and thereby violating Hulstijn’s 
(2001) operationalisation of incidental learning. Therefore, instead of using a pre- and post-test design, this 
study ensured that participants had no prior knowledge of the target words by replacing them with pseudo-
words (following Waring & Takaki, 2003; Webb, 2007, 2008). Since participants cannot have encountered 
these words before, all vocabulary knowledge in the post-test can be attributed to the treatment. 
Participants 
The participants were 84 EFL learners from various backgrounds, who volunteered to complete the study 
online following a call for participants posted on social media sites associated with the Nerdfighter1 online 
community. This sampling method was chosen as it was thought that these individuals were likely to be 
more familiar with, and more interested in, the format and content of the videos and blog posts in this study 
than a random or institutional sample of language learners would have been. 
As an inevitable result of the voluntary sampling, there was some demographic variation among the 
participants: They were 14 to 25 years old (M = 20.2, SD = 2.8) and spoke 19 different L1s, most commonly 
German (n = 23) and Dutch (n = 18). While some participants still attended secondary school (n = 14), 
most had either completed their secondary education (n = 37) or had completed at least some time at 
university (n = 32). Measures were taken, however, to ensure a degree of homogeneity in the participants’ 
L2 abilities: First, all participants had learned English in school for at least five years (M = 10.4, SD = 3.3), 
but they had not been raised bilingually, had not attended an English-speaking school, and had not lived in 
an English-speaking country for more than three months. Second, participants were excluded from the 
analysis if they did not appear to have sufficient lexical coverage to adequately comprehend the videos or 
texts. 
Criteria for Exclusion: Lexical Coverage 
To ensure that all participants in this study had sufficient lexical coverage, they completed the 5,000-word 
Vocabulary Levels Test (VLT) Version 1 (Schmitt, 2000). The VLT measures semantic word knowledge 
by asking test-takers to match lexical items and their definitions. It includes vocabulary at different 
frequency levels and can be “utilized … to inform decisions concerning whether an examinee [is] likely to 
have the lexical resources necessary to cope with certain language tasks, such as reading authentic 
materials” (Schmitt, Schmitt, & Clapham, 2001, p. 56). 
Five participants, who answered fewer than 23 out of 27 items correctly (85%), were excluded from the 
analysis. This threshold was chosen to approximate the criterion of mastery of a vocabulary level set by 
Schmitt et al. (2001; i.e., 26 out of 30 items, or 86.7%). The scores of the remaining 79 participants (M = 
25.8, SD = 2.2) suggested that their vocabulary knowledge was such that they would likely understand the 
input materials without problems. To support this assumption, a frequency profile of the input materials 
was also created using the Lextutor Vocabprofile software (Cobb, 2013). When excluding proper nouns 
Henriette L. Arndt and Robert Woore 129 
 
from the analysis, but including the pseudo-words, only 13 out of 337 lemmas in the scripts (3.9%) were 
not part of the 5,000 most frequent English words. Knowledge of the most frequent 5,000 word families 
would thus give participants 96.1% coverage, presumably making the input adequately comprehensible. 
Procedure 
Participants completed the study using a browser-based web survey. To avoid priming them to focus 
intentionally on learning new words, the study’s purpose was not fully revealed at the beginning. Instead, 
participants were told that the study was about learners’ comprehension of English-language blogs and 
YouTube vlogs. Furthermore, to prevent participants from discovering that the study used pseudo- rather 
than real words (e.g., by attempting to look up their meanings), they were instructed not to use other 
websites or materials while completing the survey. 
After completing the VLT, participants were randomly assigned to one of two treatment groups. The 
participants in the video group (n = 38 after VLT-based exclusions) watched three vlogs, two to five 
minutes long, in which video bloggers (vloggers) talked directly to the camera about online friendships. 
Some photographs which the vloggers talked about were also shown on screen. The participants who were 
assigned to the blog group (n = 42 after exclusions) read three blog posts created from the video scripts. 
Each post was 450–800 words long (1,691 total) and included the same photographs as the videos. The blog 
texts and hyperlinks to the videos appear in the Appendix. 
After reading the blogs or watching the vlogs, both groups completed a test measuring different aspects of 
knowledge of six pseudo-words included in the videos and texts (see below). Finally, participants were 
debriefed about the study’s full purpose and about the fact that the test items had been pseudo-words. 
Input Materials and Target Words 
To make the blogs and videos as authentic as possible, they were created in collaboration with three well-
established YouTube content creators. The topic (online friendships) was considered by both the 
researchers and these creators as one that was likely to appeal to a wide audience. To enable a fair 
comparison of the effects of the input modality (audio-visual versus textual) on vocabulary learning, the 
videos and blogs were matched in terms of linguistic content. That is, the video scripts were used as the 
blog posts, with only minimal alterations where necessary (e.g., write to you instead of talk to you). 
Six target words (time zone, message, photo, (to) travel, (to) write, and interesting) were chosen on the 
grounds that they were easy to repeat frequently when discussing online friendships, yet (in the opinion of 
the researchers and content creators) would not be vital to understanding the overall gist. Three nouns, two 
verbs, and one adjective were selected, being the word classes most commonly found in natural speech. 
These numbers also reflect their proportional frequency of occurrence in general speech (Kucera & Francis, 
1967). In the case of travel, the vloggers were instructed to use the word only as a verb (not as a noun). 
In line with the findings of previous studies (as noted above), it was anticipated that participants would 
need to encounter each target word at least 10 times to achieve measurable learning. Each target word was 
therefore incorporated into each video or text three to six times—but not more often than that, to avoid 
making them overly salient. Each item was thus repeated 11–14 times in total (see Table 1). 
The target words were then replaced by pseudo-words, adopted from Webb (2007). They respected English 
morphological conventions, phonotactic constraints, and spelling patterns. All were bisyllabic and had five 
or six letters in their written forms. Table 1 shows the target words and their pseudo-word substitutes. In 
the videos, the pseudo-words were given standard English grammatical inflections.  
130 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Table 1. Target Words, Pseudo-Words, and Number of Repetitions 
Word Forms  Number of Repetitions 
Target Word Pseudo-Word  Script 1 Script 2 Script 3 Total 
time zone pacon  3 4 4 11 
message masco  4 4 5 13 
photo sagod  4 4 6 14 
(to) travel tasper  4 4 5 13 
(to) write ancon  4 4 5 13 
interesting dangy  4 4 4 12 
Total   24 23 29 76 
The vloggers were asked to write a script for a video of about two to five minutes in length and received 
instructions about how often to include the target words. In terms of content, however, they were entirely 
free to decide how to approach the specified topic of online friendships. They wrote the scripts 
independently of each other, so that the videos would reflect their own individual styles as authentically as 
possible. The scripts were edited by the researchers only regarding consistent usage and relatively even 
spread of the pseudo-words. The vloggers then filmed their videos according to the revised scripts, which 
also formed the basis for the blog posts. Finally, the researchers uploaded the videos and blog posts to a 
YouTube channel and BlogSpot page created for this study and included the hyperlinks in the web survey. 
Measuring Vocabulary Gains 
After watching the videos or reading the blog posts, the participants completed five tasks designed to 
measure different aspects of vocabulary knowledge. The tasks were adapted from Webb (2007), but to 
reduce the overall testing burden and thus the risk of attrition, only 5 of Webb’s 10 tests were used. As in 
Webb’s study, the tasks were “sequenced to avoid earlier tests affecting answers to later tests” (2007, p. 
54). The format was not altered, with the exception of the tests of knowledge of meaning: In Webb’s study, 
these were L2–L1 translation tests, but in the present study, participants spoke a variety of L1s. Monolingual 
tests of meaning recognition and recall were therefore adapted from another study by Webb (2008). 
Descriptions of the five tests appear in Table 2, listed in the order in which participants completed them. 
As mentioned before, word learning is not an all-or-nothing phenomenon. Therefore, Table 2 also explains 
how the recall tasks were scored in a way that recognised partial knowledge. For example, in the Recall of 
Meaning task, paraphrases or synonyms were marked correct even if they matched only one of the target 
word’s meanings. 
In the tasks, all lexical items were presented without contexts, as these may have cued recall and provided 
clues for the later tasks. To help suspend participants’ possible disbelief about the realness of the pseudo-
words, all tasks also included four distractors, which were low-frequency words that appeared only once in 
the input materials. The answers for distractor items were not analysed. Finally, to mitigate any effects of 
a guessing bias (cf. Schmitt, 2010), participants were told in each test that they should try to answer only if 
they thought they knew the words, but not to guess if they did not (and instead to answer I don’t know). 
It was expected that the participants would perform better on the recognition tasks, as these were more 
sensitive to partial knowledge: they were multiple-choice tests in which the distractors were very different 
from the correct answer, so that the participants would be able to choose the correct answer even if they 
possessed only partial knowledge of the target word. The recall measures were designed to be more difficult 
and require fuller knowledge of the target words, so that, taken together, the tests would show sensitivity 
to partial gains as well as exploring different aspects of receptive and productive word knowledge. 
Henriette L. Arndt and Robert Woore 131 
 
Table 2. Description of Tasks and Accepted Answers in the Post-Test 
Aspect of Knowledge Task Accepted Answers 
Recall of Orthographic 
Form 
Write down the pseudo-word 
after hearing an audio recording 
of the spoken form 
Correct spellings; plausible forms with minor 
spelling alternations (e.g., paycon for pacon), as 
judged by two English native speakers 
Recall of Meaning Write a short description of the 
meaning of the pseudo-word 
Either the target word itself (e.g., message for masco) 
or a plausible synonym or circumlocution (e.g., 
written communication for message) 
Recall of Grammatical 
Function 
Write a sentence containing the 
pseudo-word 
Any sentence in which the pseudo-word is used as 
the correct part of speech (irrespective of whether the 
sentence reflected a correct understanding of the 
word’s meaning) 
Recognition of 
Grammatical Function 
Multiple-choice; choice of three 
sentences in which the pseudo-
words were used in different 
grammatical functions (i.e., 
nouns, verbs, adjectives) 
Successful identification of the sentence in which the 
pseudo-word was used as the correct part of speech 
Recognition of 
Meaning 
Multiple-choice; choice of the 
correct meaning plus three 
plausible alternatives related to 
the topic of the videos 
Successful identification of the correct meaning 
Results 
A preliminary comparison of the groups was conducted using independent t-tests (for age, years of L2 
experience, and VLT scores) and a Mann-Whitney U test (for level of education). These found no 
significant differences between the two groups. Thus, it was assumed that they were indeed comparable 
and that any differences in vocabulary learning could be attributed to the input modality. 
Research Question 1. Comparison of Overall Lexical Gains 
The first research question asked which medium—video blogs or written blog posts—led to greater 
incidental vocabulary learning. To answer this question, the two groups’ total vocabulary gain scores were 
compared. These scores were calculated for each participant by adding together the scores of all six items 
(0 = false, 1 = correct) from all five post-tests. Total scores could thus range from 0 to 30, and their 
distribution was found to be normal for both groups, with skewness and kurtosis figures falling between 
-2 and +2 (Cameron, 2004). 
An independent samples t-test indicated no significant difference between the video and blog groups 
regarding total gains (see Table 3). However, there was a significantly higher variation in the scores of the 
blog group than the video group: Levene’s Test of Equal Variances was violated (F = 5.75, p < .05). The 
middle 50% of scores (25th to 75th quartile) fell between 12 and 28 out of 30 in the blog group, and between 
17 and 26 in the video group. 
Research Question 2. Comparison of Gains in Different Aspects of Vocabulary Knowledge 
To answer the second research question, whether there were differences regarding the aspects of vocabulary 
knowledge gained from the vlogs and blogs, the groups’ mean scores (out of six) on the various tasks were 
compared, using a series of independent samples t-tests (Table 3). A Bonferroni adjustment was applied to 
correct for the effect of multiple comparisons, setting the critical level of significance at α = .005. There 
132 Language Learning & Technology 
 
was one statistically significant difference between the two groups: the blog group scored higher than the 
video group on orthographic knowledge. This means that they were, on average, able to produce a correct 
or plausible spelling for one additional word out of six. Cohen’s d (Cohen, 1988) indicated that this was a 
medium- to large-sized effect (d = .72). 
According to Cohen’s d, there was also a medium-sized effect of the input modality on meaning recognition 
(d = .43) and two small effects on the recall of grammatical function and meaning (both d = .25). On these 
tests, the video group outperformed the blog group, but the differences in their scores did not reach 
statistical significance. Although in terms of raw scores the differences between the groups may appear 
small (e.g., on average the video group recalled the meaning of only 0.5 words more than the blog group), 
it should be borne in mind that the maximum possible score was only 6.0. Therefore, the differences may 
have appeared greater, had there been a larger number of target items. 
Table 3. Comparison of Vocabulary Gains by the Video and Blog Groups 
 Video  Blog     
Variable M SD n  M SD n t df p d 
Total Vocabulary Gain 20.77 6.35 38  19.76 8.37 41 0.58 73 .561 .13 
Orthography 3.71 1.66 38  4.79 1.30 38 -3.16 74 .002* .72 
Grammatical Function 
(Recognition) 
4.26 1.41 38  4.07 2.07 41 0.48 71 .637 .11 
Grammatical Function 
(Recall) 
4.11 1.69 36  3.61 2.20 41 1.13 73 .271 .25 
Meaning (Recognition) 5.13 0.78 38  4.49 1.98 41 1.93 53 .064 .43 
Meaning (Recall) 3.74 1.86 38  3.23 2.24 40 1.10 76 .276 .25 
*Indicates statistical significance at the level of 𝛼 = .005. 
Discussion 
Research Question 1. Comparison of Overall Lexical Gains 
The total scores on the vocabulary tests support the findings of earlier studies that both text and videos can 
provide suitable input for incidental vocabulary learning (e.g., Neuman & Koskinen, 1992; Pigada & 
Schmitt, 2006; Winke et al., 2010; Zahar et al., 2001). On average, when tested on their ability to recall or 
recognise the orthography, meaning, and grammatical function of six pseudo-words, participants in this 
study gave correct or plausible answers for about three to five items. These vocabulary knowledge gains 
resulted from 11–14 encounters with each pseudo-word, either whilst watching the three video blogs or 
reading the three blog posts.  
A key goal of the current study was to compare directly, in a controlled setting, the effects of written and 
audio-visual media on vocabulary learning. The mean overall vocabulary gains were slightly higher from 
watching the vlogs than from reading the blog posts, but this difference was not statistically significant. 
However, it is interesting to note that there was significantly higher variation in the scores of the blog group 
than the video group. One explanation for this difference could be the way that these types of materials 
were processed. The depth of processing theory (Craik & Lockhart, 1972) states that the depth of a learner’s 
engagement with language input stands in direct relation to the knowledge she or he will thereby obtain. 
The blogs could have led to a wider variance in gains by permitting greater variation in the depth with 
which participants processed the target items: some may have merely skimmed the texts and thus made 
fewer gains; others may have read and reflected on them in greater detail and made greater gains. Because 
it is not possible to skim a video for its gist in the same way, such wide variations in depth of processing 
Henriette L. Arndt and Robert Woore 133 
 
would presumably not have occurred in the video group (assuming participants remained focused 
throughout the whole video). This explanation is supported by the observation that previous studies of 
incidental vocabulary learning from reading have often let participants listen to the text while reading along, 
in order to ensure consistent levels of processing (e.g., Neuman & Koskinen, 1992; Zahar et al., 2001). 
Alternatively, the higher variability of learning gains within the blog group could have occurred because 
influential learner- or text-related variables (e.g., L2 proficiency or in-text frequency of the target words) 
differentially affected learning from the two media. For example, Vidal (2011) found that in-text frequency 
of target items predicted more variation in gains from reading than from watching videos. This possibility 
would be an interesting focus for further research. 
Research Question 2. Comparison of Gains in Different Aspects of Vocabulary Knowledge 
In addition to comparing the total vocabulary gains from reading and watching videos, this study aimed to 
discover whether there were differences in the aspects of vocabulary knowledge that these two media 
promoted. 
The blog group was found to have gained significantly more orthographic knowledge of the pseudo-words 
than the video group (d = .72). This was as expected, since the blog group saw the written forms of the 
pseudo-words, whereas the video group did not. (Any gains in orthographic knowledge for the video group 
therefore had to derive from spellings constructed by the participants themselves, based on their knowledge 
of English sound-to-spelling correspondences.) 
Furthermore, the scores of the two groups indicated a medium-sized effect of the input medium on meaning 
recognition (d = .43) and small effects on the recall of grammatical function and meaning (both d = .25). 
The video group outperformed the blog group on these measures, although these differences did not reach 
statistical significance, which might be attributable to the fact that p-values, but not effect sizes, are sensitive 
to the study’s relatively small sample size (n = 79). The fact that the direction of these effects differed from 
that found in respect of orthographic knowledge might further explain why the video and blog groups did 
not show significant differences in their total vocabulary gains: the two sets of between-group differences 
might have cancelled each other out. 
The absence of significant differences in total vocabulary gains cautions against drawing any firm 
conclusions about the general comparative effectiveness of the two modalities (audio-visual media and 
written text) for vocabulary learning. Nevertheless, this study raises interesting questions for the ongoing 
debate over the relative effectiveness of these modalities for different aspects of vocabulary acquisition. 
The finding that—albeit on a descriptive level—the video group outperformed the blog group on three 
aspects of vocabulary gains aligns with the results of the study by Neuman and Koskinen (1992), who found 
greater vocabulary gains from watching science TV segments than reading scripts. This might have been 
because the videos were highly engaging and the visual information could have helped learners comprehend 
the aural language input (Moore et al., 2004). By contrast, Vidal’s (2011) participants showed greater 
lexical gains from reading academic texts than from watching videotaped lectures. Thus, it is clear that 
further research is required to investigate this issue. One possibility is that vocabulary gains depend not 
only on the input medium, but also on the genre or topic of the text. This hypothesis is supported by research 
by Markham (1999), in which participants made greater vocabulary gains from watching a video on 
American civil rights than from watching a documentary about whales. 
Generalisability 
It is possible that the current study may have over- or under-estimated the gains that might be expected to 
occur from online reading or from watching videos in the real world. Using pseudo-words ensured that the 
target items were unknown to the participants, eliminating the need for pre-testing and ensuring that there 
were a certain number of new lexical items in the input for participants to learn. It has previously been 
argued that acquisition studies using pseudo-words simulate authentic learning because, like most L2 
vocabulary acquisition, they involve assigning a new label to a meaning that is already familiar (Service, 
134 Language Learning & Technology 
 
1992) and because “form–meaning relationships are essentially arbitrary” anyway (Hulstijn, 2001, p. 262). 
Since participants in this study had not been informed that pseudo-words would be used (and since Webb, 
2007 reports that ESL learners in his study believed that these same pseudo-words were in fact real English 
words), authentic learning was expected to occur. However, some participants in this study (approximately 
10%) indicated spontaneously that they believed that the pseudo-words were not real words. During the 
meaning recall task, for example, one participant wrote “I think you invented this word, but I think it 
means…” We must therefore consider what effect the pseudo-words may have on learning gains. 
Some researchers have argued that using pseudo-words may lead to an underestimation of learning: 
Papagno, Valentine, and Baddeley (1991), for example, suggested that learners who are aware of the use 
of pseudo-words may be less motivated to learn them, knowing that they would be useless in the real world. 
One reviewer of Webb’s (2008) study also suggested that using pseudo-words to replace frequent real words 
may reduce learners’ chances of correctly inferring their meaning from context because they already know 
another word that expresses the same meaning, again leading to an underestimation of learning gains (p. 
241). 
Conversely, Liu and Nation (1985) argue that, if participants already know the words replaced by pseudo-
forms—as is assumed to be the case in the current study—then clues like collocational knowledge may help 
them derive their meaning, leading to an overestimation of learning effects. Relatedly, it must be noted that 
in this study, the pseudo-words replaced words with relatively high frequencies in general speech, which 
could have made it easier for participants to infer their meaning. Finally, Pulido (2007) reasoned that 
awareness of the use of pseudo-words goes along with identifying the gap in one’s own knowledge about 
the meaning of these items, which according to the noticing hypothesis (Schmidt, 1990) is a condition for 
learning and could thus also lead to an overestimation of gains. 
These contradicting predictions arising from the use of pseudo-words (either an underestimation or an 
overestimation of the learning gains) suggest that the effects of using pseudo-words in vocabulary learning 
research require further investigation. However, there is no reason to suppose that the use of pseudo-words 
would differentially affect learning from the two media compared in this study, and thus the comparison 
should remain valid. 
Another feature of the present study that could limit the generalisability of the reported gains was that each 
pseudo-word was embedded in the videos and blogs with equal frequency. This was to control for the 
known effects of the in-text frequency of target words on learning gains. However, it is still unclear whether 
authentic blog posts and vlogs also feature low-frequency words at similar rates. This could be investigated 
in corpus studies, such as those recently conducted with films (Webb, 2010) and television shows (Rodgers 
& Webb, 2011; Sockett, 2011; Webb & Rodgers, 2009). If real vlogs and blogs repeat low-frequency words 
less often than was the case for pseudo-words in the present study, then the gains reported would again be 
an overestimation of authentic learning, and vice versa. Furthermore, if, in the real world, low-frequency 
words occur significantly more often in one medium than another, then this would of course influence the 
estimation of the relative usefulness of these media for incidental vocabulary learning. 
Finally, the very nature of the vocabulary tests used in this study may limit the generalisability of the results. 
For example, the participants may have gained knowledge of other words that were not tested. By selecting 
participants on the basis of their VLT scores, it was assumed that they knew the most frequent 5,000 words 
in English, or around 96% of the words in the input. Nevertheless, the treatment may have led participants 
to acquire other words previously unknown to them, or to increase their knowledge of words of which they 
had only had partial knowledge. 
Limitations and Future Research 
There are several limitations inherent to the design of this study, in addition to those already discussed 
above regarding the sampling method, generalisability, sample size, and the use of pseudo-words. 
First, it must be noted that vocabulary gains were measured based on only six target words: three nouns, 
Henriette L. Arndt and Robert Woore 135 
 
two verbs, and one adjective. It may be useful for future research to compare incidental learning of more 
target words through reading and watching videos, and to include other parts of speech. Furthermore, gains 
in knowledge of only three aspects of vocabulary (grammatical function, spelling, and meaning) were 
assessed. A more extensive battery of tests would have enabled a more thorough comparison of those 
aspects of vocabulary knowledge best gained from the two media. 
Due to resource limitations, no delayed-post tests were conducted. However, as Webb (2008, p. 237) 
remarks, “without the possibility of further encounters with the [pseudo-words…], the rate of decay of 
vocabulary should follow established norms” (see also Waring & Takaki, 2003). Nevertheless, future 
research is needed to compare the durability of learning gains from the two modalities. 
Furthermore, although the current study controlled for some factors previously found to influence incidental 
vocabulary learning (e.g., number of encounters with target words), it did not account for a number of other 
variables, such as contextual informativeness or the learners’ general L2 proficiency. Because of a lack of 
strong evidence to suggest the contrary, it could be assumed that these variables affected both conditions 
equally. Nonetheless, further research is needed to determine whether the findings in this study are 
generalisable to other text and video materials, since each genre of language input has its own 
characteristics. Finally, more research is needed to shed light on the processes behind the learning gains 
observed in the present study. A qualitative approach may prove especially useful in this regard. 
Conclusion 
This study adds to existing research on incidental vocabulary learning in several ways. To the best of the 
authors’ knowledge, it is the first study to measure incidental learning gains from two popular types of 
online media: blog posts and video blogs. Unlike most texts and videos studied in previous research (e.g., 
graded readers, academic texts, educational videos), the media investigated here are not usually designed 
as learning resources. They may therefore be more representative of the kind of content with which L2 
users might choose to engage in their spare time. By directly comparing the learning from both media, this 
study also contributes to the very limited body of research into the differential effects that reading and 
watching video may have on incidental vocabulary learning (Neuman & Koskinen, 1992; Vidal, 2011). 
The data showed that incidental vocabulary learning occurred, in approximately equal amounts, from both 
reading blog posts and watching vlogs. However, there were some indications that different types of 
vocabulary knowledge were gained from the two modalities. Unsurprisingly, written input promoted greater 
gains in orthographic knowledge than did videos, although previous research findings (e.g., Hui, 2007; 
Markham, 1999; Winke et al., 2010) suggest that this effect might have been reduced if the participants had 
watched the vlogs with L2 captions. Conversely, there was some tentative evidence that the videos may 
have promoted greater recall of the target words’ grammatical functions and greater recognition and recall 
of their meanings. This might have been because the vlogs were highly engaging and the visual information 
helped learners to comprehend the aural language input (Moore et al., 2004). Given that previous studies 
have produced contrasting findings in respect of this issue, further research is required in this area. 
There seems to be a commonly held belief among language professionals that extensive reading is the most 
important means of learning vocabulary informally (e.g., Waring, 2009). However, there is considerable 
variability in the conceptualisation of what exactly constitutes extensive reading. In light of the present 
findings, it seems a serious oversight to discount the effectiveness of online multimedia resources such as 
vlogs and blogs for word learning, and indeed these activities could be recognised as extensive reading or 
listening activities under a broader definition (Waring, 2015; Waring & McLean, 2015). 
When engaging with these media in their free time, individuals choose what content to attend to, presumably 
leading to higher levels of motivation and allowing for individualisation of the vocabulary learned. Indeed, 
a key principle of extensive reading is students’ free choice of text and topic (Day & Bamford, 1998). In a 
language class that includes students with widely varying interests, it is often impossible to teach every 
student the vocabulary she or he needs. However, a student interested in mathematics might, for example, 
136 Language Learning & Technology 
 
choose to follow YouTuber Vi Hart (n.d.), who produces highly engaging videos in which she explains 
mathematical principles through music. Extrapolating from the findings of the current study, these videos 
could help the student learn the specialist vocabulary he or she needs to pursue an interest in mathematics 
through English. 
Furthermore, even though students often engage with online media independently, a better understanding 
of the affordances of various modes of linguistic input for different aspects of language acquisition could 
help both learners and teachers identify the most effective ways of reaching particular learning goals. 
Teachers might draw their students’ attention to the potential of various informal online activities to support 
their language learning beyond the classroom; and indeed they might even consider how to help learners 
make the most of such activities through effective learning strategies. Nonetheless, teachers should not 
forget that their students seem to engage in online activities primarily for entertainment (Sockett, 2014). 
Discussing the potential of these activities as learning tasks could, therefore, negatively affect students’ 
motivation to engage in them in the first place. Given the prevalence of social media in many young 
people’s lives, these issues are important areas for further consideration. 
Acknowledgements 
We are sincerely grateful to the participants who volunteered to take part in this study. We also gratefully 
acknowledge the video bloggers (Chris, Lidewij, and JP) who donated their time and creativity to produce 
the YouTube videos and blog posts for this project. Finally, we would like to thank the anonymous 
reviewers for their helpful comments on earlier drafts of this article. 
Notes 
1. The Nerdfighter online community formed in 2007 around the Vlogbrothers YouTube channel 
belonging to author John Green and his brother, Hank Green. In this community, things that are often 
labelled by young people as “nerdy” in a derogative fashion are highly valued and celebrated (e.g., 
intelligence and learning or being passionate and enthusiastic about your interests—whether an 
academic discipline, a book, a TV show, etc.) Nerdfighters are primarily adolescents and young adults, 
but there are also older members (Green, 2014). Though largely based in the US, there are many 
members in all parts of the world who mainly network with each other online but often also attend 
meet-ups and form close friendships in person. Most Nerdfighters communicate in English although 
many are not native speakers. Anecdotal evidence suggests that new members often rapidly improve 
their English proficiency when they start actively participating in communities such as this. 
References 
Adolphs, S., & Schmitt, N. (2004). Vocabulary coverage according to spoken discourse context. In P. 
Bogaards & B. Laufer (Eds.), Vocabulary in a second language: Selection, acquisition, and testing 
(pp. 39–49). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Alderson, J. C. (2005). Diagnosing foreign language proficiency. London, UK: Continuum. 
Cameron, A. C. (2004). Kurtosis. In M. S. Lewis-Beck, A. Bryman, & T. F. Liao (Eds.), The SAGE 
encyclopedia of social science research methods (pp. 544–546). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Çetin, Y., Sözcü, Ö. F., & Kinay, H. (2012). Incidental foreign language vocabulary acquisition from 
social network games. Journal of Human Sciences, 9(2), 535–552. 
Cobb, T. (2013). Lextutor Vocab Profiler (BNC-COCA). Retrieved from https://www.lextutor.ca/vp/ 
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Henriette L. Arndt and Robert Woore 137 
 
Craik, F. I. M., & Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of processing: A framework for memory research. 
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11(6), 671–684. 
Day, R. R., & Bamford, J. (1998). Extensive reading in the second language classroom. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge Language Education. 
DeKeyser, R. M., & Sokalski, K. J. (1996). The differential role of comprehension and production 
practice. Language Learning, 46(4), 613–642. 
Elley, W. B. (1991). Acquiring literacy in a second language: The effect of book-based programs. 
Language Learning, 41(3), 375–411. 
Ellis, R. (1999). Factors in the incidental acquisition of second language vocabulary from oral input. In R. 
Ellis (Ed.), Learning a second language through interaction (pp. 35–62). Amsterdam, Netherlands: 
John Benjamins. 
Green, D. W., & Meara, P. (1995). Guest editorial. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 8(2–3), 97–
102. 
Green, H. (2014). 2014 Nerdfighter census analysis. Retrieved from 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sh5RemPWcds 
Guoyi, X., & Nation, I. S. P. (1984). A university word list. Language Learning and Communication, 
3(2), 215–229. 
Henriksen, B. (1999). Three dimensions of vocabulary development. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 21(2), 303–317. 
Hu, M. H.-C., & Nation, I. S. P. (2000). Unknown vocabulary density and reading comprehension. 
Reading in a Foreign Language, 13(1), 403–430. 
Huang, B.-G., & Yang, J. C. (2012). A multiplayer online role-playing game for incidental vocabulary 
learning. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Computers in Education. Singapore: 
National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University. 
Hui, W. (2007). The effects of captions on Chinese EFL students’ incidental vocabulary acquisition. 
Chinese English Language Education Association Journal, 30(4), 9–16. 
Hulstijn, J. H. (2001). Intentional and incidental second language vocabulary learning: A reappraisal of 
elaboration, rehearsal, and automaticity. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and Second Language 
Instruction (pp. 258–286). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Krashen, S. D. (1981). Second language acquisition and second language learning. Oxford, UK: 
Pergamon Press. 
Kucera, H., & Francis, W. N. (1967). A computational analysis of present-day American English. 
Providence, RI: Brown University Press. 
Laufer, B., & Ravenhorst-Kalovski, G. C. (2010). Lexical threshold revisited: Lexical text coverage, 
learners’ vocabulary size, and reading comprehension. Reading in a Foreign Language, 22(1), 15–30. 
Liu, N., & Nation, I. S. P. (1985). Factors affecting guessing vocabulary in context. RELC Journal, 16(1), 
33–42. 
Markham, P. (1999). Captioned videotapes and second-language listening word recognition. Foreign 
Language Annals, 32(3), 321–328. 
Milton, J. (2008). Vocabulary uptake from informal learning tasks. Language Learning Journal, 36(2), 
227–237. 
138 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Moore, M., Burton, J. K., & Myers, R. J. (2004). Multiple-channel communication: The theoretical and 
research foundations of multimedia. In D. H. Jonasssen (Ed.), Handbook of research on educational 
communications and technology (2nd ed., pp. 979–1005). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Nation, I. S. P. (1990). Teaching and learning vocabulary. Boston, MA: Heinle. 
Nation, I. S. P. (2001). Learning vocabulary in another language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Neuman, S. B., & Koskinen, P. (1992). Captioned television as comprehensible input: Effects of 
incidental word learning from context for language minority students. Reading Research Quarterly, 
27(1), 94–106. 
Papagno, C., Valentine, T., & Baddeley, A. (1991). Phonological short-term memory and foreign-
language vocabulary learning. Journal of Memory and Language, 30(3), 331–347. 
Pigada, M., & Schmitt, N. (2006). Vocabulary acquisition from extensive reading: A case study. Reading 
in a Foreign Language, 18(1), 1–28. 
Pulido, D. (2007). The effects of topic familiarity and passage sight vocabulary on L2 lexical inferencing 
and retention through reading. Applied Linguistics, 26, 66–86. 
Rodgers, M. P. H., & Webb, S. (2011). Narrow viewing: The vocabulary in related television programs. 
TESOL Quarterly, 45(4), 689–717. 
Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 11, 129–
158. 
Schmitt, N. (2000). Vocabulary in language teaching. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Schmitt, N. (2010). Researching vocabulary: A vocabulary research manual. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave 
MacMillan. 
Schmitt, N., Schmitt, D., & Clapham, C. (2001). Developing and exploring the behaviour of two new 
versions of the Vocabulary Levels Test. Language Testing, 18(1), 55–88. 
Service, E. (1992). Phonology, working memory, and foreign-language learning. The Quarterly Journal 
of Experimental Psychology, 45(1), 21–50. 
Sockett, G. (2011). From the cultural hegemony of English to online informal learning: Cluster frequency 
as an indicator of relevance in authentic documents. La Revue Du Groupe d’Étude et de Recherche en 
Anglais de Spécialité, 59, 5–20. Retrieved from https://asp.revues.org/2469 
Sockett, G. (2014). The online informal learning of English. London, UK: Palgrave MacMillan. 
Sockett, G., & Toffoli, D. (2012). Beyond learner autonomy: A dynamic systems view of the informal 
learning of English in virtual online communities. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 34, 
212–215. 
Stæhr, L. S. (2008). Vocabulary size and the skills of listening, reading, and writing. The Language 
Learning Journal, 36(2), 139–152. 
Toffoli, D., & Sockett, G. (2010). How non-specialist students of English practice informal learning using 
web 2.0 tools. La Revue Du Groupe d’Étude et de Recherche en Anglais de Spécialité, 58, 125–154. 
Retrieved from https://asp.revues.org/1851 
Vi Hart. (n.d.). Home [YouTube Channel]. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/user/Vihart 
Vidal, K. (2003). Academic listening: A source of vocabulary acquisition? Applied Linguistics, 24(1), 56–
89. 
Henriette L. Arndt and Robert Woore 139 
 
Vidal, K. (2011). A comparison of the effects of reading and listening on incidental vocabulary 
acquisition. Language Learning, 61(1), 219–258. 
Waring, R. (2009). The inescapable case for extensive reading. Retrieved from 
http://www.robwaring.org/er/what_and_why/er_is_vital.htm 
Waring, R. (2015). The poor cousin? Extensive listening. Paper presented at the ER Foundation World 
Congress Dubai. Dubai, United Arab Emirates. Retrieved from 
http://www.robwaring.org/presentations/EL/The_poor_cousin_Extensive_Listening_WC4.pptx 
Waring, R., & McLean, S. (2015). Exploration of the core and variable dimensions of extensive reading 
research and pedagogy. Reading in a Foreign Language, 27(1), 160–167. 
Waring, R., & Takaki, M. (2003). At what rate do learners learn and retain new vocabulary from reading 
a graded reader? Reading in a Foreign Language, 15(2), 130–163. 
Webb, S. (2007). The effects of repetition on vocabulary knowledge. Applied Linguistics, 28(1), 46–65. 
Webb, S. (2008). The effects of context on incidental vocabulary learning. Reading in a Foreign 
Language, 20(2), 232–245. 
Webb, S. (2010). A corpus driven study of the potential for vocabulary learning through watching 
movies. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 15(4), 497–519. 
Webb, S., & Rodgers, M. P. H. (2009). Vocabulary demands of television programs. Language Learning, 
59(2), 335–366. 
Wesche, M. B., & Paribakht, T. S. (1996). Assessing vocabulary knowledge: Depth vs. breadth. The 
Canadian Modern Language Review, 53(1), 13–49. 
Winke, P., Gass, S. M., & Sydorenko, T. (2010). The effects of captioning videos used for foreign 
language listening activities. Language Learning & Technology, 14(1), 65–86. 
Zahar, R., Cobb, T., & Spada, N. (2001). Acquiring vocabulary through reading: Effects of frequency and 
contextual richness. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 57(4), 541–572. 
Appendix. Input Materials 
Chris on Making YouTube Friends 
Video available at https://youtu.be/vOSnxKu4DwE 
Hey guys! 
A lot of you have been asking me about the sagods I have on my wall so I thought I’d tell you the story 
behind them. I’ll start with one sagod in particular and it’s this one of me and JP. [photograph not included] 
So I think it was around April 2012 and I’d just uploaded a big video about Doctor Who on my channel. 
And I get this masco from a YouTuber in Australia saying we should ancon a video together and collaborate. 
So I ancon a reply saying it’s a really cool idea, it’s just a shame that he’s on the other side of the world! 
But he ancons back—surprisingly quickly actually considering the different pacons—and he says he’s 
planning to tasper around Europe and we should meet up. So I just thought ‘Why not?’ and he taspers to 
the UK I think in June the same year, and he sends me a masco saying ‘Let’s go for sushi!’ 
So we met up in London and I was really nervous actually because it was the first time I’d just ever agreed 
to just go and meet a YouTuber who I’ve never met before. But it was really dangy actually and we hit it 
off straight away. So we shot a little vid together about the differences between the UK and Australia and 
there’s quite a lot of differences actually. There’s more than just the accents and the different pacons. And 
I find it really dangy actually that Australians love coming to the UK so much. I mean, why would you 
want to tasper over here when you’ve got the amazing beaches over there? 
140 Language Learning & Technology 
 
But yeah, we anconed this little script together, made our little video, and after that he carried on taspering. 
I think he went off to Germany and I thought that was the last we’d see of each other. But then I was at 
Summer in the City a few weeks later and I got a masco saying “Hey! I’m coming to Summer in the City, 
too!” 
So we hung out that weekend and I introduced him to all my friends and that’s actually when we took that 
sagod. We also took another one with everyone. [photograph not included] 
And I think it’s just really cool that you can meet people from the other side of the world through YouTube. 
And it’s just really dangy that it didn’t exist a few years ago and then here it is, creating friendships! 
But yeah, even though he’s back in Australia we still send each other mascos and we always try and Skype 
whenever we can. Obviously there’s a bit of a difference in the pacons so we have to see when we’re both 
online. But whenever we can, we do. I think that’s really cool and that’s why I keep all of the sagods of me 
and my friends on my wall. 
Lidewij on Online Friendships 
Video available at https://youtu.be/Q7deTCapeso 
Hi guys! In this post I want to talk about one of my favorite benefits of being involved in the YouTube 
community: online friendships. I think online friendships are great and can be pretty dangy as well. I highly 
recommend acquiring some! I’ll try to add sagods whenever I have any, but no promises! 
My first real live contact with people I knew through the internet was in Berlin, in 2008. John Green, who 
is a YouTuber and writer, had just anconed Paper Towns and was visiting the city for some sort of book 
event. Approximately six people who watched his videos taspered to Berlin to see him. Here, a sagod. 
[photograph not included] 
It was very difficult to get time off from school to tasper to Berlin, but it worked out in the end. The most 
dangy take-away was, in my opinion, how these people I met, despite growing up in a different country, 
had similar inside jokes and stuff. It was the first time I realized that being part of an internet community 
can have such a profound impact on your opinions, humor, and culture. I think that’s really dangy! 
After I got back, I anconed a masco in response to a thread in which people were trying to organize a 
gathering in Amsterdam. We met up pretty soon after. Six of the people I met at that gathering are still 
some of my best friends. If I manage to find a sagod, I’ll put it right here. [photograph not included] 
In 2010, I went to VidCon, which is a large YouTube event in LA. This was the first gathering I attended 
outside of my own pacon. I finally got to meet some people I’d only known online before, specifically my 
Canadian friend Jess. This is a sagod of us in LA. [photograph not included] 
After VidCon I sent Jess a masco to ask if I could visit her in Canada and she sent a masco back saying it 
was OK. I had a great time staying with her and learned some dangy stuff about Canada, like that you can’t 
boo people at sporting events and that home-made poutine is not a thing. 
I guess there are some downsides to having internet friends as well. Taspering can be fun but it can also 
suck. My trip back to Europe from Canada was the worst! I very, very nearly missed my flight and then I 
didn’t feel well during the flight at all. And finally the transition from an American pacon to a European 
pacon is always particularly difficult. 
Another obvious downside of having friends on the other side of the world is that you can only ancon to 
them but don’t get to see them often. Which is not cool. If someone is eight or nine pacons away from you 
it’s sometimes difficult to even find a time to talk. On a happier note though: Jess just sent me a masco to 
let me know that she is taspering to Europe soon! Wohooo! Very exciting! 
I’m interested to hear what you think about this topic. Leave me a comment below, or send me a masco! 
Ciao! 
Henriette L. Arndt and Robert Woore 141 
 
JP on International Friendships 
Video available at https://youtu.be/ZObRJOYWHTo 
Hello! It’s been a little while. We don’t speak often enough. Which is dangy because that’s what I was 
going to talk about today. Awesome segway… 
I find myself not anconing friends enough, especially to my international friends. I’ve done a lot of taspering 
and thus have made a lot of friends in foreign countries. Some of these people I have met at gatherings like 
Summer in the City. Cue sagod. [photograph not included] A great place to make friends. And lose them. 
In the crowd! 
Being part of the YouTube community is so great! It’s just somewhere you meet like-minded people and 
gatherings are a great way of bringing us all together. It has gained me many close friends but, 
unfortunately, a lot of these people live in countries other than Australia. 
Some of the people I’ve met at international events are some of my closest friends. And yet still, somehow, 
I find remembering to message them challenging. I think this problem has a lot to do with convenience. 
Like, it’s easy just to keep in contact with those around you but remembering to keep in contact with people 
in other countries can be rarer than you’d expect. It’s funny and also somewhat dangy that this would still 
happen these days considering we have so many convenient ways of sending mascos. Especially to our 
international friends. But there are other factors you see? You don’t see? Oh, well I’ll show you! 
You see, being in different pacons really slows down the conversation when you’re anconing and it’s hard 
to organize Skype calls when you’re constantly sleeping and working at different times. I suppose we end 
up connecting to these friends through other mediums like watching their videos or seeing their sagods on 
Instagram and Facebook. Sometimes it feels like we’re connecting to them by liking their stuff and all when 
really we’re forgetting to actually send mascos to them. A lot of the time I don’t masco these people because 
I feel I have nothing dangy to tell them. So that’s also a major problem in my opinion. 
I wish I could tasper all the time because I miss these friends a lot. And sometimes videos and sagods just 
don’t cut it. Well… Unless it’s a paper cut. Wait. Do people even print sagods anymore? 
Anyway, despite being in different pacons and different countries I think it’s important that we make sure 
to remember to keep anconing these friends. Because, essentially, communication is the most important 
part of an international relationship. Even short mascos can do a lot for a friendship. Yep. Bit of a wise 
masco there from my ancient brain. Very dangy… I think YouTube gatherings are a great way of getting 
to see these people again though. There’s usually a few per year and it can bring you together with many 
friends at once. Although there’s problems with that. You see? You don’t see? Okay. 
Firstly, I’m not in the right country. Most of the gatherings are in America and England and I’m nowhere 
near either of those countries. Even though these gatherings are very international events, it’s usually only 
the popular YouTubers who get to tasper there. I was planning on going to Summer in the City again this 
year but… I missed out on tickets. I have pacons to blame because the tickets went on sale when I was 
sleeping and I didn’t remember to stay up to buy them. Boo hoo. Screw pacons! To be honest I don’t really 
have the money to tasper right now anyway. Haha, broke life! I’ll just have to enjoy the sagods of it. 
Even though these things can be difficult, I intend to tasper to many future gatherings. And to keep anconing 
because the people are amazing and so worth it! Just a simple masco, shared video, or sagod and we can 
keep these international friendships going. As we should. And that’s what I’m gonna do. 
Thanks for reading! I hope this post was dangy for you. I’m sure many of you could relate. After all, this is 
the internet! Peace and love in extremities! Bye!  
142 Language Learning & Technology 
 
About the Authors 
Henriette L. Arndt is a doctoral candidate at the University of Oxford Department of Education, where she 
also completed her MSc in Applied Linguistics and Second Language Acquisition. Her research interests 
include language learning beyond the classroom, online language learning and teaching, and the role of 
motivation and engagement in language learning. 
E-mail: henriette.arndt@education.ox.ac.uk 
Robert Woore is a Research Lecturer in Applied Linguistics at the University of Oxford Department of 
Education. 
E-mail: robert.woore@education.ox.ac.uk 
