Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2018, Volume 22, Issue 3 
pp. 37–40 
BOOK REVIEW  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Hong Diao 
 
 
Review of The handbook of technology and 
second language teaching and learning 
Hong Diao, Chongqing Technology and Business University 
 
The handbook of technology and second language teaching 
and learning 
Chapelle, C. A., & Sauro, S. (Eds.) 
2017 
ISBN: 978-1118914038 
US $ 195.00 
517 pp. 
Wiley Blackwell 
Hoboken, NJ 
 
As an ever-growing body of research on second language acquisition (SLA) has indicated, numerous factors 
are involved in second language (L2) teaching and learning (Gass & Mackey, 2012; Gass & Selinker, 2008; 
Ortega, 2009). Among these factors, technologies of all sorts are playing an increasingly significant role in 
SLA, making the comprehensive analysis of the interplay between them duly necessary. In its four sections 
and 30 chapters by leading international scholars (e.g., Chun, Liaw, Godwin-Jones, Heift, Hegelheimer), 
The handbook of technology and second language teaching and learning collects the most recent strands 
of research on this topic, offering an in-depth and authoritative reference book for scholars, teachers, 
students, and practitioners. Chapelle and Sauro, the editors, together with other contributors, are to be 
congratulated on the timeliness, inclusiveness, richness, and reader-friendliness of the handbook. It is 
impossible to do justice to all aspects of this vast volume as a whole and the range and diversity of every 
essay in a short book review and my observations are as a result inevitably selective. 
In the heading piece, the two editors first state their goal in creating this volume: to communicate “the shape 
and texture of the technology-rich environments that language learners inhabit today as well as the 
relevance of these environments for second language teaching and learning” (p. 1). They firmly believe that 
technology has affected the potential for access to an increasing number of language interests (p. 2). An 
introduction to the layout and organization of this volume then follows, accompanied by brief comments 
on the particular contribution of each chapter. This succinct yet enlightening introductory essay provides 
useful background for and explanation of essential topics covered in the subsequent chapters. 
The first section centers on the ways that technology is integrated in the teaching and learning of specific 
aspects of language knowledge and skills (i.e., grammar, vocabulary, reading, writing, listening, speaking, 
pragmatic abilities, and intercultural competence). Chapter 2, by Otto, reviews the chronological 
advancement of the use of technology for L2 learning from the early 20th century through the 21st century, 
setting the stage for many technologies discussed in the rest of the handbook. Chapter 3 provides an 
overview of technologies for L2 grammar by analyzing in detail four typical technology-based pedagogies: 
tutorial computer-assisted language learning (CALL), intelligent CALL, data-driven learning, and 
computer mediated communication. Responding to the advent of large numbers of vocabulary apps for 
mobile devices, Chapter 4 examines the importance of self-regulated learning—an under-researched 
38 Language Learning & Technology 
 
topic—to L2 vocabulary learners in today’s mobile-assisted language learning environment. Of particular 
interest to researchers of L2 reading development, Chapter 5 introduces currently popular reading 
technologies, investigates the major challenges for educators, and offers future research directions. Chapter 
6 reviews how new technologies, namely Web 2.0 applications, automated writing evaluation systems, and 
corpus-based tools, have shaped the teaching and learning of L2 writing. The next two chapters discuss 
CALL for L2 listening and speaking, respectively. The last chapter of the section explores models of 
intercultural communicative competence and the expansion of pragmatic repertoires in digitally-mediated 
interactions. 
Section 2 highlights a series of new pedagogies (including new concepts and practices) that have developed 
in recent years. A common concern is that shifts and developments in technologies have dramatically 
changed the environments, modes, and scale of L2 teaching and learning, requiring both teachers and 
learners to rethink their practices. Chapter 10 investigates the impact of recent developments in technology-
mediated distance language teaching on pedagogical issues such as task design, assessment of learning, and 
teacher expertise. Chapter 11 shifts to blended and hybrid learning, an issue drawing lots of academic 
attention in recent years. Through a research review of 26 studies conducted from 2006 to 2014, Grgurović 
reveals the major trends in the field and convincingly suggests that it will be a preferred approach in the 
future. Telecollaboration, a significant element in both distance and blended L2 learning, is neatly defined 
and analyzed in detail by Dooly in Chapter 12. I am most stimulated by the next two chapters, dealing with 
virtual worlds and gaming for language learning. In Chapter 13, Sadler focuses on the application of games 
and software such as Second Life, OpenSim, Active Worlds, and Club Penguin in L2 education. In Chapter 
14, Reinhardt reviews the history and theory of games in CALL and rightly points to the need for 
collaboration among the stakeholders, researchers, L2 educators, and game developers. With more 
collaboration, it is hoped that research on games in L2 learning contexts will yield more promising and 
enlightening results. Again, mobile learning is the theme of Chapter 15, in which a contemporary pedagogic 
skillset designed for teachers and educators is suggested. Chapter 16 investigates how task-based language 
teaching can be implemented through Web 2.0 technologies and proposes important areas to be explored. 
In Chapter 17, Cotos maps out corpus-based pedagogies in teaching language for specific purposes by 
analyzing the application of corpora in data-driven learning approaches where students engage in hands-on 
explorations of texts. Chapter 18 probes into the intersection of technologies and new literacies, such as 
multimedia literacy and computer-mediated communication literacy. Finally, Chapter 19 shifts to the 
emergence, recent research, and future challenges of CALL teacher education, a well-established domain. 
Section 3, comparatively short, briefly sums up the work being done with technologies in language testing 
and assessment. The review of classroom assessments by Jamieson and Musumeci in Chapter 20 illustrates 
how assessment principles can be utilized in the evaluation of language learning materials. The next chapter, 
with a focus on technology-mediated high-stakes testing, discusses examples of how technology can be 
used in the development, administration, scoring, and security of language tests and puts forward key issues 
for future research. Chapter 22 moves to validation in language testing, a term arbitrating educational and 
linguistic policies, institutional decisions, pedagogical practices, and tenets of language theory and research 
(Cumming & Berwick, 1996, p. 1). The author outlines a framework for an argument-based approach to 
validation that offers a way for integrating technology considerations in language testing. 
The final section, encompassing eight chapters, mainly addresses the practices that are instrumental in 
creating innovations with technologies of various kinds in language learning. Chapter 23 investigates the 
application of courseware in CALL, rightfully arguing that the majority of language teachers are likely to 
rely on commercial courseware in the future (p. 361). The next chapter conducts an overview of the origin 
and evolution of a design-based research paradigm based on seminal contributions in the literature. In 
Chapter 25, Chapelle examines five types of arguments (i.e., comparative argument, authenticity argument, 
corpus linguistic argument, theory-based argument, and pedagogy-based argument) that have been used in 
the evaluation of technology for language learning. She concludes the chapter by suggesting that “the 
perspective of evaluation as argument holds the potential for improving the profession’s capacity for 
designing and critiquing evaluations of technology for language learning” (p. 378). In Chapter 26, Chun 
Hong Diao 39 
 
reviews research methodologies used in both traditional aspects and technological environments of 
language and culture learning. In Chapter 27, the authors introduce the key components for conducting a 
meta-analysis, followed by an examination of how existing CALL meta-analytical reports are documented 
in L2 context. Chapter 28 focuses on a multimodal, corpus-based approach to research on online language 
learning, an approach that is not widely applied. Chapter 29 discusses technology-enhanced SLA research 
in terms of three theoretical frameworks: cognitive approaches, the interaction approach, and sociocultural 
theory. The final chapter functions as an excellent summary of the handbook. The two editors review three 
fundamental themes of the book (i.e., multimodal nature of language abilities, innovative nature of language 
teaching and learning, and the integral role of research in understanding language teaching and learning) 
while commenting on the particular contribution each chapter makes and looking to the future of technology 
and L2 teaching and learning. 
The greatest strength of the handbook lies in the strong integration and cross-fertilization between theories 
and practice. SLA-centered theoretical frameworks, together with technology-assisted teaching modes, are 
often tested in the classroom, and understanding of classroom language and behavior can feed into the 
betterment of technologies and the advancement of theoretical notions. The synergy between technologies 
of various kinds and SLA in different cultures and nations is fully demonstrated and examined. The overall 
structure is, while perhaps standard, very effective. Most chapters open with a section that describes an 
approach or theory and its history followed by the outlining of core issues and the summary of seminal 
research and, in some cases, case studies and future research suggestions. This organization is, on the one 
hand, ideal for linking research and practice, past and future and, on the other hand, conducive to readers’ 
digestion. One of the most common problems of reference works like this one is that they require the readers 
to have a considerable knowledge of the issues discussed. However, such is not the case for this handbook, 
as most of the authors have made an enormous effort to present their arguments in a way that is easy to 
understand for non-specialized readers. The editors’ effort in bringing together such a broad range of 
researchers, teachers, and practitioners is admirable. This handbook is also characterized by highly readable 
font, generous spacing, and many types of illustrations, rendering the reading experience enjoyable. 
However, as with all such collections of works, the handbook has some weaknesses. One potential 
shortcoming is the lack of research on language processing based on technology-assisted psycholinguistic 
and neurolinguistic methodologies. Issues such as cognitive ability, working memory capacity, and 
interactional feedback in SLA are largely ignored. Another point is that the handbook would have been 
stronger if a list of illustrations, a list of abbreviations, and a glossary—usually integral parts of reference 
works—were provided. In addition, Chapter 10 and Chapter 17 are somewhat thin on research support, 
leaving the readers unconvinced of the efficacy of the approaches and paradigms discussed. 
In sum, it can be said that most of the discussions in this handbook are empirically supported, theoretically 
grounded, and thought-provoking, making them conducive to further understanding and more in-depth 
research on the increasingly frequent and sophisticated interplay between technology and SLA. Featuring 
accessible writing styles, authentic references, comprehensive overviews, enlightening pedagogical 
commentary, elaborate theoretical elucidation, and critical evaluation, The handbook of technology and 
second language teaching and learning is a truly valuable reference work not only for SLA researchers and 
language teachers, but also for undergraduates and postgraduates involved in SLA research. 
References 
Cumming, A. H., & Berwick, R. (1996). Validation in language testing. Bristol, UK: Multilingual 
Matters. 
Gass, S., & Mackey, A. (Eds.). (2012). The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition. New 
York, NY: Routledge. 
Gass, S., & Selinker, L. (2008). Second language acquisition: An introductory course (3rd ed.). New 
York, NY: Routledge. 
40 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Ortega, L. (2009). Understanding second language acquisition. London, UK: Hodder Education. 
About the Author 
Hong Diao is a senior lecturer of English at Chongqing Technology and Business University. His research 
interests include SLA, translation studies, sociolinguistics, and language planning. He has published papers 
in journals such as Target, Foreign Language Learning Theory and Practice, Translation Forum, and 
Language Education. 
E-mail: jacksglj123@163.com 
