Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
October 2018, Volume 22, Issue 3 
pp. 176–192 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2018 Christine Giguère & Susan Parks 
 
 
Child-to-child interaction and corrective feedback 
during eTandem ESL–FSL chat exchanges 
Christine Giguère, Commission Scolaire des Bois-Francs 
Susan Parks, Université Laval 
Abstract 
This study examined the role of corrective feedback in the context of an English as a second language (ESL) 
and French as a second language (FSL) eTandem chat exchange involving Grade 6 students. The students 
were enrolled in intensive programs in the provinces of Quebec and Ontario and had an elementary to low-
intermediate level of language proficiency. Tasks were completed on a weekly basis over a 9-week period. 
Six tasks completed by 13 pairs were retained for analysis. The analysis showed that the ESL and FSL 
students provided three types of feedback: explicit feedback, recasts, and negotiation of form. Unlike the 
study by Morris (2005), which involved Grade 5 second language (L2) Spanish students, the preference in 
this study was for explicit feedback. This difference was attributed to the tandem approach which 
emphasizes training in how to give feedback as well as school culture. Differences between the amount of 
feedback provided during the ESL and FSL exchanges were also observed. Here, too, the influence of school 
culture appears to have been a factor. The ESL students appeared to be more positively oriented to L2 
learning, reflected in a higher appreciation of the tandem learning exchange. Implications for teaching and 
the need of future research are discussed. 
Keywords: Computer-Mediated Communication, Telecollaboration, ICT Literacies, Social Context 
Language(s) Learned in This Study: English, French 
APA Citation: Giguère, C., & Parks, S. (2018). Child-to-child interaction during eTandem ESL–FSL chat 
exchanges. Language Learning & Technology, 22(3), 176–192. https://doi.org/10125/44663 
Introduction 
This study reports on an eTandem language learning project that involved a chat exchange between two 
groups of Grade 6 ESL and FSL students. Although the tandem approach to language learning originally 
involved face-to-face exchanges, with the advent of the Internet online tandems—eTandems or 
teletandems—involving emails, chat, or videoconferencing have also emerged (for a historical overview, 
see Wolff, 2009). What distinguishes the tandem language learning approach is that two second language 
(L2) learners with different first languages (L1s) collaborate to learn their partner’s first language 
(Brammerts, 1996; Little & Brammerts, 1996). More generally, the approach is associated with two main 
principles: reciprocity and autonomy. In line with the principle of reciprocity, half the exchange should be 
in one language, half in the other. As partners are also expected to give each other feedback, it is strongly 
recommended that training in this area be provided. As such, their roles alternate between that of L2 learner 
and that of L1 tutor. The principle of autonomy is reflected in how students assume their roles and the 
initiative they take in order to take advantage of the tandem partnership and learn their L2. Although most 
of the published research to date has focused on adults, the present study contributes to the few studies 
which have involved children. 
Literature Review 
From a linguistic point of view, chat has been described as having features which are reflective of both 
Christine Giguère and Susan Parks 177 
 
written and oral language. As chat takes place in real time, it encourages students to use language more 
spontaneously and can thus play a role in developing fluency (Abrams, 2003; Payne & Whitney, 2002). As 
noted by Sauro and Smith (2010), “the chat window provides interlocutors with a more enduring and 
reviewable visual record of the exchange” (p. 556). Drawing on an interactionist perspective of language 
learning (Chapelle, 1997, 2016; Gass, 2002; Long, 1996), a number of studies have demonstrated the 
potential of chat for language learning, as it enables L2 learners to notice new features as well as gaps in 
their own interlanguage (Pellettieri, 2000; Sauro, 2012; Sauro & Smith, 2010; Shekary & Tahririan, 2006; 
Smith, 2004, 2005). 
With respect to tandem learning, a number of studies have involved email (e.g., Kabata & Edasawa, 2011; 
Priego, 2011; Vinagre & Muñoz, 2011) and videoconferencing (e.g., Cappellini, 2013; El-Hariri, 2016; 
Flick, 2013; Guillén, 2014). To our knowledge, however, only two have involved chat, both with adults: 
one study by Kötter (2003) and another by Bower and Kawaguchi (2011). Kötter’s (2003) study involved 
a tandem exchange between 15 American university students and 14 German university students. Although 
specific statistical analyses were not provided, Kötter reported analyzing the chat scripts to identify the 
forms and frequencies of negotiation of meaning. Compared to previous face-to-face studies, Kötter’s 
participants made more frequent use of clarification requests. The use of such requests confirmed the 
assumption that in such environments “students usually preferred their partners to rephrase or amend their 
utterances” (p. 158). 
In the study by Bower and Kawaguchi (2011), 11 pairs of Japanese and Australian university students 
completed three open-ended discussion tasks. In contrast to the chat exchanges, much more corrective 
feedback was provided in follow-up emails, where students could spend more time reflecting on errors. 
However, regarding this feedback, the Japanese students provided substantially more metalinguistic 
explanations and reformulations of ungrammatical items or forms than did the Australian students. These 
results were attributed to the Japanese students’ high exposure to the L2 at school as well as the importance 
accorded to both L2 and L1 grammar instruction. By contrast, foreign language classes were not a 
“curricular priority” (p. 62) for the Australian participants, and grammar teaching was not emphasized for 
either the L2 or the L1. 
With respect to tandem language learning and chat studies more generally, few have involved children. 
Although to our knowledge, no published tandem chat studies with children currently exist, three studies 
(Thurston, Duran, Cunningham, Blanch, & Topping, 2009; Tolosa, Ordόñez, & Alfonso, 2015; Tolosa, 
Ordόñez, & Guevara, 2017) have investigated children engaged in asynchronous online reciprocal peer 
tutoring exchanges. In the study by Thurston et al. (2009), 9–12-year-old students in Scotland and Catalonia 
wrote five texts in their L2s over an 8-week period (i.e., English and Spanish, respectively), gave each other 
feedback on errors in their L1, and used the feedback to correct their texts. The analysis showed that tutors 
were able to detect 35% of the errors in their tutees’ texts. The most frequently used correction strategy was 
to indicate the error and give the correction. Although no significant differences for experimental and 
control groups were observed for fluency or complexity in a pre- and post-writing test, the experimental 
group did produce significantly fewer errors. Questionnaires also revealed that both Scottish and Catalonian 
students’ attitudes toward language learning improved significantly compared to those of the control 
groups. According to the authors, this finding suggested that the students found peer tutoring “a motivating 
real context that gave their communication meaning” (p. 470). 
As in the study by Thurston et al. (2009), a study by Tolosa et al. (2017) focused on online asynchronous 
reciprocal peer tutoring and the completion of five texts over an 8-week period. More specifically, this 
study involved 27 students from New Zealand and 21 from Colombia, ages 11–14, who were all beginners 
of their L2s: Spanish and English, respectively. Analysis of pre- and post-writing tests showed significant 
differences in fluency, accuracy, and complexity for the New Zealand students and in accuracy and 
complexity for the Columbian students. In contrast to an earlier study (Tolosa et al., 2015), more attention 
was given to structuring the writing–feedback–rewriting cycle and providing students with support in terms 
of how to provide correction. This increased attention to training and monitoring was considered the main 
178 Language Learning & Technology 
 
reason for the observed formal gains. 
In addition to the two asynchronous tandem studies referred to above, two other non-tandem studies shed 
light on children’s ability to engage in chat activities. In a study by Coyle and Reverte Prieto (2017), 16 10-
year-old Spanish beginner level EFL children were engaged in a chat exchange with English native speakers 
(NSs) of the same age who were not Spanish learners. Over a 5-week period, pairs worked together to 
complete three jigsaw picture sequencing tasks (40 minutes per session). The NS children were instructed 
to help their partners use English correctly, and the non-native speakers (NNSs) to use as much English as 
possible and ask for help. Interactional strategies were categorized into three groups: task-specific 
discourse, negotiation strategies used to overcome difficulties or breakdowns in communication, and social 
exchanges. The greatest percentage of strategies were task-related, that is, asking for and exchanging 
information about each other’s pictures. However, a significant proportion of negotiation strategies were 
also identified, in particular those related to clarification requests and self-repetition as well as seeking 
lexical assistance and self-correction. Recasts and explicit correction were rarely used. The mean number 
of negotiation episodes for all three tasks per pair ranged from 0.3 to 6.0 (overall average 2.4 for all pairs). 
Although successful uptake of the targeted lexis occurred infrequently, pre- and post-vocabulary tests for 
these items showed that children’s lexical knowledge had improved significantly over time. 
In Morris’ (2005) study, the analysis involved 46 Grade 5 students who were learning Spanish in an 
immersion program in the United States. The students, who were at an intermediate and upper-intermediate 
level, were paired up with classmates and completed one jigsaw task in a 25-minute session without any 
prior modelling or training. Using pictures as a stimulus, the pairs worked together to produce “one 
collaborative essay” (p. 33) about an individual’s routine activities. The interactions in the chat logs were 
coded for the types of corrective feedback, types of errors which led to feedback, and evidence of repair 
(i.e., uptake). Morris found that 64% of the errors which received corrective feedback were syntactic, 33% 
were lexical, and 3% involved L1 use. The vast majority of errors (95%) were signaled by means of 
negotiation of form and only 5% by recasts. None involved the use of explicit corrections. The study thus 
showed that child-to-child interactions during the chat exchange primarily involved implicit negative 
feedback similar to patterns found in face-to-face interactions. The lack of explicit feedback was further 
attributed to the students’ reticence to be perceived by their interlocutors as “abrupt and impolite” (p. 31), 
as well as to a lack of formal instruction in Spanish grammar. In addition, 68% of the errors were repaired, 
a percentage considered high by the researchers. 
In view of the dearth of studies involving children engaged in tandem learning and chat more generally, the 
present study investigated corrective feedback in the context of an ESL–FSL eTandem exchange involving 
Grade 6 children. The research questions, largely adapted from Morris (2005), were as follows: 
1. Do L2 learners participating in a tandem chat exchange provide each other with corrective 
feedback? 
a. during the English part of the exchange 
b. during the French part of the exchange 
2. What types of learner errors lead to what types of corrective feedback? 
a. during the English part of the exchange 
b. during the French part of the exchange 
3. Does corrective feedback lead to uptake? 
a. during the English part of the exchange 
b. during the French part of the exchange 
4. In the case of uptake, what types of corrective feedback lead to uptake? 
a. during the English part of the exchange 
b. during the French part of the exchange 
5. How do the ESL and FSL students view the tandem chat exchange as a strategy for learning their 
L2? 
Christine Giguère and Susan Parks 179 
 
Methodology 
The present study is situated within a qualitative research paradigm. As noted by Patton (1987), this 
approach is particularly useful for “programs that are developing, innovative, or changing, where the focus 
is on program improvement, facilitating more effective implementation, and exploring a variety of effects 
on participants.” (p. 18). In the present case, the objective was to explore the implementation of an 
innovative teaching approach: eTandem chat exchanges with young learners. Both qualitative and 
quantitative data were collected. 
School Contexts and Participants 
The tandem project was conducted with Grade 6 students enrolled in public school intensive language 
programs in towns located throughout the Canadian provinces of Quebec and Ontario. Within Quebec, 
where French is the official language, the ESL students attended a French-medium school. By contrast, the 
FSL students were in an English-medium school in a primarily English-speaking area. The tandem project 
was thus implemented as an attempt to enable students to have contact with NSs of the language they were 
learning. The intensive ESL program took place during a 5-month period; students were selected based on 
a number of criteria (e.g., level of autonomy, interest in learning ESL, study and work habits). The FSL 
intensive program extended over the entire school year; students enrolled on a voluntary basis. All students 
in the two classes participated in the tandem exchange, specifically 26 ESL students (13 boys and 13 girls; 
mean age = 11.5) and 24 FSL students (10 boys and 14 girls; mean age = 12.0). Based on their teachers’ 
assessments, the students of both classes were at the elementary to low-intermediate level of L2 proficiency. 
For this project, the ESL teacher (the first author) was also involved as a researcher, here referred to as the 
teacher-researcher. In terms of a qualitative paradigm, where the researcher role can vary in terms of actual 
involvement in the context being investigated, the teacher-researcher functioned as a full participant 
(Patton, 1987, p. 74). The FSL teacher was contacted by the teacher-researcher after emailing Ontario 
schools offering French immersion programs. The teacher-researcher also acted as a resource person to 
provide suggestions for tasks and technical support. As an insider with experience working with ESL 
students in intensive classes, she also provided insights into the interpretation of the results. 
The Tasks 
To facilitate interaction, students were assigned tasks that reflected real-life situations they could easily 
relate to (e.g., summer vacation, Halloween, Christmas, their family, their school, favorite TV shows). The 
instructions for the tasks were given in the students’ L1s. For each session, there were two different topics, 
one for the French exchange and one for the English exchange, to better ensure that the students did not run 
out of things to say. Students were only given a task sheet for the topic they had to ask about. In other 
words, they did not know what topics they would be asked about in their L2 by their partners (for an example 
of how the tasks were presented to students, see Appendix A). The exchange took place in the computer 
labs of the students’ respective schools. The Gmail chat interface was used, as it was publicity free and 
enabled students to easily print out copies of their chat scripts. 
Data Collection Instruments 
For this project, data were obtained from two sources: the chat scripts and the questionnaires. Chat scripts 
were printed out following each chat session and collected by the teacher-researcher. An initial 
questionnaire was given to all the participants to have them self-evaluate their language skills and provide 
information about their language backgrounds, their reasons for learning the L2, and the extent of their 
familiarity with computers and chat. The questionnaires were used by the teacher-researcher to pair up 
students. At the end of the study, a short questionnaire with Likert-type questions was administered to 
students in their L1 to elicit information about their personal appreciation of the chat sessions. 
Data Collection Procedures 
As shown in Table 1, the project took place over a period of 12 weeks. Due to the limited number of 
180 Language Learning & Technology 
 
computers in the Quebec school, chat sessions were done on two different days in the same week to ensure 
that every student had the opportunity to have a one-on-one exchange. To respect the tandem format, the 
sessions were held for the first 30 minutes in one language followed by 30 minutes in the other. As the 
teacher-researcher was more familiar with the chat interface, it was decided that the Quebec students would 
invite their Ontario counterparts and initiate the sessions; the teacher-researcher monitored the time and 
told students when to change to the other language. Students completed 18 tasks (two per session). Due to 
the larger number of Quebec students, two students in this group did the chat sessions twice; these students 
were not included as part of the analysis. At the end of each chat session, students printed out copies of 
their chat scripts. 
In order to keep students organized, each student was given a binder that was used to keep track of various 
documents including reflection forms (see Appendix B) completed at the end of each exchange. On their 
reflection forms, students were asked to note items they had learned while referring to their chat scripts and 
briefly reflect on their appreciation of the session with their partner. As recommended in previous studies, 
the tandem exchange was integrated into the regular classroom activities (Flick, 2013). Training was given 
to students to familiarize them with the goals of tandem learning and how to provide feedback (Brammerts, 
1996). In this latter regard, teachers showed excerpts from a chat session and discussed how implicit 
feedback (e.g., recasts, reformulations) and explicit feedback could be given. A reminder to help their 
partners was also included on their task sheets. 
Table 1. Procedures and Scheduling used for Carrying Out the Study 
Schedule Activities 
Week 1 Information re: the tandem project given by FLS and ESL teachers to their 
respective students. 
Initial questionnaire used to form pairs completed by students. 
Consent forms for students and parents distributed and collected. 
Week 2 Trial run sessions with computers using the Gmail chat interface. FLS and ESL 
students, supervised by their respective teachers, chatted with their classmates 
from their respective classes. 
Weeks 3–11 Period during which the FLS and ESL chat sessions took place on a weekly basis 
with partners. 
Week 12 End-of-project questionnaire administered by FLS and ESL teachers to their 
respective students. 
Data Analysis 
The analysis was conducted using the chat scripts of 13 pairs who had completed six of the nine chat 
sessions. The following terms are defined below: corrective feedback, types of errors, and repair. In the 
examples which follow, A refers to an Anglophone student, and F refers to a Francophone student. 
Corrective Feedback 
Corrective feedback was operationalized in terms of three types: explicit correction, recasts, and negotiation 
of form. Explicit correction “directly and clearly indicates that what the learner has said is incorrect” 
(Morris, 2005, p. 34). In the present study, typical comments which served to identify explicit correction 
were you should say, do you mean, you mean, c’est préférable de dire (it’s preferable to say) or, on dit (one 
says; as in Excerpt 1). 
Excerpt 1. Pair 10, Session 3 
A: est ce que tu sais cette film? (Do you know [savoir] this film?) 
Christine Giguère and Susan Parks 181 
 
F: on dit est ce que tu connais ce film (One says do you know [connaître] this film?) 
In this excerpt, the Francophone explicitly draws the Anglophone partner’s attention to differences in the 
use of savoir and connaître, which in English can both be translated to know. This excerpt also illustrates 
reactive focus on form as the problem is signaled by the interlocutor “in response to learners’ actual or 
perceived errors” (Ellis, 2001, p. 23). In this study, both a reactive and proactive focus on form were 
evidenced. Proactive focus on form refers to the teacher’s or the learner’s “attention to a form that is 
perceived to be problematic even though no production error in the use of the form or difficulty with 
message comprehension has arisen” (Ellis, 2001, p. 22). In Excerpt 2, the Francophone student asks his 
partner what spaz means. 
Excerpt 2. Pair 6, Session 1 
A: im a spaz or at least my teacher thinks I am =) 
im joking 
so is my teacher is to 
oops said it wrong 
F: wath?? 
E: spaz meanslike a mess =D 
F: sorry but the first thing you said I don’t understand 
E: spaz = mess 
F: ok!!! 
E: mess= =0 
A recast is defined as the “immediate implicit reformulation of an ill-formed utterance” (Morris, 2005, p. 
34). In Excerpt 3, the Francophone student has a problem with the word order of adjectives in English. 
Excerpt 3. Pair 10, Session 2 
F: What is your programme t.v. favourite??? 
A: my favourite tv programme is much 
music 
However, as noted by Smith (2003), within a chat context, delays can intervene between the trigger and the 
response resulting in split negotiation routines. As this feature was observed in the present study, responses 
could be immediate or delayed. 
As defined by Morris (2005), “negotiation of form provides learners with signals that facilitate peer- and 
self-repair rather than mere rephrasing of their utterances. Negotiations differ from explicit correction and 
recasts in that negotiations do not provide learners with a correct form” (p. 34). In Excerpt 4, the 
Anglophone’s request for clarification (what) leads the Francophone student to change the preposition on 
to in. 
Excerpt 4. Pair 13, Session 4 
F: which persone work on your school 
A: what 
F: which persone work in your school 
182 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Types of Errors 
The three types of errors originally identified by Morris (2005) were syntactic, lexical, and unsolicited L1 
use. In the present study, two additional types were added: lexico-syntactic and spelling. Syntactic errors 
referred to such items as the “lack of or use of articles, determiners, prepositions, pronouns, errors with 
subject–verb agreement, gender, verb morphology, pluralization, and word order” (p. 34). In the present 
study, an utterance was coded as having a syntactic error if only one error was involved. In Excerpt 5, the 
Francophone student corrected his Anglophone partner’s mistake with the gender of a possessive adjective. 
Excerpt 5. Pair 2, Session 3 
A: est ce que tu veux dire le nom de ton blonde (do you mean the name of your [ton] girlfriend) 
F: ta blonde (your [ta] girlfriend) 
Lexical errors referred to such items as “inaccurate, imprecise, or inappropriate choices of lexical items and 
non-target derivations of nouns, verbs, adverbs, and adjectives” (Morris, 2005, p. 34). As for the syntactic 
category, those coded as lexical errors were also limited to one specific occurrence within an utterance as 
in Excerpt 6. 
Excerpt 6. Pair 8, Session 2 
A: quel age est il? (how old is he?) 
F: on dit (quel age a-t-il) il a treize ans (One says (what age has he) he has thirteen years) 
In the preceding excerpt, the Anglophone used être (to be) to express someone’s age in French whereas the 
appropriate verb would have been avoir (to have). 
It is of note that in Morris’ original study (2005), the examples provided for syntactic and lexical errors 
were all very clear-cut insofar as they were limited to discrete, single occurrences within an utterance. By 
contrast, the data of the present study provided numerous instances when more complex reformulations of 
an utterance were necessary in order to correct different types of errors or more than one error in the context 
of a phrase or clause. To facilitate coding, a lexico-syntactic error category was created. Lexico-syntactic 
errors referred to phrases or clauses involving corrections of two or more syntactic or lexical errors or the 
use of the L1. Excerpt 7 provides an example. 
Excerpt 7. Pair 6, Session 2 
A: quell est ta livre preferer (What is your book prefer) 
F: c’est préférable de dire quel est TON LIVRE PRÉFÉRÉ (it is preferable to say what is YOUR 
PREFERRED BOOK) 
A: oh ok 
In Excerpt 7, the Anglophone student made two errors: (a) ton (the gender of the possessive adjective in 
reference to livre) and (b) preferer (the form of the adjective). The Francophone student corrected both 
errors by reformulating the problematic phrase as ton livre préféré. 
As defined by Morris (2005), unsolicited L1 use referred to instances when participants used their L1 when 
the L2 would have been more appropriate or expected. In the present study, use of the L1 was referred to 
as code-switching. In Excerpt 8, the Anglophone’s switch to the English word junk was rephrased by the 
Francophone as pas bon. 
Excerpt 8. Pair 11, Session 3 
A: mon ordinateur est junk (my computer is junk) 
Christine Giguère and Susan Parks 183 
 
F: ah! Ton ordinateur est pas bon (ah! Your computer is not good) 
Although Morris (2005) did not attend to spelling errors, it was decided to include them in this study as 
students frequently focused on them. Correction of spelling errors within an utterance was tallied separately 
from other types of error corrections. In Excerpt 7 for example, in addition to the correction of the lexico-
syntactic error, the Francophone rewrites quell* (what) as quel. Thus, for this episode, two types of errors 
were recorded: one for spelling and one for the lexico-syntactic category. 
Repair 
As defined by Morris (2005), repair (i.e., uptake) referred to “immediate responses to feedback” (p. 35). 
Repairs occurred during both reactive (Lyster & Ranta, 1997) and preemptive focus on form episodes (Ellis, 
Basturkmen, & Loewen, 2001). Corrective feedback can be categorized as successful (the correct form is 
reused) or unsuccessful (the provision of feedback is acknowledged but it is not reused by the learner; see 
Ellis et al., 2001). Although acknowledgements were tabulated, they were considered as no repair (or no 
uptake), due to the fact that it was difficult to know what the learner was referring to or whether the 
corrective feedback was truly noticed (Ellis et al., 2001). The uptake, especially in chat contexts (Smith, 
2005), can be immediate (following the signaling of the problem) or delayed (occurring later on in the 
exchange after a number of turns have taken place). 
Interrater reliability was ensured by having an independent researcher code 30% of the corpus for types of 
corrective feedback, types of errors, and instances of repair. This researcher was fluent in English and 
French and had a PhD in applied linguistics. Interrater agreement was 95%. The project was approved by 
the university ethics committee. 
Results 
The first research question investigated whether the L2 learners participating in the tandem chat exchange 
provided each other with corrective feedback. The analysis revealed a total of 370 instances of corrective 
feedback for the 13 pairs: 156 for the English exchanges (42.2%) and 214 (57.8%) for the French exchanges. 
For the six 1-hour tandem sessions, the mean number of instances per session (combined for the English 
and French exchanges) was 4.7. The total number per pair for the six sessions ranged from 10 to 44. As 
such, means per session for pairs ranged from 1.7 to 7.3. Although the numbers of instances varied, all pairs 
gave each other feedback in both the ESL and FSL exchanges. The results for the first research question 
thus confirm that Grade 6 students with an elementary to low-intermediate level of language proficiency 
were capable of providing each other with corrective feedback during a tandem chat exchange. 
The second research question investigated what types of learner errors led to what types of corrective 
feedback. As shown in Table 2, 61.9% of instances of corrective feedback targeted syntactic (32.2%) and 
lexico-syntactic errors (29.7%). Spelling errors accounted for 24.6% of the corrective feedback. Lexical 
errors accounted for only 10.0% of the feedback given (although they were also part of the lexico-syntactic 
category). As well, most of the corrective feedback provided was explicit (62.4%). Recasts accounted for 
27.0% of instances of corrective feedback and negotiation of form for the fewest (10.5%).  
184 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Table 2. Number of Instances of Corrective Feedback per Type of Error for All Pairs 
Type of Error 
Type of Corrective Feedback 
Explicit Recast Negotiation of Form Total 
Syntactic 72 (19.5%) 46 (12.4%) 1 (0.3%) 119 (32.2%) 
Lexical 23 (6.2%) 3 (0.3%) 11 (3.0%) 37 (10.0%) 
Spelling 70 (18.9%) 20 (5.4%) 1 (0.3%) 91 (24.6%) 
Code-switching 6 (1.6%) 3 (0.8%) 4 (1.1%) 13 (3.5%) 
Lexico-syntactic 60 (16.2%) 28 (7.6%) 22 (5.9%) 110 (29.7%) 
Total 231 (62.4%) 100 (27.0%) 39 (10.5%) 370 (100.0%) 
In the French chat sessions (Table 3), syntactic errors led to more than twice as many instances of corrective 
feedback as in the English exchanges (22.4% vs. 9.7%). In other words, the Francophone students gave 
considerably more feedback in response to syntactic errors than their Anglophone peers in the English 
exchanges. More specifically, 12.7% involved explicit feedback in the French chat exchanges compared to 
6.8% in the English exchanges. In the case of recasts involving syntactic errors, the Francophone students 
also provided more corrective feedback during the French exchanges than the Anglophone students during 
the English exchanges (9.5% vs. 3.0%). 
Table 3. Number of Instances of Corrective Feedback for English and French Sessions 
Type of 
Error 
Type of Corrective Feedback 
Explicit  Recast  Negotiation of Form  Total 
English    French  English  French  English French  English French 
Syntactic  25 (6.8%)  47 (12.7%)  11 (3.0%) 35 (9.5%)  0 (0.0%)  1 (0.3%)  36 (9.7%)  83 (22.4%) 
Lexical  10 (2.7%)  13 (3.5%)  1 (0.3%)  2 (0.6%)  4 (1.1%)  7 (1.9%)  15 (4.0%)  22 (5.9%) 
Spelling  37 (10.0%)  33 (8.9%)  12 (3.2%)  8 (2.2%)  0 (0.0%)  1 (0.3%)  49 (13.2%)  42 (11.4%) 
Lexico-
syntactic 
 32 (8.6%)  28 (7.6%)  9 (2.4%) 19 (5.1%) 10 (2.7%)  12 (3.2%)  51 (13.8%)  59 (15.9%) 
Code-
switching 
 2 (0.5%)  4 (1.1%)  0 (0.0%)  3 (0.8%)  1 (0.3%)  3 (0.8%)  3 (0.8%)  10 (2.7%) 
The third research question examined whether corrective feedback led to repair. As shown in Table 4 and 
Table 5, corrective feedback was frequently acknowledged in both the English and French chat exchanges. 
Actual repair was infrequent, although it did occur in both parts of the exchange. Out of a total of 154 
instances of corrective feedback in the English exchanges, only 24 involved repair (15.6%). Of the 216 
instances of corrective feedback identified in the French chat exchanges, 21 (9.7%) led to repair. 
The fourth research question investigated what types of corrective feedback led to repair. In the English 
exchanges (see Table 4), repair occurred fairly equally in terms of the different types of corrective feedback. 
By contrast, in the French exchanges (Table 5), negotiation of form stood out as it led to the majority of the 
repairs. For the combined groups, the most frequent type of corrective feedback that led to repair was 
negotiation of form. In the French exchanges, recasts were the least effective in terms of leading to repair.  
Christine Giguère and Susan Parks 185 
 
Table 4. Type of Corrective Feedback Leading to Repair in the English Chat Sessions 
Type of Corrective Feedback 
Repair No Repair 
Acknowledgements No Indicator 
Explicit 7 (4.5%) 63 (40.9%) 36 (23.4%) 
Recast 9 (5.8%) 12 (7.8%) 12 (7.8%) 
Negotiation of Form 8 (5.2%) 5 (3.2%) 2 (1.3%) 
Total 24 (15.5%) 80 (51.9%) 50 (32.5%) 
Table 5. Type of Corrective Feedback Leading to Repair in the French Chat Sessions 
Type of Corrective Feedback 
Repair No Repair 
Acknowledgements No Indicator 
Explicit 5 (2.3%) 92 (42.6%) 28 (13.0%) 
Recast 1 (0.5%) 28 (13.0%) 38 (17.6%) 
Negotiation of Form 15 (6.9%) 4 (1.9%) 5 (2.3%) 
Total 21 (9.7%) 124 (57.4%) 71 (32.9%) 
The fifth research question investigated how the ESL and FSL students viewed the tandem chat exchange 
as a language learning activity. As shown in Table 6, the great majority of ESL students (91.3%) liked using 
the computer for learning their L2. By contrast, only 63.2% of the FSL students favored such an approach. 
As shown in Table 7, 69.5% of ESL students believed that chatting helped them to learn English a lot or 
some. By contrast, with respect to learning French, the majority of FSL learners chose some or a little 
(52.7%). The results thus show that the FSL students were less favorable to the use of chat for learning their 
L2 than the ESL students. Whereas 87.0% of ESL students said that they had reused something they had 
learned from the chat sessions, only 52.6% of the FSL students reported doing so (see Table 8). With respect 
to reading over the chat transcripts as a tool for learning, the ESL students showed a higher degree of 
appreciation. As shown in Table 9, more than twice as many ESL students responded a lot or some 
compared to the FSL students, with 65.2% and 31.2% respectively. 
Table 6. Appreciation of the Computer as a Learning Tool 
 a lot some a little not at all 
How did you like using the computer as 
a tool for learning English? (n = 23) 
19 (82.6%) 2 (8.7%) 2 (8.7%) 0 (0.0%) 
How did you like using the computer as 
a tool for learning French? (n = 19) 
3 (15.8%) 9 (47.4%) 5 (26.3%) 2 (10.5%) 
Table 7. Appreciation of the Use of Chat for L2 Learning 
 a lot some a little not at all 
Do you think that chatting helped you 
improve your English? (n = 23) 
9 (39.1%) 7 (30.4%) 6 (26.1%) 1 (4.3%) 
Do you think that chatting helped you 
improve your French? (n = 19) 
0 (0.0%) 9 (47.4%) 9 (47.4%) 1 (5.3%) 
186 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Table 8. Appreciation of Reuse of Something Learned during Chat Sessions 
 Yes No 
Have you been able to reuse something you 
learned while chatting? (ESL; n = 23) 
20 (87.0%) 3 (13.0%) 
Have you been able to reuse something you 
learned while chatting? (FSL; n = 19) 
10 (52.6%) 9 (47.4%) 
Table 9. Appreciation of Chat Transcripts for L2 Learning 
 a lot some a little not at all 
Did reading over your chat transcripts 
help you learn more English? (n = 23) 
9 (39.1%) 6 (26.1%) 8 (34.8%) 0 (0.0%) 
Did reading over your chat transcripts 
help you learn more French? (n = 19) 
0 (0.0%) 6 (31.6%) 8 (42.1%) 5 (26.3%) 
Discussion 
The discussion for this article revolves around four issues: provision of corrective feedback, type of 
corrective feedback, repair, and pedagogical implications. 
Provision of Corrective Feedback 
As revealed by the present analysis, L2 Grade 6 students were shown to be capable of providing corrective 
feedback to each other during ESL–FSL tandem chat exchanges. These results support those of Morris 
(2005), who also demonstrated that children in elementary grades, specifically Grade 5 Spanish L2 learners, 
were able to provide each other with feedback. However, in contrast to that study, where the children had 
an intermediate to high-intermediate level of proficiency, those in the present study were in an elementary 
and low-intermediate range. Similarly to the study by Coyle and Reverte Prieto (2017), the present study 
suggests that even students with lower proficiency levels are capable of providing feedback during a chat 
exchange. 
Although in the present study both Anglophones and Francophones gave feedback, more feedback appeared 
to be provided by the Francophone students during the French sessions than by the Anglophone students 
during the English sessions (57.8% vs. 41.9% of total instances, respectively). Several reasons might 
explain these differences. First, as observed by the teacher-researcher, the FSL students appeared to have a 
lower level of L2 proficiency than the ESL students. On this basis, it might be argued that there were more 
opportunities for the Francophone students to provide correction. Another possible explanation pertains to 
students’ perceptions of their respective L2s. Students in the intensive ESL program had gone through a 
selection process and, as confirmed by the teacher-researcher, had a positive attitude toward learning 
English. By contrast, the Anglophone students, as confirmed by their teacher, had a more negative attitude 
toward learning French (even though they had volunteered to be in the program). Questionnaire results 
further confirmed that the ESL students had a much more positive attitude with respect to the chat project. 
A third reason could also pertain to individual differences among students. As shown in both eTandem 
learning projects (Priego, 2011) and other types of L2 school learning contexts (e.g., Gillette, 1994; Parks, 
2000; Parks, Huot, Hamers, & Lemonnier, 2005), the way students orient to the task at hand has 
implications for language learning strategies and learning outcomes. In the case of eTandem exchanges, 
future research needs to pay greater attention both to general attitudes toward the L2 as well as to the way 
individual students invest or fail to invest in the targeted tasks. 
Christine Giguère and Susan Parks 187 
 
Type of Corrective Feedback 
In terms of the present study, both Anglophones and Francophones provided each other with all three types 
of corrective feedback: explicit feedback, recasts, and negotiation of form. However, of particular note is 
that the preference of the children in this study was for explicit feedback (62.4% of the total instances of 
given feedback). Although the finding appears to support those tandem studies involving children in 
asynchronous reciprocal peer tutoring exchanges (Thurston et al., 2009; Tolosa et al., 2017), it contrasts 
with Morris’ (2005) study where the Spanish L2 students had a preference for implicit negative feedback, 
mainly in the form of negotiations. 
With respect to the preference for explicit feedback, one important influence could be the classroom culture. 
As explained by Morris (2005), the program in which his Spanish immersion fifth graders were enrolled 
emphasized “thematic and cultural content over linguistic form” (p. 32). In addition to the absence of 
explicit feedback, most of the corrections focused on lexical items rather than grammar—a result which 
Morris also attributed to the content-based focus of the curriculum. In the present study, not only was 
explicit correction privileged, but grammar-related corrections were also three times as numerous as lexical 
ones. As reported by the teacher-researcher, although the intensive ESL program was communicatively 
oriented, it also emphasized the instruction of grammar and vocabulary. Following consultation with the 
FSL teacher, it was determined that the French immersion program in the Ontario school was more content-
based and communicative than the intensive English program in Quebec. It is also important to note that 
within the Quebec school system, grammatical accuracy is an integral and important part of L1 instruction. 
Taking into account both the L1 and L2 instruction to which Francophones were exposed may help explain 
why the ESL students gave more feedback overall as well as more explicit types of feedback. Although this 
topic requires further investigation, a study by Gagné and Parks (2013), also involving intensive Grade 6 
ESL students in Quebec, showed that their L2 learners had a preference for explicit feedback while engaged 
in face-to-face cooperative learning tasks: “[these learners] were at ease in terms of both asking for and 
giving help with the language” (p. 200). Likewise, emphasis given to grammar teaching in L1 and L2 
contexts was suggested by Bower and Kawaguchi (2011) as a reason to explain differences in the amount 
of feedback provided by Japanese and Australian university students during a tandem exchange. 
A second reason could relate to training with respect to giving feedback. Although the way negotiation 
strategies were categorized in the study by Coyle and Reverte Prieto (2017) makes direct comparison 
difficult, the two strategies typically associated with negative feedback (i.e., recasts and explicit corrections) 
were evidenced, but not frequently used. In their study, students were instructed to ask each other for help 
and use as much English as possible, but no specific training in feedback strategies appeared to have been 
given. By contrast, and as recommended within a tandem approach, students in the present study received 
training, including how to give explicit feedback. The need for training has also been emphasized in the 
context of asynchronous tandem language learning exchanges (Thurston et al., 2009; Tolosa et al., 2017). 
Repair 
Despite a substantial number of negotiation episodes observed in the study by Coyle and Reverte Prieto 
(2017), actual instances of repair (or uptake) were infrequent. This contrasts with the results of Morris’ 
(2005) study where repair was high. The total rate of repair found by Morris was 68% compared to only 
15.5% (English exchanges) and 9.7% (French exchanges) in the present study. This may be due to the 
nature of the tasks involved. Although both Coyle and Reverte Prieto (2017) and Morris (2005) used jigsaw 
tasks, a type of task which has been shown to be particularly useful in terms of generating negotiation (Pica, 
Kanagy, & Falodun, 1993), tasks in the present study were open-ended in nature. In Morris’ (2005) study, 
the jigsaw tasks were associated with a high rate of repair, but such was not the case in the study by Coyle 
and Reverte Prieto (2017). In this regard, the nature of jigsaw tasks could be a factor. In Morris’ (2005) 
study, a collaborative essay task was involved, while in the study by Coyle and Reverte Prieto (2017), 
participants engaged in a picture sequencing task. Also important in the present study is that over 50% of 
the no-repair items involved acknowledgements, a move which also tended to signal the end of a negotiation 
episode. Although repair provides evidence of noticing, the absence of repair does not necessarily mean 
188 Language Learning & Technology 
 
that the correct form has not been noticed (Ellis et al., 2001). This is particularly true of the chat mode, as 
participants can scroll back to previous utterances. Although corrective feedback may provide 
comprehensible input, without additional testing (e.g., as in the chat studies by Coyle & Reverte Prieto, 
2017; Shekary & Tahririan, 2006), it is impossible to know whether negotiations led to acquisition. Future 
research needs to continue to address this issue. 
Pedagogical Implications 
Tasks for the present study, which had children discuss topics of interest to their age group, also resulted in 
substantial interaction episodes. However, the low rates of repair observed in the present study and those 
in the study by Coyle and Reverte Prieto (2017) suggest that teachers should pay closer attention to both 
the tasks students are asked to carry out during the chat sessions and follow-up reinvestment tasks. As 
suggested by Morris (2005), online jigsaw tasks that require a collaborative written component may be 
more conducive to fostering repair (a point which also calls for further research). Although students in the 
present study were asked to identify corrections and reflect on their experiences, more substantive 
reinvestment tasks could be devised. Although used for testing purposes, the follow-up picture story writing 
task used by Coyle and Reverte Prieto (2017) provided evidence of reuse of words negotiated during the 
chat exchanges as well as of words which had been used by NS partners and picked up by the NNS partners. 
For the present study, participants could have done a poster or PowerPoint presentation based on the 
information gathered about their chat partners. Such tasks could provide students with a more meaningful 
goal and increased the need to negotiate during the chat exchanges. Other tasks could involve Skype to talk 
with partners or written reports based on information obtained in the exchanges or surveys and shared 
online. In the present study, students varied in terms of their motivation. Developing a sense of community 
and belonging might lead to enhanced motivation and a willingness to invest in the exchanges over a longer 
period of time. With respect to motivation, consideration also needs to be given to the task types (Appel & 
Gilabert, 2002; El-Hariri, 2016) and the use of a variety of tasks (Coyle & Reverte Prieto, 2017). 
Conclusion 
To date, studies of tandem language involving young children have been limited to asynchronous exchanges 
(Thurston et al., 2009; Tolosa et al., 2015; Tolosa et al., 2017). To our knowledge, the present study 
represents the first reported study of a synchronous tandem chat exchange involving elementary school 
children. More generally, it contributes to the few text-based chat studies which show that young learners 
(aged 10–12) are capable of engaging in online negotiation of meaning and form in the context of various 
tasks (Coyle & Reverte Prieto, 2017; Morris, 2005). In contrast to the study by Morris (2005) involving 
Grade 5 Spanish L2 learners, children in the present study showed a preference for explicit, rather than 
implicit, corrective feedback. This preference was attributed to the tandem approach that emphasized 
training in how to give feedback as well as to differences in the school cultures. To further amplify the 
benefits of a tandem approach, it is suggested that the activities be better integrated into the classroom 
culture so as to foster greater links between the students and more meaningful in-class reinvestment tasks. 
Within classroom settings, especially in elementary and high school, tandem language learning remains a 
largely peripheral activity, despite research involving intact classes. To explore more fully the potential of 
this approach for language learning will require a substantive change in terms of how teachers view their 
roles as language teachers and the value they attach to seeking out partnerships and making such activities 
central features of their curriculum (Parks & Priego, 2017). Future research will also need to pay closer 
attention to how tandem language learning activities contribute to acquisition as well as the role of 
individual differences. 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank the three anonymous reviewers and the editors of this issue for their insightful 
comments during the review process. 
Christine Giguère and Susan Parks 189 
 
References 
Abrams, Z. I. (2003). The effect of synchronous and asynchronous CMC on oral performance in German. 
The Modern Language Journal, 87(2), 157–167.  
Appel, C., & Gilabert, R. (2002). Motivation and task performance in a task-based web-based tandem 
project. ReCALL, 14(1), 16–31. 
Bower, J., & Kawaguchi, S. (2011). Negotiation of meaning and corrective feedback in Japanese/English 
eTandem. Language Learning & Technology, 15(1), 47–71. 
Brammerts, H. (1996). Language learning in tandem using the Internet. In M. Warschauer (Ed.), 
Telecollaboration in foreign language learning: Proceedings of the Hawai‘i symposium (pp. 121–
130). Honolulu, Hawai’i: University of Hawai’i Second Language Teaching & Curriculum Center. 
Cappellini, M. (2013). Co-construction des routines d’étayage dans un tandem franco-chinois par 
visioconférence. In C. Dejean, F. Mangenot, E. Nissen, & T. Soubrié (Eds.), Actes du colloque EPAL: 
Échanger pour apprendre en ligne (pp. 1–13). Grenoble, France: Université Grenoble. 
Chapelle, C. A. (1997). CALL in the year 2000: Still in search of research paradigms? Language 
Learning & Technology, 1(1), 19–43. 
Chapelle, C. A. (2016). CALL in the year 2000: A look back from 2016. Language Learning & 
Technology, 20(2), 159–161. 
Coyle, Y., & Reverte Prieto, M. J. (2017). Children’s interaction and lexical acquisition in text-based 
online chat. Language Learning & Technology, 21(2), 179–199. 
El-Hariri, Y. (2016). Learner perspectives on task design for oral-visual eTandem language learning. 
Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 10(1), 49–72. 
Ellis, R. (2001). Investigating form-focused instruction. Language Learning, 51(1), 1–46. 
Ellis, R., Basturkmen, H., & Loewen, S. (2001). Preemptive focus on form in the ESL classroom. TESOL 
Quarterly, 35(3), 407–432. 
Flick, L. (2013). Motivating francophone ESL learners in Quebec: A pilot study on the potential role of 
eTandem with anglophone peers in Ontario. (Unpublished master’s thesis). University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa, Canada. 
Gagné, N., & Parks, S. (2013). Cooperative learning tasks in a Grade 6 intensive ESL class: Role of 
scaffolding. Language Teaching Research, 17(2), 188–209. 
Gass, S. M. (2002). An interactionist perspective on second language acquisition. In R. B. Kaplan (Ed.), 
The Oxford handbook of applied linguistics (pp. 170–181). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Gillette, B. (1994). The role of learner goals in L2 success. In P. Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.), Vygotskian 
approaches to second language research (pp. 195–213). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Guillén, G. (2014). Expanding the language classroom: Linguistic gains and learning opportunities 
through e-tandems and social networks. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of California, 
Davis, Davis, CA. 
Kabata, K., & Edasawa, Y. (2011). Tandem language learning through a cross-cultural keypal project. 
Language Learning & Technology, 15(1), 104–121. 
Kötter, M. (2003). Negotiation of meaning and code switching in online tandems. Language Learning 
and Technology, 7(2), 145–172. 
Little, M., & Brammerts, H. (1996). A guide to language learning in tandem via the Internet. Dublin, 
Ireland: Trinity College Dublin. 
190 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C. Ritchie 
& T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413–468). San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press. 
Lyster, R., & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learner uptake: Negotiation of form in 
communicative classrooms. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19(3), 37–66. 
Morris, F. (2005). Child-to-child interaction and corrective feedback in a computer mediated L2 class. 
Language Learning & Technology, 9(1), 29–45. 
Parks, S. (2000). Same task, different activities: Issues of investment, identity, and use of strategy. TESL 
Canada Journal, 17(2), 64–88. https://doi.org/10.18806/tesl.v17i2.890 
Parks, S., & Priego, S. (2017). A tandem approach to language learning: Re-envisioning the teaching and 
learning of ESL-FSL in Canada. Réflexions, 36(3), 27–30. 
Parks, S., Huot, D., Hamers, J., & Lemonnier, F. H. (2005). “History of Theatre” web sites: A brief 
history of the writing process in a high school ESL language arts class. Journal of Second Language 
Writing, 14(4), 233–258. 
Patton, M. Q. (1987). How to use qualitative methods in evaluation. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
Payne, J. S., & Whitney, P. J. (2002). Developing L2 oral proficiency through synchronous CMC: 
Output, working memory, and interlanguage development. CALICO Journal, 20(1), 7–32. 
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical 
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Networked-based language teaching: Concepts and 
practice (pp. 59–86). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Pica, T., Kanagy, R., & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communicative tasks for second language 
instruction. In G. Crookes & S. M. Gass (Eds.), Tasks in a pedagogical context (pp. 9–34). Clevedon, 
UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Priego, S. (2011). Helping each other: Scaffolding in electronic tandem language learning. The 
International Journal of Knowledge and Society, 7(2), 133–151. 
Sauro, S. (2012). L2 performance in text-chat and spoken discourse. System, 40(3), 335–348. 
Sauro, S., & Smith, B. (2010). Investigating L2 performance in text chat. Applied Linguistics, 31(4), 554–
577. 
Shekary, M., & Tahririan, M. H. (2006). Negotiation of meaning and noticing in text-based online chat. 
The Modern Language Journal, 90(4), 557–573. 
Smith, B. (2003). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction: An expanded model. The Modern Language 
Journal, 87(1), 38–57. 
Smith, B. (2004). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction and lexical acquisition. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 26, 365–398. 
Smith, B. (2005). The relationship between negotiated interaction, learner uptake, and lexical acquisition 
in task-based computer-mediated communication. TESOL Quarterly, 39(1), 33–58. 
Thurston, A., Duran, D., Cunningham, E., Blanch, S., & Topping, K. (2009). International on-line 
reciprocal peer tutoring to promote modern language development in primary schools. Computers & 
Education, 53(2), 462–472. 
Tolosa, C., Ordόñez, C. L., & Alfonso, T. (2015). Online peer feedback between Colombian and New 
Zealand FL beginners: A comparison and lessons learned. PROFILE Issues in Teachers’ Professional 
Development, 17(1), 73–86. 
Christine Giguère and Susan Parks 191 
 
Tolosa, C., Ordόñez, C. L., & Guevara, D. C. (2017). Language learning shifts and attitudes towards 
language learning in an online tandem program for beginner writers. PROFILE Issues in Teachers’ 
Professional Development, 19(1), 105–118. 
Vinagre, M., & Muñoz, B. (2011). Computer-mediated corrective feedback and language accuracy in 
telecollaborative exchanges. Language Learning & Technology, 15(1), 72–103. 
Wolff, J. (2009). History of tandem. Retrieved from http://www.tandemcity.info/general/en_history.htm 
Appendix A. Example of a Task 
Third Contact 
 
 
Task 3 (In French) 
Today you will talk about Halloween! 
WHAT YOU SHOULD TRY TO FIND OUT 
To start off, greet your partner. 
Ask your partner if he or she likes Halloween. 
Ask your partner what he or she does on Halloween. 
Ask your partner what he or she dressed up as. 
If you have time, talk to your partner about another topic. 
Say bye to your partner. 
Appendix B. Reflection Form 
Your name: 
Second contact: 
How did your chat session go with your partner? 
__very good __good __pretty good __not so good 
Don’t forget to speak English first! 
After 30 minutes, you will be told to switch 
to French! 
Don’t forget to correct your partner when 
necessary! 
192 Language Learning & Technology 
 
If things didn’t go so well, explain why. 
List a few examples of feedback you got from your partner. 
Are there any words/expressions you learned during the chat session? __yes __no 
If yes, what? 
 
About the Authors 
Christine Giguère has completed an MA in Applied Linguistics. She has extensive experience teaching in 
French immersion and intensive ESL programs in elementary and high school. 
E-mail: christine.giguere.46@gmail.com 
Susan Parks is an associate professor at Université Laval where she teachers undergraduate and graduate 
courses in L2 teacher education. She is involved in promoting tandem language learning via the ESL–FSL 
Tandem Canada Platform. 
E-mail: susan.parks@lli.ulaval.ca 
