Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
June 2019, Volume 23, Issue 2 
pp. 145–158 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2019 Sheng-Shiang Tseng & Hui-Chin Yeh 
 
 
The impact of video and written feedback on student 
preferences of English speaking practice 
Sheng-Shiang Tseng, Tamkang University 
Hui-Chin Yeh, National Yunlin University of Science and Technology 
Abstract 
This study examined the differences in perceptions of the value of feedback for improving English speaking 
performance between students who received video feedback and those who received written feedback and 
their preferences for written or video feedback. A total of 43 English as a foreign language students 
participated in this study to produce a video clip to which their peers responded with either written or video 
feedback. The collected data included (a) students’ video clips before and after receiving peer feedback, (b) 
the video and written feedback they received, and (c) a survey which the students completed after receiving 
video or written feedback to examine their own English speaking performance in terms of pronunciation, 
intonation, fluency, grammar, and word usage. The findings showed that both written and video feedback 
was useful for English speaking skill development. Written feedback helped the students learn grammar 
rules and word usage to achieve greater linguistic accuracy in their English speaking performance. Video 
feedback helped students improve their intonation. However, neither video feedback nor written feedback 
could help them significantly improve their pronunciation and fluency. The students also preferred written 
over video feedback due to its efficiency and clarity. 
Keywords: Written Feedback, Video Feedback, English Speaking Performance, EFL Students 
Language(s) Learned in This Study: English 
APA Citation: Tseng, S.-S., & Yeh, H.-C. (2019). The impact of video and written feedback on student 
preferences of English speaking practice. Language Learning & Technology, 23(2), 145–158. 
https://doi.org/10125/44687 
Introduction 
English speaking is an important skill for students of English as a foreign language (EFL), because it is an 
international medium of communication that enables them to share their thoughts and ideas with foreigners. 
However, constraints in Taiwan’s educational environment—including exam-oriented syllabi, large class 
sizes, limited class time, lack of suitable teaching methods, and unqualified teachers (Butler, 2011; Hsieh, 
2016)—have limited students’ opportunities to develop adequate English speaking skills. According to 
global TOEFL reports, the English speaking skills of EFL students in Taiwan are lower than those of 
students in other Asian countries (Ministry of Education of Taiwan, 2016). Furthermore, the annual report 
of the Educational Testing Service (2017) reported that Taiwanese students’ average score on the 2016 
TOEIC speaking test was 134, indicating difficulties due to limited vocabulary size and inaccurate 
pronunciation. These reports strongly suggest that most EFL students in Taiwan have not reached a level 
of English speaking proficiency required in many professions. 
To overcome the shortcomings in Taiwanese English instruction, effective teaching methods need to be 
introduced. Video feedback, grounded in Paivio’s (1986) dual coding theory, has been used by EFL teachers 
to improve students’ English speaking skills. The dual coding theory posits that language processing is 
composed of linguistic elements, such as text, and non-linguistic elements, such as images. Video feedback 
is therefore used to combine linguistic and non-linguistic elements to benefit students’ English speaking 
practice. The beneficial features of video feedback include (a) an enriched format for speaking practice that 
146 Language Learning & Technology 
 
features images, spoken words, body language, and facial expressions; (b) demonstration of linguistic 
elements, such as pronunciation and intonation; (c) authentic interactions with peers; and (d) archiving 
feedback for replaying (Crook et al., 2012; Godwin-Jones, 2003; Goldstein, 2008; Walker & White, 2013). 
Recognizing these benefits, researchers (e.g., Hung, 2016; Hung & Huang, 2015) have implemented video 
feedback in language classrooms using video technology or blogs. For example, Hung (2016) investigated 
the effect of video on EFL learners’ engagement in and strategies for providing peer feedback and found 
that while receiving and producing video feedback, students became more interactive and more engaged in 
improving their English speaking skills. Similarly, Hung and Huang (2015) examined English oral 
presentation performance and the effects of video blogging by asking students to upload four presentation 
files and exchange peer feedback. They found that the students improved in the areas of pronunciation, 
intonation, projection, posture, introduction, conclusion, and purpose. In a similar vein, Shih (2010), who 
integrated video blogging with face-to-face instruction in an English public-speaking class, also found that 
video feedback helped students improve their public speaking performance. These studies suggest the 
positive effects of video feedback on English speaking skills, such as promoting interaction, fostering 
engagement, and enhancing presentation skills and speaking performance. 
The shortcoming of previous studies is that they used video feedback alone to improve EFL students’ 
English speaking performance, not examining the power of written feedback in English speaking 
performance training. Written feedback has been used effectively to provide clear and detailed information 
that students can readily comprehend and interpret. However, few studies have either investigated the 
benefits of using written feedback in English speaking skill training (e.g., Crook et al., 2012; Hung, 2016; 
Hung & Huang, 2015; Shih, 2010) or compared the effects of video and written feedback practices on EFL 
students’ English speaking performance. In addition, no studies have explored students’ preferences for 
video or written feedback for training in English speaking skills. Rather, the focus of previous research has 
been on teachers’ perceptions of video and written feedback (e.g., Orlando, 2016). Given the lack of 
substantive evidence for EFL teachers on which they can base pedagogical suggestions to improve students’ 
English speaking performance, this study investigates the differences in English speaking performance 
between students who received video feedback and those who received written feedback by proposing the 
following three research questions (RQs): 
1. What is the difference in students’ perceptions of their English speaking performance between 
students who receive written feedback and those who receive video feedback? 
2. How do video and written feedback practices help students improve their English speaking 
performance? 
3. What are the students’ preferences regarding video and written feedback? 
Literature Review 
One of the theories supporting the use of peer feedback is Vygotsky’s (1978) socio-cultural theory, claiming 
that language learning takes place through social interaction. From this perspective, peer feedback can be 
viewed as a method that allows students to receive and provide constructive knowledge in a socially-
interactive learning environment. As Benson (2015) indicated, “the cognitive processes involved in learning 
are stimulated and supported by communicative interaction and … that cognition is embodied in interaction” 
(p. 89). Through interaction, students can negotiate meaning, gain multiple perspectives, refine their 
original understanding, and improve their skills, enabling more comprehensive and deeper thinking toward 
language learning (Yanguas, 2010). Another construct supporting peer feedback is Vygotsky’s (1978) zone 
of proximal development, meaning that students can move toward their own optimal level of learning 
through collaboration with more-advanced peers (Lee, 2008; Wood, Bruner, & Ross, 1976). From 
Vygotsky’s theoretical perspective, therefore, peer feedback is a collaborative activity with the potential to 
improve students’ English speaking performance. 
Two major forms of peer feedback practice are written and video feedback. Written feedback refers to 
Sheng-Shiang Tseng and Hui-Chin Yeh 147 
 
written comments or suggestions for improving performance given by peers (Hyland, 2003). The use of 
written feedback to improve EFL students’ English proficiency is based on the noticing hypothesis, arguing 
that students acquire language when they pay attention to linguistic forms (Schmidt, 1990). The written 
feedback allows students to explicitly analyze linguistic forms and notice the differences in language forms 
between their own language productions and the target language input they receive to enhance their 
language proficiency (Storch & Wigglesworth, 2010). In language teaching, written feedback has been used 
mainly to improve EFL students’ English writing (e.g., Kamimura, 2006; Yastıbaş & Yastıbaş, 2015). For 
example, Kamimura (2006) found that written peer feedback had overall positive effects on both high- and 
low-achieving students’ writing performance, as it provided visible linguistic information that students 
could consume and interpret at their own learning pace. Likewise, Yastıbaş and Yastıbaş (2015), who 
investigated the effects of written peer feedback on Turkish EFL students’ writing anxiety, found that 
students perceived that peer feedback decreased their writing anxiety and increased their confidence. These 
studies support the use of written peer feedback to enhance EFL students’ English writing skills. 
Another form of feedback practice is video feedback, which emerged during the rapid development of 
learning technologies. Among studies on the influence of video feedback on EFL students’ English 
speaking skills, Toland, Mills, and Kohyama (2016) found that most EFL Japanese university students 
agreed that mobile-video reflective feedback could help enhance the quality of presentation performance 
and speaking proficiency. Similarly, Xu, Dong, and Jiang (2017)—who had students watch five video clips, 
record a retelling of each story, and receive feedback in the form of multimedia through a social 
communication app called WeChat—found that students with positive attitudes toward the feedback 
process gained more confidence when speaking English. In the same manner, Huang and Hung (2013) 
attempted to explore how a video-based online discussion forum enhanced the English competence of 
Taiwanese EFL learners. In their study, 17 students participated in a voice-based online discussion forum 
on the platform Facebook, in which they provided feedback for their classmates’ videos. The results showed 
that the video-based forum activity offered Taiwanese EFL learners additional speaking practice and 
cultivated their public speaking skills. Overall, these studies all indicated that video feedback could 
facilitate students’ English-speaking skills. 
While the research has provided evidence of the effectiveness of the two types of feedback for EFL learners’ 
writing skills (e.g., Kamimura, 2006; Yastıbaş & Yastıbaş, 2015), there is still a need for studies to 
investigate the extent to which written feedback can facilitate speaking skills. Also, even though some 
research has investigated how video feedback can benefit EFL learners’ speaking skills (e.g., Toland et al., 
2016; Xu et al., 2017; Huang & Hung, 2013), little attention has been paid to evaluating (a) the effectiveness 
of both written and video feedback on EFL learners’ English-speaking skills, (b) how the effects of the two 
types differ, and (c) whether one type is more effective than the other. It is still unclear which aspects of 
students’ English speaking proficiency can be promoted by each feedback practice (written or video). Of 
the few studies comparing the two types in terms of their effects on students’ writing skills, Özkul and 
Ortaçtepe (2017) found that video feedback was more beneficial in developing EFL learners’ writing skills 
than was written feedback. In addition, Luck, Lerman, Wu, Dupuis, and Hussein (2018) investigated 
whether students in a teacher-training program preferred written, vocal, or video feedback. They found that 
all the participants preferred receiving vocal feedback. Again, these studies did not address the effects of 
feedback type on students’ speaking skills—a critical target area in communicative language teaching. To 
fill this gap, this study investigates the differences in English speaking performance between students who 
received video feedback and those who received written feedback. It also investigates student preferences 
for the type of feedback and examines the benefits of both video and written feedback on English speaking 
performance. 
Method 
Participants 
Participants included 43 third-year EFL college students enrolled in an 18-week undergraduate course, 
148 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Multimedia English. The course was designed for practicing speaking and writing skills in the Department 
of Applied Foreign Languages at a national university in central Taiwan. The first language of the students 
was Mandarin Chinese. The age of the students ranged from 21 to 22. Among the 43 students, 30 were 
female and 13 were male. The students were assessed as having upper-intermediate level speaking ability 
by the General English Proficiency Test (GEPT). The GEPT is a criterion-referenced test developed in 1999 
that provides self-assessment and focuses individually on listening, reading, writing, and speaking. The test 
is used nationwide for assessing English proficiency of EFL learners in Taiwan, so it was deemed 
appropriate for the evaluation of students’ oral proficiency in this study. 
Research Design 
The 43 participants were divided within the course into 10 video feedback groups (N = 21) and 11 written 
feedback groups (N = 22). After the course introduction, from Week 2 to Week 8, each feedback group 
created a 20-minute video related to cultural topics of Taiwan (see Table 1). The groups then uploaded the 
videos for peers to review and to provide feedback during Week 9 and Week 10. An oral presentation rubric 
was distributed to them for peer practice, comprising five categories: pronunciation, intonation, fluency, 
grammar, and word usage. Feedback was given to written feedback groups in the form of written texts and 
to the video feedback groups as a 2-minute video. The recipient students then revised their videos based on 
the feedback received and submitted revised videos in Week 18 for a second round of feedback. The 
students used the same oral presentation rubric to assign scores to the revised videos and to give comments 
and feedback. 
Table 1. Timeline of the Written and Video Feedback Practices 
Week Activities Collected Data 
Week 1 The instructor introduced video and written feedback 
practices. 
 
Weeks 2–8 Students produced and uploaded videos to receive 
peer feedback. 
Videos before the written and 
video feedback practice 
Weeks 9–10 Students provided written or video feedback on videos 
based on the rubric. 
 
Weeks 11–17 The written feedback group received the feedback as 
paper texts and revised their original videos. 
The video feedback group received video-recorded 
feedback and revised their original videos. 
Records of written and video 
feedback 
Week 18 Students uploaded revised videos for a second round 
of feedback. 
Students provided written or video feedback on videos 
based on the rubric. 
Students filled out a survey and responded in writing 
to open-ended questions regarding their perceptions of 
the usefulness of the written or video feedback for 
their English speaking performance. 
Revised videos after the first 
round of feedback and the 
survey 
After the second round of feedback, the students filled out a survey and wrote a reflective essay responding 
to the following open-ended questions: 
• Please talk about the feedback you received. 
• How did you perceive the usefulness of the feedback for your pronunciation, intonation, fluency, 
grammar, and word usage? 
• What is your preference between written and video feedback? 
Sheng-Shiang Tseng and Hui-Chin Yeh 149 
 
Data Collection and Analysis 
The data included records of the written and video peer feedback, the students’ videos before and after they 
received feedback, and the completed surveys which the students filled out after receiving video or written 
feedback to self-examine their own English speaking performance. The speaking performance survey was 
adapted from Hung’s (2016) instrument, designed to elicit students’ perceptions of the usefulness of the 
feedback. The survey comprised 20 Likert-scale items rated from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). 
The items were grouped into five aspects of English speaking performance: pronunciation, intonation, 
fluency, grammar, and word usage. Sample items include the following: 
• The feedback helped me to improve my pronunciation. 
• The feedback I received helped me understand where to stress in a sentence. 
• The feedback I received helped to identify my grammar errors. 
To ensure the reliability of the 20 Likert scale items, Cronbach’s coefficient alpha was calculated, and a 
value of .83 was obtained, indicating a highly reliable survey (Hung, 2016). The survey scores of the two 
groups for each variable were compared and analyzed using multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) 
to examine the difference in students’ perceptions of their English speaking performance between the video 
and written feedback groups (RQ1). 
The students’ written and video feedback, their initial videos, and their revised videos after receiving peer 
feedback were qualitatively analyzed to triangulate the survey results and explore how video and written 
feedback improved students’ English speaking performance (RQ2). The records of written and video 
feedback, the initial and revised videos, and the survey results were analyzed using Glaser’s (1965) constant 
comparative method “which occurs throughout the whole research experience from initial data collection 
through coding to final analysis and writing” (p. 437). 
The reflective essays were analyzed using content analysis to determine students’ preferences for written 
or video feedback (RQ3). The analysis included the stages of coding, categorization, description, and 
interpretation (Patton, 2002). In the coding phase, the research team read students’ responses to the open-
ended questions thoroughly and highlighted meaningful statements from which several codes were 
generated and then collapsed into categories. In the description phase, the main ideas of the categorized 
units were summarized and documented. Finally, in the interpretation phase, the research team interpreted 
the predominant themes by providing possible explanations, reaching conclusions, and drawing inferences 
from each main idea. Reliability was established through regular discussions between the two coders on 
emerging themes, and the means of the inter-rater reliability for different sets of data reached .88. 
Results 
Perceptions of Feedback Practices on English Speaking Performance 
All participants completed a survey to evaluate their own English speaking performance after receiving 
video or written feedback. The survey included pronunciation, intonation, fluency, grammar, and word 
usage. The means and standard deviations of each delivery variable for the two groups are shown in Table 
2. The multivariate results indicated that there was a significant difference between the video feedback 
groups and the written groups in the delivery category (Wilk’s lambda = .47, F(5, 37) = 9.14, p = .00; see 
Table 3). The effect size of the delivery variables, 34%, was associated with the feedback practice.  
150 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Table 2. Means and Standard Deviations for Each Delivery Variable 
Delivery Variable Groups M SD N 
Pronunciation Written feedback group 3.86 0.64 22 
Video feedback group 4.14 0.66 21 
Intonation Written feedback group 3.32 0.78 22 
Video feedback group 4.24 0.83 21 
Fluency Written feedback group 3.50 0.74 22 
Video feedback group 3.33 0.91 21 
Grammar Written feedback group 3.77 0.81 22 
Video feedback group 2.90 0.63 21 
Word usage Written feedback group 3.91 0.61 22 
Video feedback group 3.38 0.81 21 
Table 3. Multivariate Effects for the Peer Feedback Practice 
 Delivery Variable Wilk’s Lambda F p η2 
Peer Feedback Practices Pronunciation .47 9.14 .00 .56 
Interpretation scores 
Intonation 
Evaluation scores 
Fluency 
Univariate ANOVAs were further performed to investigate the differences between the video feedback 
groups and the written feedback groups in the delivery category (see Table 4). The results showed that there 
were significant differences in intonation (p = .01), grammar (p = .00), and word usage (p = .02), with 
small effect sizes (η2 = .26, .27, and .13, respectively). These findings suggested that video feedback was 
more useful for improving intonation, while written feedback was more beneficial for grammar and word 
usage. There were no significant differences between the two groups for pronunciation and fluency. 
Table 4. Univariate Effects for the Feedback Practice 
Delivery Variable SS df MS F p η2 
Pronunciation 0.84 1 0.84 2.00 .17 .05 
Intonation 9.09 1 9.09 14.02 .01 .26 
Fluency 0.71 1 0.71 1.04 .31 .03 
Grammar 8.09 1 8.09 0.60 .00 .27 
Word usage 3.00 1 3.00 5.92 .02 .13 
Improving English Speaking Performance Through Video and Written Feedback 
To triangulate the self-reported survey results and explore how video and written feedback improved 
students’ English speaking performance, the students’ feedback, their initial videos, and their revised videos 
were analyzed. Participants S4, S10, S20, and S28 were selected as representative cases to illustrate the 
differences between the video and written groups in intonation, grammar, and word usage. These students 
were selected because their English performance scores were the closest to the mean scores of their 
Sheng-Shiang Tseng and Hui-Chin Yeh 151 
 
respective groups (see Table 5). 
Table 5. Selected Students’ English Speaking Performance for Each Delivery Variable 
 Pronunciation Intonation Fluency Grammar Word Usage 
S4 (Written feedback group) 3 3 3 4 4 
S10 (Written feedback group) 3 2 3 4 4 
S20 (Video feedback group) 4 4 3 2 3 
S28 (Video feedback group) 3 4 3 3 3 
Intonation 
Table 6. Examples of Written and Video Feedback on Intonation 
 Written Feedback Group Video Feedback Group 
Excerpt from the 
Initial Video 
S4: //Taiwanese meatball is one of 
Taiwanese favorite food, and people 
cannot live without it. // 
//What makes these meatballs unique is 
its translucent chewy outside, which is 
made with rice flour and sweet potato 
flour. // 
S20: //The second one is the Lance62 
hostel. The public transportation is very 
convenient in this area. // 
//There are three specialties in this 
youth hotel. // 
//First, … Second, it holds different 
kinds of activities like music 
performance. // 
Sample Feedback The narration sounds like just reading or 
memorizing the script. You can 
emphasize on some words and sentences 
such as “people cannot live without it,” 
“what makes these meatballs unique 
is…” If you can show your emotions and 
feeling through the words, that would be 
the icing on the cake! 
The narrator spoke too fast, and the tone 
was also too blending so I could not get 
the point easily. I think you could speak 
slowly and emphasize some words with 
high or low tones. For example, you can 
say like this: “The public transportation is 
very convenient in this area” by 
emphasizing the word “convenient.” 
Analysis of the 
Initial Feedback 
Identify intonation problems. 
Identify problematic sentences. 
Identify intonation problems. 
Demonstrate the intonation of a sentence. 
Excerpt from the 
Revised Video 
S4: //Taiwanese meatball is one of 
Taiwanese favorite food, and people 
cannot live without it. // 
//What makes these meatballs unique is 
its translucent chewy outside, which is 
made with rice flour and sweet potato 
flour. // 
//The second one is the Lance62 
hostel.// 
//The public transportation is very 
convenient in this area. // 
//There are three specialties in this 
youth hotel. // 
//Second, it holds different kinds of 
activities like music performance// 
Analysis of the 
Revised 
Feedback 
Retain the original intonation. Slow the speech speed. 
Emphasize key messages by raising the 
tone. 
The video feedback was more useful for improving intonation, because it provided an aural-phonetic model 
of English intonation. As Table 6 shows, S4 received written feedback commenting that she read as if 
“memorizing the script” and she was given examples of sentences in which she could stress some words. 
152 Language Learning & Technology 
 
However, S4 did not follow the written feedback in the revised prompted video. 
Unlike S4, S20 changed her speech intonation after receiving video feedback suggesting that her tone was 
too even to emphasize the main points of her speech and advising her to speak more slowly and emphasize 
keywords by altering her pitch. After hearing her peer’s concrete phonetic modeling of the suggested 
intonation, S20 raised the pitch and volume of the key words in their revised video. 
As this comparison shows, without an aural-phonetic model, which was possible in the video but not in the 
written feedback, students had difficulty conceptualizing the accurate intonation. In her reflective essay, S4 
stated that it was hard to conceptualize intonation in the written feedback, which making it much less useful 
than auditory feedback: 
“Watching a real person’s demonstration is needed for the improvement of intonation” (S4). 
“I can learn about the use of stress in sentences from video feedback” (S11). 
“Intonation is hard to learn through reading peers’ written feedback” (S27). 
“It is hard to imagine the correct intonation from reading written feedback” (S28). 
“I have no ideas which parts of the sentence I should raise my tone from written feedback” (S3). 
Grammar and Word Usage 
Conversely, video feedback was reported to be less effective than written feedback for two reasons. First, 
when providing video feedback, the students tended to focus on visual and auditory effects or the video 
editing rather than on grammatical and lexical improvements: 
“It is not easy to learn grammar from watching video feedback” (S5). 
“In video feedback, few people would mention about the grammar usage” (S8). 
“We learn grammar through reading rather than listening” (S30). 
“Written feedback works better in identifying my grammar errors” (S34). 
“Written feedback is more clear in explaining grammar rules and word usage” (S41). 
Second, grammar rules and word usage were difficult for students to understand in the video feedback. As 
Table 7 demonstrates, S24 received the video feedback asking him to correct the phrase which dish will he 
recommended to which dish does he recommend, since he was performing the interview with a person in 
the video. However, S24 did not correct the grammar errors in the revised video, because his peer talked 
too fast and he was confused with some grammatical terms used in the video feedback such as third-person 
subjects and past tense. S10 was able to correct his grammar errors in the use of nouns after receiving his 
peer’s written feedback that argument is a countable noun and seafood is a collective noun. After he fixed 
the two errors in the revised video, S10 stated that he appreciated the clarity of the written feedback. 
The comparison of S10 and S24 showed that students found written feedback more helpful for grammar 
and lexical advice, which was hard to follow in the video feedback because of the students’ speech and the 
complexity of grammar rules. As students commented, grammar was learned through reading rather than 
through listening to the videos. The peer reviewers could provide explicit instructions and written models 
of correct grammar. 
  
Sheng-Shiang Tseng and Hui-Chin Yeh 153 
 
Table 7. Examples of Written and Video Feedback on Grammar and Word Usage 
 Written Feedback Group Video Feedback Group 
Excerpt from the 
Initial Video 
S10: Although they have *argument, they 
are both involved in making pizza. 
S10: Every morning, we buy vegetables 
and *sea foods at the market. 
S24: Which dish will he recommended? 
Sample Feedback In 2:14, the argument is countable. You 
should add “s” to the noun. 
In 2:45, seafood is a collective noun and 
uncountable. 
And, it’s seafood, not sea food. You 
shouldn’t separate it into two words. 
“Dish” should be plural. You should also 
use “what” instead of the “which” since 
you are asking the person the question in 
the interview. Which are the relative 
pronouns used to name things you 
already know. 
Analysis of the 
Initial Feedback 
Correct the countable noun. 
Correct the uncountable noun. 
Speak too fast about the grammar errors. 
Excerpt from the 
Revised Video 
S10: Although they have arguments, they 
are both involved in making pizza. 
S10: Every morning, we buy vegetables 
and seafood at the market. 
S24: Which dish will he recommended? 
Analysis of the 
Revised 
Feedback 
Fix the error by adding -s to the noun 
argument. 
Fix the error by removing -s. 
Stick to the original sentence. 
Pronunciation and Fluency 
There was no significant difference in pronunciation and fluency between the two feedback groups. This 
can be attributed to two factors. The first was that neither form of feedback supported improvement of 
students’ pronunciation and fluency, as they are aspects that require long-term and consistent speaking 
practice. The other reason was that little written and video feedback on pronunciation and fluency was 
given, although pronunciation errors or dysfluency markers were still found in the students’ English speech. 
Because such errors did not hinder comprehension, they did not elicit correction. S4 stated, “Pronunciation 
and fluency do not really matter as long as we can understand their talk.” The results suggested that the 
students regarded comprehensibility as a more significant criterion than correct pronunciation and fluency: 
“You cannot change your pronunciation immediately by receiving video and written feedback” (S18). 
“Video feedback and written feedback were not helpful because pronunciation and fluency need 
practiceing” (S14). 
“I did not receive much written feedback about pronunciation and fluency” (S29). 
“Correcting pronunciation and fluency errors might not be the priority in video and written feedback” 
(S6). 
Students’ Preferences for Written and Video Feedback 
Most of the students (70%) preferred to receive written feedback for the following reasons: First, compared 
to video feedback, written feedback provided more constructive, informative, and organized information. 
As S21 stated, “Video feedback is not that clear for me to understand what my peers want to convey. 
However, writing one or two paragraphs in an organized or logical manner helps me understand quickly 
and clearly.” Because video feedback involved speech that was often disorganized, repetitive, and 
redundant, it was difficult for students to process the message being conveyed. Written feedback, on the 
other hand, involved a more systematic mode of thinking in which the reviewers critically reflected on and 
154 Language Learning & Technology 
 
analyzed their peers’ English speech and shared personal experiences in a logical manner. This made the 
feedback more comprehensible and useful. 
Another problem with video feedback was that students found the process of locating and reviewing peers’ 
comments, which involved replaying the video several times, inefficient. Written feedback, however, could 
easily be consulted, and as EFL learners, the students were better at processing textual information. In 
addition, written feedback allowed the students to use keywords to search for the comments they needed 
and highlight comments to review later. 
The last problem with video feedback was its clarity. Speed of speaking, frequently low volume, and 
background noise became obstacles for students to comprehend the video feedback. As S16 stated, 
“Sometimes I can’t hear clearly what the speakers said. Maybe they speak too fast or there are other sounds 
interfering with the recording.” In addition, the students complained that they had to spend too much time 
figuring out video feedback because the speakers did not have good pronunciation. They also strongly 
suggested providing subtitles. 
“Written feedback is more detailed and specific than video feedback” (S33). 
“Information in written feedback was presented in a logical way” (S29). 
“In written feedback, we can review the information we need easily” (S36). 
“Some people speak too fast when they give video feedback” (S14). 
“Reading written texts is easier than listening to video feedback” (S40). 
The students identified some benefits of video feedback, although these benefits were not usually related 
to English speaking ability. First, the students indicated that they felt encouraged when seeing their peers’ 
faces and hearing their voices. Such features as facial expressions, speech tones, and body language in video 
feedback established emotional connections, fostering engagement while watching the video feedback to 
identify English speaking errors. In addition, facial expressions and body language made video feedback 
more conversational. S8 indicated, “Video feedback is more interesting and interactive as I can see and hear 
them.” Because facial expressions and speech tones in video feedback allowed the students to feel 
connected to their peers, video feedback could be more persuasive than written feedback. These features 
also made feedback on intonation more effective. The benefits of video feedback showed that its power lay 
in its visual and auditory capacity to build an interactive and socialized environment that promoted students’ 
engagement in the peer feedback process. 
“Video feedback could turn suggestions into more persuasive reasoning using body language” (S8). 
“I can understand what people want to express through their tone of voice” (S16). 
“Visuals are more interesting and engaging than text” (S20). 
“Images are more persuasive than words” (S11). 
“Video feedback is more interactive as I can hear their voices” (S8). 
Discussion and Conclusion 
This study investigated differences in the perceptions of students who received written feedback and those 
who received video feedback on English speaking performance. Speaking performance was comprised of 
five variables: pronunciation, intonation, fluency, grammar, and word usage. The findings showed that 
video feedback was useful for improving students’ intonation. In addition, and unlike previous studies that 
investigated only the effects of video feedback on English speaking skills (e.g., Crook et al., 2012; Hung, 
2016; Hung & Huang, 2015; Shih, 2010), this study found that written feedback played a substantive role 
in supporting students’ English speaking performance especially in the areas of grammar and vocabulary. 
However, neither written feedback nor video feedback significantly benefitted students’ fluency and 
Sheng-Shiang Tseng and Hui-Chin Yeh 155 
 
pronunciation, which contradicts findings by Hung and Huang (2015) that video feedback has positive 
effects on pronunciation. To triangulate the self-reported results, students’ written and video feedback, their 
initial and revised videos, and their responses to open-ended questions were analyzed and reported 
anecdotally. 
This study found that written feedback was more helpful than video feedback for improving grammar and 
word usage, mainly because it made the suggestions more explicit and easily accessible for students to 
monitor and remember their own errors. This finding aligns with Schmidt’s (1990) noticing hypothesis and 
the suggestion by Sachs and Polio (2007) that the saliency of written feedback could help students pay 
attention to their grammar or lexical errors and consciously remember corrections to avoid repeating errors. 
However, video feedback could not promote the linguistic awareness of the students due to its timely feature 
and the exigencies of real-time conversation. Because peers in video feedback talked too fast, the students 
had a hard time revising grammar and word usage errors. Thus, they preferred to receive more written 
feedback, as it helped them learn grammar rules and word usage and maintain the accuracy of their English 
speaking. 
Video feedback had its strength in helping students improve their English intonation by watching their 
peers’ demonstrations. This result was in line with the finding by Crook et al. (2012) that the major benefit 
of video feedback for English speaking practice lay in its auditory and visual features. However, the 
demonstration in video feedback had little effect on English pronunciation—an inconsistency with the 
findings of Hung and Huang (2015). This contradiction may be explained by the greater difficulty for 
Taiwanese students to master pronunciation than to master intonation. Several English phonemes do not 
exist in Chinese, creating difficulties for EFL students when distinguishing between some minimal pairs. 
Therefore, mastering pronunciation is a long and arduous journey for most native Chinese speaking learners 
of English. Additional teaching activities taught by native English speakers are suggested to provide 
instructional support in video feedback to help students improve and internalize pronunciation. 
Finally, this study found that the students preferred written over video feedback because of its efficiency 
and clarity. For efficiency, written feedback allowed the students to quickly locate the information they 
needed, sometimes by referencing key words. Video feedback often required multiple viewings—
something students found tedious. These results conflicted with those of Crook et al. (2012), who found 
that the advantage of video feedback was to allow students to archive and reply. The present study did 
however confirm the usefulness of written feedback for developing English speaking skills and suggested 
that written feedback should not be downplayed. 
Pedagogical Implications and Future Research 
Most importantly, this study concluded that both written and video feedback helped students to improve 
English speaking performance. Teachers are therefore encouraged to use video feedback to improve 
students’ intonation. Written feedback is preferable for improving grammar and word usage. Second, the 
results showed that written feedback represented a more reflective thinking process than oral feedback, 
suggesting that practicing written feedback could train students to think critically and produce speech in a 
logical manner. Third, although video feedback can help students identify their pronunciation errors, 
improving pronunciation and fluency requires long-term and consistent speaking practice. A teaching 
approach targeting language learners’ speaking proficiency, such as communicative language teaching 
(Nunan, 1987), can be complemented with video feedback throughout a semester to help students improve 
and internalize pronunciation and speaking fluency. 
The current study investigated the effects of written and video feedback on students’ English speaking skills 
and emphasized the importance of using both methods together. However, further research on feedback 
practices is needed. First, the current study evaluated the effectiveness of video and written feedback only 
from the feedback receivers’ perspectives. Similar studies could investigate the feedback providers’ 
perceptions of the two types of feedback for a more complete understanding of potential benefits for 
156 Language Learning & Technology 
 
students in both roles. Second, this study involved 43 Taiwanese college students with upper-intermediate 
level speaking in the central Taiwan. Similar research in different contexts or with more participants at 
various levels of proficiency would allow for comparisons among findings for a more detailed picture. 
Third, the potential of peer feedback in other skill areas requires further exploration. Future studies can 
investigate the effects of written and video peer feedback on skills such as reading comprehension, intensive 
listening, and extensive listening. 
Acknowledgements 
This project was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology in the Republic of China, Taiwan 
under the grant numbers MOST 108-2511-H-032-001 and MOST 106-2628-S-224-001-MY3. 
References 
Benson, P. (2015). Commenting to learn: Evidence of language and intercultural learning in comments on 
YouTube videos. Language Learning & Technology, 19(3), 88–105. 
Butler, Y. (2011). The implementation of communicative and task-based language teaching in the Asia-
Pacific region. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 31, 36–57. 
Crook, A., Mauchline, A., Maw, S., Lawson, C., Drinkwater, R., Lundqvist, K., Orsmond, P., Gomez, S., 
& Park, J. (2012). The use of video technology for providing feedback to students: Can it enhance the 
feedback experience for staff and students? Computers and Education, 58(1), 386–396. 
Educational Testing Service. (2017). Newsletter 45. Retrieved from http://www.toeic.com.tw/file/ 
17251052.pdf 
Glaser, B. G. (1965). The constant comparative method of qualitative analysis. Social Problems, 12(4), 
436–445. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2003). Blogs and wikis: Environments for on-line collaboration. Language Learning 
& Technology, 7(2), 12–16. 
Goldstein, B. (2008). Working with images. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Hsieh, H. C. (2016). High school students’ topic preferences and oral development in an English-only 
short-term intensive language program. English Language Teaching, 9(9), 116–133. 
Huang, H. T. D., & Hung, S. T. A. (2013). Exploring the utility of a video-based online EFL discussion 
forum. British Journal of Educational Technology, 44(3), 90–94 
Hung, S. T. A. (2016). Enhancing feedback provision through multimodal video technology. Computers 
& Education, 98, 90–101. 
Hung, S. T. A., & Huang, H. T. D. (2015). Video blogging and English presentation performance: A pilot 
study. Psychological Reports, 117(2), 614–630. 
Hyland, F. (2003). Focusing on form: Student engagement with teacher feedback. System, 31(2), 217–
230. 
Kamimura, T. (2006). Effects of peer feedback on EFL student writers at different levels of English 
proficiency: A Japanese context. TESL Canada Journal, 23(2), 12–39. 
Lee, L. (2008). Focus-on-form through collaborative scaffolding in expert-to-novice online interaction. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(3), 53–72. 
Sheng-Shiang Tseng and Hui-Chin Yeh 157 
 
Luck, K. M., Lerman, D. C., Wu, W. L., Dupuis, D. L., & Hussein, L. A. (2018). A comparison of 
written, vocal, and video feedback when training teachers. Journal of Behavioral Education, 27(1), 
124–144. 
Ministry of Education of Taiwan. (2016). 亞洲國家托福成績概況分析. Retrieved from 
http://stats.moe.gov.tw/files/brief/%E4%BA%9E%E6%B4%B2%E5%9C%8B%E5%AE%B6%E6%
89%98%E7%A6%8F%E6%88%90%E7%B8%BE%E6%A6%82%E6%B3%81%E5%88%86%E6%9
E%90.pdf 
Nunan, D. (1987). Communicative language teaching: Making it work. ELT Journal, 41(2), 136–145. 
Orlando, J. (2016). A comparison of text, voice, and screencasting feedback to online students. American 
Journal of Distance Education, 30(3), 156–166 
Özkul, S., & Ortaçtepe, D. (2017). The use of video feedback in teaching process-approach EFL writing. 
TESOL Journal, 8(4), 862–877. 
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representations: A dual coding approach. New York, NY: Oxford University 
Press. 
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Sachs, R., & Polio, C. (2007). Learners’ uses of two types of written feedback on a L2 writing revision 
task. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 29(1), 67–100. 
Schmidt, R. W. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 
11(2), 129–158. 
Shih, R. C. (2010). Blended learning using video-based blogs: Public speaking for English as a second 
language students. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 26(6), 883–897. 
Storch, N., & Wigglesworth, G. (2010). Learners’ processing, uptake, and retention of corrective 
feedback on writing. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 32(2), 303–334. 
Toland, S. H., Mills, D. J., & Kohyama, M. (2016). Enhancing Japanese university students’ English-
language presentation skills with mobile-video recordings. JALT CALL Journal, 12(3), 179–201. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
Walker, A., & White, G. (2013). Technology enhanced language learning: Connecting theory and 
practice. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Wood, D., Bruner, J. S., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem-solving. Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 17(2), 89–100. 
Xu, Q., Dong, X., & Jiang, L. (2017). EFL learners’ perceptions of mobile-assisted feedback on oral 
production. TESOL Quarterly, 51(2), 408–417. 
Yanguas, I. (2010). Oral computer-mediated interaction between L2 learners: It’s about time! Language 
Learning & Technology, 14(3), 72–93. 
Yastıbaş, G. Ç., & Yastıbaş, A. E. (2015). The effect of peer feedback on writing anxiety in Turkish EFL 
(English as a foreign language) students. Procedia: Social and Behavioral Sciences, 199, 530–538. 
About the Authors 
Sheng-Shiang Tseng is an assistant professor in the graduate program of curriculum and instruction at 
Tamkang University. His research focuses on computer-assisted language learning, online learning, and 
teacher professional development. He is currently working on the topics related to annotation tools, online 
158 Language Learning & Technology 
 
learning engagement, multimodality, augmented reality, and virtual reality. 
Email: u9241346@gmail.com 
Hui-Chin Yeh, the corresponding author, is currently a Distinguished Professor and Chair in the Department 
of Applied Foreign Languages and Associate Dean in College Humanities and Applied Science at National 
Yunlin University of Science and Technology in Taiwan. Her research interests center on EFL teacher 
education, computer-assisted language learning, and EFL reading and writing. She has published more than 
40 articles on these topics. She received distinguished young scholar awards from the Ministry of Science 
and Technology in 2011 and 2017, a 2016 Yunduo award in teaching and mentoring, a 2014 research 
excellence award, a 2011 excellent mentor award, and a 2010 teaching excellence award from her university. 
Her multimedia English course has been certified as a quality e-learning course from the Ministry of 
Education of Taiwan. In addition, in recognition of several different language systems developed, five 
patent achievements were honored with the TWPatentDB. She hopes her efforts in different aspects can 
contribute to academia. 
E-mail: hyeh@gemail.yuntech.edu.tw 
