Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
June 2019, Volume 23, Issue 2 
pp. i–v 
ANNOUNCEMENTS AND NEWS  
 
 
Copyright © 2019 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Announcements and news from our sponsors 
 
Announcements 
Robert Godwin-Jones has been editing the Emerging Technologies column 
since the first issue of LLT in 1997. In appreciation of his outstanding and 
extremely popular column, we are presenting him with a plaque recognizing 
his 22 years of extraordinary service to LLT and to the field of computer-
assisted language learning.  
LLT is happy to announce that Dr. Hayo Reinders will start his term as an 
Associate Editor. Hayo has served as a board member since 2011, and we 
are excited to work with him in this new role! 
We would like to remind our readers that LLT readership statistics are 
available to the public and can be found here. We encourage those who 
might find it useful to visit the site. Please note that a date range must be 
entered at the top of the page before scrolling down to see statistics from 
past issues. We also acknowledge that the statistics available via this site 
only cover traffic to the new website (i.e., from June 2017 onward). Past 
statistics between 1997 and 2017 are not available. 
Copy Editor Acknowledgements for Volume 23, Issue 2 
The editorial staff would like to thank the copy editors that edited the manuscripts appearing in this issue. 
We appreciate their dedication and service while helping to prepare these manuscripts for publication. 
Lucia K. Miller (University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa) 
Sponsors 
University of Texas at Austin Center for Open Educational Resources & Language Learning 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center 
University of Hawai‘i Center for Language and Technology 
The Center for Open Educational Resources & Language Learning 
(COERLL) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A leader in the development and dissemination of Open Educational Resources (OERs) such as textbooks, 
videos, and websites, the Center for Open Educational Resources & Language Learning (COERLL) works 
to create an open digital environment for sharing rooted in the use of open licenses, which allow foreign 
language learners and teachers to exchange products, practices, and findings through workshops and online 
communities. 
ii Language Learning & Technology 
 
#GoOpen Initiative 
COERLL recently became a supporting organization of the #GoOpen initiative sponsored by the U.S. 
Department of Education Office of Educational Technology. The initiative provides many resources for 
school districts adopting OERs, including a district launch packet. You can learn more about #GoOpen 
here. 
Foreign Languages & The Literary in the Everyday (FLLITE) 
The FLLITE project, a collaboration of the Center for Educational Resources in Culture, Languages, and 
Literacy (University of Arizona) and COERLL, helps to bridge the divide between language and literature 
found in many foreign language programs. It aids instructors in designing their own L2 literacy-based 
lessons that focus on the poetics of everyday language (e.g., conversations, letters, blogs, YouTube videos, 
etc.). FLLITE lessons develop language awareness in tandem with communicative abilities through the 
integration of reading, listening, speaking, and writing tasks.  Lesson authors develop their lessons for 
publication as OERs in dialogue with members of the project’s editorial board. 
You can view teacher-authored FLLITE lessons in Chinese, French, German, Persian, Portuguese, and 
Spanish here. 
OpenUp 
COERLL’s blog, OpenUp, has updates from language instructors about their use of open practices and 
technology in teaching. Some recent posts include the following: 
• “Virtual reality: Innovation in open education” by Margherita Berti (University of Arizona), 
• “From MSA to CA: A beginner’s guide for transitioning into colloquial Arabic” by Lina Gomma 
(Portland State University), 
• “Inclusive pedagogy and the language-learning classroom” by Sarah Le Pichon (The University of 
Texas at Austin), 
• “Working with students to create a textbook” by Julie Ward (University of Oklahoma), and 
• “Open resources for indigenous languages.” 
You can read the blog here. 
Games2Teach Collaboratory 
August 1–2, 2019, Austin, TX 
COERLL and the Center for Applied Second Language Studies at the University of Oregon will host a 
Games2Teach collaboratory, an interactive workshop where instructors play technology-mediated games, 
learn how game design principles promote language acquisition, and learn to implement games in the 
classroom. 
COERLL News 
For updates about the above projects, sign up for COERLL news! You can also read about COERLL’s 
other projects at our Projects page.  
News iii 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center 
(NFLRC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) engages in research and 
materials development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among 
its many activities. 
6th International Conference on Language Documentation & Conservation: Connecting 
Communities, Languages, & Technology 
February 28–March 3, 2019, Honolulu, HI 
The 6th International Conference on Language Documentation & Conservation (ICLDC6), Connecting 
Communities, Languages, & Technology, was held at the Hawaiʻi Imin International Conference Center on 
the campus of the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa. ICLDC6 was hosted by the Department of Linguistics 
and the National Foreign Language Resource Center at the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa and was 
generously supported with funding from the National Science Foundation. 
The conference program featured two keynote talks, talk story sessions, workshops, papers, and posters. 
New for 2019 was the technology showcase, a networking opportunity that will bring together technology 
developers and language community members. An optional Hilo field study (on the island of Hawaiʻi) to 
visit Hawaiian language revitalization programs in action took place immediately after the conference 
(March 4–5, 2019). ICLDC6, the largest ICLDC yet, drew over 450 attendees from 30 countries. In 
addition, over 125 different indigenous, endangered, or less-commonly taught languages were represented 
in the close to 200 presentations. 
Did you know that we have another online refereed journal focusing specifically on language 
documentation and conservation? Check out Language Documentation & Conservation and subscribe for 
free. 
2019 Summer Institute: Exploring Project-Based Language Learning 
July 22–26, 2019, Twin Cities, MN 
Language teachers! Thinking you might have missed the boat on project-based language learning (PBLL)? 
It is not too late! Come and catch our Summer Institute on the road in Minnesota, July 22–26, 2019! This 
institute is designed for educators with little or no background in PBLL. This summer institute is a special 
collaboration with the NFLRC and the Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition at the 
University of Minnesota. 
PBLL connects the language classroom to the world beyond through learners’ focus on challenging 
problems or questions as an organizing principle for learning. In the first part of this institute, participants 
will examine established principles and standards for high-quality project-based learning as well as issues 
and concerns specific to PBLL, such as how to apply the concept of sustained inquiry at the Novice level. 
Participants will engage in guided project idea generation and peer critique, exploring how better to connect 
with community partners and a public audience. 
In the second part of the institute, participants will choose one of their favorite project ideas and flesh it out 
by aligning to standards, establishing learning outcomes and corresponding assessments, developing one 
or more assessment rubrics, and designing scaffolding for language, content, interactions, process, product, 
and use of technology. 
For more information on registration, see our website. 
Join the NFLRC Listserv 
To get announcements and reminders on NFLRC news, publications, professional development events, and 
iv Language Learning & Technology 
 
more, please subscribe to the official announcements email list for the National Foreign Language Resource 
Center at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa. We may occasionally post announcements of other news and 
events of interest to our listserv subscribers, but in general, posts will be kept to a minimum. 
If you prefer social media, you could instead join our 4,200+ fans on Facebook or 1,000+ followers on 
Twitter. All key announcements will be posted there as well. 
  
News v 
 
NFLRC Publications 
Korean for Professionals, Volume 3 
 
The Korean Language Flagship Center aims to produce professionals who 
can function in Korean in their chosen fields. After two years of intensive 
Korean language training customized to their fields, graduates of this program 
are expected to take their place among the next generation of global 
professionals as Korea specialists, commanding professional-level 
proficiency in Korean. Successful completion of the program and 
demonstration of the ability to use Korean at a professional level (ILR 3, 
ACTFL Superior) lead to the Master of Arts degree in Korean for 
Professionals. This monograph series is a compilation of the students’ 
research on critical and controversial issues in Korea or Korea–US relations. 
This volume is the third in the series. 
ScholarSpace 
 
NFLRC maintains a large searchable archive of free language research and 
teaching materials which currently contains over 350 items. These items 
include foreign language teaching materials (in print, audio, and video), 
language acquisition research papers, and collections of conference materials. 
 
Save the trees! Check out our other two online, open-access journals 
 
 
 
 
Language Documentation & Conservation (LD&C) is 
a refereed, open-access journal sponsored by the 
NFLRC and published by University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to 
language documentation and conservation, as well as 
book reviews, hardware and software reviews, and 
notes from the field. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed 
international journal of issues in foreign 
language reading and literacy, published twice 
yearly on the World Wide Web and sponsored 
by the NFLRC and the College of Languages, 
Linguistics, and Literature at the University of 
Hawai‘i at Mānoa. 
 
View all NFLRC Publications 
