Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2019, Volume 23, Issue 1 
pp. 87–113 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2019 Pia Sundqvist 
 
 
Commercial-off-the-shelf games in the digital wild 
and L2 learner vocabulary 
Pia Sundqvist, University of Oslo and Karlstad University 
Abstract 
The purposes of this study are to examine the relation between playing commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) 
games in the wild and L2 English vocabulary and to offer comparisons with non-gamers’ vocabulary. Data 
were collected from two samples of teenage L2 English learners in Sweden, Sample A (N = 1,069) and 
Sample B (N = 16). Questionnaires and English grades were collected from A and B, productive and 
receptive vocabulary tests from A, and interviews and essays from B. A quantitative-dominant mixed-
methods approach was adopted. Results showed a significant positive correlation between time played and 
test scores. They also showed that time played was related to types of games played. Multiple regression 
analysis including time played and types of games as predictor variables and L2 vocabulary as the outcome 
variable showed that the effect from type disappeared when it was entered into the model, whereas time 
remained significant. A close examination of 45 words (productive test) revealed significantly higher scores 
for gamers (compared with non-gamers) at all vocabulary frequency levels, and for particularly difficult 
words. Overall, findings from Sample B regarding gaming habits and vocabulary (i.e., use of advanced or 
infrequent words in essays) reflected the results from Sample A, making it possible to conclude that playing 
COTS games matters for L2 learner vocabulary. 
Keywords: Gaming, L2 Vocabulary, Digital Wild, Extramural English 
Language(s) Learned in This Study: English 
APA Citation: Sundqvist, P. (2019). Commercial-off-the-shelf games in the digital wild and L2 learner 
vocabulary. Language Learning & Technology, 23(1), 87–113. https://doi.org/10125/44674 
Introduction 
The use of digital games in teaching and learning foreign and second languages (L2s) is a topic that has 
gained traction in second language acquisition (SLA) and computer-assisted language learning (CALL) 
literature (Reinders, 2012; Thorne, Black, & Sykes, 2009). Digital games provide interesting benefits for 
learners, such as repeated opportunities for practice, lowered affective filters that encourage risk-taking, 
explicit information “both on demand and just in time” (Gee, 2007, p. 226), the possibility to take on and 
play around with different identities and, not least, target language input, interaction, and output (Gee, 2007; 
Reinders, 2012). However, despite an increased number of studies on the relation between digital gameplay 
and language learning, empirical large-scale studies are scarce, as are studies that focus on gaming outside 
institutional settings, in the digital wilds. This study hopes to partially fill that void. Moreover, instead of 
involving adult learners, which has usually been the case (see Reinders, 2012), this study targets teenagers. 
Considering the importance of gaming to many young people and its potential for L2 learning, it is 
surprising that so little scholarly attention has been paid to this specific learner group (cf. Pinter, 2014). 
After the social turn in SLA (Block, 2003), there was general acknowledgement of the relevance and value 
of sociologically- and ecologically-oriented approaches in L2 research (Thorne, Sauro, & Smith, 2015). 
This study falls into the latter category. More specifically, and in relation to CALL and gaming research, 
the study takes a player-learner-oriented perspective (Reinhardt, 2017). The main objectives are to examine 
the relation between playing commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) games (Van Eck, 2009) in the digital wild 
88 Language Learning & Technology 
 
and L2 English vocabulary learning and to offer comparisons with non-gamers’ vocabulary. The greatest 
attention is paid to productive vocabulary. Output, production, and interaction is the type of language 
practice that many young people get while playing COTS games, making it particularly relevant to study 
productive vocabulary more closely. Further, Levy (2015) says that “large and small-scale studies are 
necessary to provide breadth and depth, sometimes through mixed-methods approaches, to reach a deeper 
understanding of the processes involved” (p. 565). In line with his suggestion, this study draws on both 
quantitative and qualitative data collected from two samples of learners and adopts a mixed-methods 
approach. Next, before the research questions are stated, there is a literature review concerning the digital 
wilds as well as gaming and L2 learning. 
Literature Review 
Digital Wilds 
As pointed out by Wagner (2004), “the real potential for a social approach to language learning lies outside 
the classroom” (p. 615). It is central for L2 development that learners get the chance to participate in 
relevant and meaningful interactions, and such interactions take place outside institutions, in the wild. This 
term, the wild, was coined by Hutchins (1995), who used it in reference to real life, situated cognition. 
Language learning in the wild, then, has to do with using the resources available outside institutional 
contexts for learning an L2 (e.g., Theodórsdóttir, 2011). As suggested by Kasper (2004), “ordinary 
conversation can be a particularly productive environment for L2 learning” (p. 553). 
Language learning in the digital wild (or wilds) differs in that it occurs in “noninstitutionally located online 
cultures” (Thorne et al., 2015, p. 216, emphasis added). In the call for papers for this special issue, CALL 
in the digital wild is said to encompass any type of informal language learning that takes place in digital 
spaces, communities, and networks, and it should be independent of formal instructional contexts (Sauro 
& Zourou, 2017). That is the definition used in this article. The focus is on possible learning from COTS 
games (i.e., pleasure-oriented in contrast to education-oriented games) played voluntarily by learners in 
their free time, often in their homes using a computer, tablet, or smartphone on broadband access, but also 
on the bus or in cafes—that is, in contexts that represent the digital wild. Further, research has pointed to 
the complex semiotic ecologies of multiplayer games, including game-generated texts, collaboration 
between players, and websites supporting gameplay (Thorne, Fischer, & Lu, 2012). It may be added that 
“language is not learned only from or through games, but as constitutive of the ecology of the broader 
discourses surrounding games” (Reinhardt & Thorne, 2016, p. 423). Ryu (2013) demonstrates this L2 
learning in beyond-gaming culture, such as when players enrich their gaming experiences by discussing 
game-related issues in online fora. The term digital games refers to all types of games played on various 
digital devices. 
The definition of CALL (of L2 English) in the digital wild is very similar to the definition of extramural 
English (EE; Sundqvist & Sylvén, 2016), or simply extramural Ln (for any L2), in that the learning is 
initiated by the learner—not a teacher or institution. However, extramural Ln may also encompass learner-
initiated language learning taking place offline, which makes that term broader. In this paper, English in 
the digital wild and EE are used interchangeably. 
Gaming and L2 Learning 
Reinhardt and Thorne (2016) write the following: 
The language use in, around, and about games has increased in quantity, quality, and diversity, as game 
playing has become a truly global, interactive, multiplayer, and often multilingual practice. As 
increasing numbers of L2 learners play digital games outside the classroom, and games are produced 
in an increasing variety of game genres and languages, it has become easier to imagine digital games 
as authentic, consequential, and widely applicable L2 learning resources. (p. 416) 
What they say is supported by findings from a meta-analysis of the relative effectiveness of digital game-
Pia Sundqvist 89 
 
based learning types that revealed that meaningful and engaging games yielded a large effect size, whereas 
drill and practice games yielded a small effect (Chiu, Kao, & Reynolds, 2012). Their conclusion aligns with 
suggestions by others, for example, that massively multiplayer online games (MMOs) may be particularly 
beneficial for L2 learning (e.g., Peterson, 2012; Rankin, Gold, & Gooch, 2006). MMOs are played on 
commercial international servers and involve hundreds and even thousands of players in simultaneous 
gameplay. 
So, how can gaming and L2 be researched? Reinhardt (2017) suggests that researchers may approach a 
problem from one of three perspectives: the perspective of the game, the player-learner, or pedagogy. This 
study represents player-learner oriented research. As clarified by Reinhardt, in such research, “a learner is 
in effect both a player and a learner whose experience is impacted by variables like gender, age, L2 
proficiency, and game literacy” (p. 211). A strength of such research, Reinhardt says, is that it “can be 
highly authentic and ecologically valid, especially when using vernacular games and focused on learning” 
(p. 211). A weakness, however, lies in establishing which behaviors and outcomes are linked with, for 
example, titles or genres. 
L2 Vocabulary 
Literature on gameplay and L2 learning first appeared in the 1990s. In his evaluation of computer games 
for L2 learning, Hubbard (1991) asked some key questions that are still valid: for example, whether the 
quality of the interaction is linguistically rich enough so that it affords learning. Another early study focused 
on incidental vocabulary acquisition and revealed that the participants’ vocabulary improved (game-
specific words) thanks to intensive game-work (Cheung & Harrison, 1992). In incidental vocabulary 
learning, there is no intent to learn, or learning occurs as a by-product of doing something else, such as 
communicating (Laufer & Hulstijn, 2001). Studies such as these are relevant to this study and accounted 
for in what follows. 
In two American studies using the simulation game The Sims among adult L2 English learners, positive 
results were found regarding the participants’ L2 English vocabulary after having supplemented material 
to the game to make vocabulary input more comprehensible (Miller & Hegelheimer, 2006; Ranalli, 2008). 
In another study from the US, L2 English university students assumed virtual identities and played 
EverQuest II (a massively multiplayer online role-playing game, MMORPG), with positive findings 
regarding vocabulary gains, presumably thanks to in-game interactions with non-playing characters 
(Rankin et al., 2006). Also in the US, by letting a Japanese-as-a-foreign-language student play a baseball 
action game, the player-learner learned sports vocabulary thanks to repetition and contextual cues (deHaan, 
2005a). In an experimental study among undergraduates from a computer science university in Japan 
(deHaan, Reed, & Kuwada, 2010), learners were either players or watchers of an English-language video 
music game. While both groups recalled vocabulary from the game, the players recalled significantly less 
vocabulary than did the watchers, most likely due to “the extraneous cognitive load induced by the 
interactivity of the game” (deHaan et al., 2010, p. 74). Altogether, these studies show the potential of 
incidental vocabulary acquisition through gameplay. 
Whereas the studies above involved adults, others have targeted younger learners. In Sweden, Sundqvist 
(2009) examined secondary school L2 English learners’ involvement in EE and found a connection between 
digital gameplay and vocabulary size. A follow-up study by Sundqvist and Wikström (2015) investigated 
the relation between digital gameplay and L2 English vocabulary in tests and essays. Frequent gamers used 
the most advanced vocabulary in the essays, followed by non-gamers and moderate gamers. The pattern 
was different for the tests, where frequent gamers scored the highest, followed by moderate gamers and 
non-gamers, indicating that gameplay aligned more directly with vocabulary test scores than with indicators 
of vocabulary drawn from essays. Another study (of primary-school learners) revealed that L2 English 
vocabulary proficiency was positively correlated with frequency of gameplay (Sylvén & Sundqvist, 2012), 
and a similar finding was established among very young Danish learners (Hannibal Jensen, 2017). Cobb 
and Horst (2011, p. 25) examined Francophone L2 English learners in Canada (who were instructed to play 
a mini-game) and found vocabulary gains and increased speed of lexical access; they concluded that a 
90 Language Learning & Technology 
 
longer period of game play was needed to stabilize learning. Thus, time was important. In Norway, Brevik 
(2016) interviewed upper secondary-school learners who were poor readers in first language (L1) 
Norwegian but strong in L2 English; they were all frequent gamers and reported having learned vocabulary 
through gaming. These studies underscore the importance of time spent gaming for learning, but they say 
less about the possible influence of game preference. Thus, there is a gap in the literature regarding the 
connection between types of games-played and L2 learning. In addition, productive L2 use is under-
researched in gaming studies, and studies on younger player-learners from an ecologically-oriented 
perspective are few. These gaps are addressed in this study. 
Categorization of Digital Games 
Generally, it has been considered difficult to categorize digital games according to genre, and lately, 
broadband access “has afforded even more diversification of game type and genre” (Reinhardt & Thorne, 
2016, p. 417). For instance, deHaan (2005b) focused on the content of the game when he proposed these 
categories: sports, virtual pet, simulation, or role-playing and action/adventure games. In contrast, 
Sundqvist (2013) focused on the number of players involved in simultaneous gameplay when proposing 
the scale of social interaction (SSI) model for classification. In this model, the potential for L2 English 
learning is hypothesized to be greater as the scale of the in-game social interaction grows larger. This is due 
to an increased likelihood of encountering co-players of different nationalities and, as a consequence, a 
need for a shared language (English). Basically, the model suggests that MMOs are more beneficial for 
learning English than multiplayer (MP) games which, in turn, are more beneficial than singleplayer (SP) 
games (for details, see Sundqvist, 2013). As the SSI model can be used in a quantitative approach where 
overlap between game genres or types must be avoided, it was considered suitable for this study. 
Research Questions 
Based on data collected from teenage learners, the aims of this study were to examine the relation between 
playing COTS games in the wild and L2 English vocabulary, with an emphasis on productive vocabulary, 
and to offer comparisons with non-gamers. Four research questions guided the study: 
1. To what extent is there a relation between the time spent playing COTS games and L2 English 
vocabulary test measures? 
2. To what extent is there a relation between four type-of-game-preference groups (i.e., non-gamers, 
SP, MP, and MMO) and L2 English vocabulary test measures? 
3. What does an examination of solution rates (percentage of correct answers) of individual 
vocabulary items in a productive levels test reveal about gamers’ productive vocabulary? Is it 
different from non-gamers’ productive vocabulary? If so, how? 
4. What does an examination of infrequent vocabulary in essays reveal about productive vocabulary 
use among gamers? Is it different from non-gamers’ productive use of infrequent vocabulary? If 
so, how? 
Method 
The Schools and Teachers 
Over the years, the researcher has regularly been invited to give talks to in-service teachers. On such 
occasions, the researcher used to put out a call for teachers who would be interested in participating in a 
large-scale study on gaming and vocabulary learning. When teachers at six schools agreed to participate 
with 16 classes, it was possible to start the project. It ran for three years, with data collected from three 
cohorts of ninth graders, constituting Sample A (see Appendix A). 
Altogether, nine schools took part. They represented a great variety of schools in terms of sizes, students’ 
language backgrounds, grades, and parental educational backgrounds. Moreover, they were spread out 
Pia Sundqvist 91 
 
across Sweden in rural areas, small towns, and cities of various sizes. In terms of students’ language 
background, 17% had a L1 other than Swedish, which was close to the national percentage (20% in 2014, 
Swedish National Agency for Education, 2014). Although the schools and students in Sample A were not 
identified via a random sampling procedure, it seemed reasonable to consider the sample as a near 
representation of typical Year 9 students in Sweden. 
The researcher worked closely with one contact teacher per school. She trusted her contacts with collecting 
the data in a reliable way and the contacts trusted the researcher to send corrected tests in return. This 
worked out well; the researcher could collect data from a large sample and the teachers received valuable 
information about their students’ vocabulary. Nevertheless, this type of research design had limitations. For 
example, national regulations stipulated that the students were guaranteed to receive 480 hours of English 
instruction in compulsory school. Thus, the time for collecting data was restricted, which made it necessary 
to decide on an appropriate balance between practical feasibility and research reliability. 
The Participants 
Sample A 
In total, 1,324 students in 61 classes were invited to participate (see Appendix A). Of these, 1,069 (81%) 
agreed.1 All were in Year 9 (ages 15–16), the final year of compulsory school. 528 were male (49%) and 
541 were female (51%). It was inevitable that some participants would be absent on some days of data 
collection. Although the teachers were very helpful in collecting data afterward, it was practically 
impossible to collect everything from all students. Unfortunately, the productive levels tests from one class 
were lost in the outgoing mail at one school, and the vocabulary levels tests from two classes were lost 
when a teacher changed offices. For these reasons, the totals in the results section vary. 
Sample B 
Sample B was a convenience sample consisting of 16 students at one school (12 girls, 4 boys; Year 9). All 
were familiar with the researcher, as they had participated in another study while in middle school. They 
were invited to an interview study of EE, focusing on gaming. Fourteen were L1 Swedish speakers; two 
were simultaneous bilinguals. 
Materials 
Several datasets were used. While some were collected from both samples, others could only be collected 
from one. The different materials listed in Table 1 are discussed more in-depth in the following sections. 
Table 1. Data Collected From Samples A and B 
Data Collected (Used for RQ) Sample A Sample B 
Time of Collection 2011–2012, 2012–2013, 2013–2014 2015 
Questionnaire (RQ1–RQ4) September May 
Productive Levels Test (RQ1–RQ3) Fall n/a 
Vocabulary Levels Test (RQ1–RQ2) Spring n/a 
National Test Essay (RQ4) n/a April 
National Test Scoring Profile (RQ4) n/a April 
School Leaving Certificate (RQ4) June June 
Student Interview (RQ4) n/a May 
Questionnaire 
The questionnaire was used to collect data about students’ L2 English learning in the wild through various 
activities, with a focus on digital gameplay. It had to be kept short to ensure that the teachers would be able 
92 Language Learning & Technology 
 
to answer any queries from the students, but mainly because short questionnaires are highly recommended 
for children (Pinter, 2014). Almost all questions included had previously been used in evaluations of 
English, reports on youth and media, and research (Oscarson & Apelgren, 2005; Sundqvist, 2009; Swedish 
Media Council, 2008; Swedish National Agency for Education, 2004). For the purpose of this study, three 
questionnaire items (1–3) were used (translated from Swedish): 
1. I play computer/video games in English (4-point Likert scale: daily, once or a few times per week, 
once or a few times per month, and never or almost never). 
2. Approximately how much time per week do you spend on playing computer/video games in 
English? (4-point Likert scale: none, because I don’t usually play computer/video games, less than 
3 hours per week, 3–9 hours per week, and more than 9 hours per week).2 Those who responded 
that they played games were also asked to list game titles. 
3. Where do you believe you learned most of what you know in English? (4-point Likert scale: 
all/nearly all through work in school, most through work in school, most outside of work in school, 
and all/nearly all outside of work in school). 
The three selected questions were deemed the most suitable ones to validly connect to the broad language 
habits examined in this study. For Sample A, the questionnaire was collected by the contacts. They followed 
written instructions; no problems were reported. For Sample B, it was collected by the researcher in 
conjunction with the interviews. 
Vocabulary Tests 
Two vocabulary tests were used, the productive levels test (PLT; Laufer & Nation, 1999; Nation, 2001) and 
the vocabulary levels test (VLT; Nation, 2001). Both were adapted, shortened versions of the original tests 
in order to suit the participants (for details, see Sundqvist, 2009). Both tests had previously been used 
successfully with ninth graders (e.g., Sundqvist, 2009; Sundqvist & Wikström, 2015). 
The PLT measures productive vocabulary knowledge by use of single sentences with target items, such as 
He was riding a bi..... (bicycle). Altogether, there were 45 items, distributed across four word frequency 
levels: 17 items from the K2-level (i.e., the second most frequent 1,000 word families), 15 items from the 
K3-level, 8 items from the K5-level, and 5 items from the university word list (Xue & Nation, 1984), here 
referred to as academic words (see Nation, 2001). 
The VLT measures receptive vocabulary knowledge. Six words are listed, where three should be paired up 
with synonyms or explanations (see Figure 1). Here, the VLT included three parts corresponding to 
frequency levels K2, K3, and K5 (30 words per level, 90 in total). 
1. apply  
2. elect  ___choose by voting 
3. jump ___become like water 
4. manufacture ___make 
5. melt   
6. threaten   
Figure 1. An example of the VLT format 
The tests were mailed to the contact teachers for administration. To ascertain test administration reliability, 
the teachers were instructed to carefully follow the written instructions provided. All tests were returned to 
the researcher for correction. Photo copies were made and corrected originals were mailed back along with 
a key, student scores, and suggestions for follow-up activities. Vocabulary scores were used by the teachers 
as part of ongoing formative assessment, which is why all students in a class took the tests (i.e., also non-
project students). 
Pia Sundqvist 93 
 
Essay 
The essay was written as part of the mandatory high-stakes national test of English in 2015.3 No aids were 
allowed. Due to test secrecy regulations, the exact test topic formulation and instruction cannot be revealed, 
but it had to do with writing a text to organizers of a conference. 
The essays were transcribed as written. The transcripts were entered into Cobb’s (2017) Compleat Lexical 
Tutor tool (Web VP Classic v.4) to generate counts of tokens and types. Spelling errors and occasional 
Swedish words were kept, which meant that the counts did not only represent English words. This, however, 
was considered to be a minor concern regarding validity. In addition, students’ use of advanced or 
infrequent vocabulary was assessed with the help of frequency counts of long words (i.e., polysyllabic 
words, consisting of three or more syllables; cf. Zipf’s law, which states that word length is “inversely 
proportional to frequency of usage,” Malvern, Richards, Chipere, & Durán, 2004, p. 202; see also Sundqvist 
& Wikström, 2015). The Longman dictionary of contemporary English online was used as a reference. 
Polysyllabic words were counted manually and controlled systematically. The essay instructions included 
17 polysyllabic types that were often repeated in students’ writing. To control for this, the polysyllabic 
words from the instructions and the essays were compared, yielding data for each student’s use of own 
polysyllabic types (that is, not copied from the instructions; cf. Sundqvist & Wikström, 2015). 
National Test Scoring Profiles and School Leaving Certificates 
The national English test scoring profiles contain grades assigned to speaking, listening/reading, and 
writing. Only the writing grade (A–F) was used here. School leaving certificates were collected from both 
samples; the final English grade (A–F) was included in the analyses. Grades are aligned with the Common 
European Framework of Reference for Languages (Council of Europe, 2001) and a passing grade (E) from 
Year 9 corresponds to level B1. 
Interviews 
The interviews were semi- structured (Dörnyei, 2007) and focused on eliciting talk about students’ informal 
English language learning practices occurring in the wild, with specific attention to gaming. The researcher 
used an interview guide and offered the students a poster (describing typical English-mediated activities in 
the wild) to look at for inspiration, with the intention of foregrounding the students’ views, language use, 
and “individual stories” (Pinter, 2014, p. 172). To the best of her ability, the researcher—who has extensive 
experience of interviewing both children and adults—conducted the interviews in an age-appropriate way, 
for example, by adapting her style of speaking when probing for more information (see Mackey & Gass, 
2016). The students were divided into pairs or groups of three (see Table 2). 
Table 2. Student Interviews 
Interview Students in Interview Minutes 
1 Cathrine, Ingela 29 
2 Mira, Peter 25 
3 Klara, Lovisa 40 
4 Bengt, Fredrik 55 
5 Daniela, Henrik, Ottilia 41 
6 Agnes, Naomi 71 
7 Emmy, Greta, Jessica 54 
Total  315 
Mean  45 
94 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Research Questions and Materials 
To answer Research Question 1, responses to questionnaire Item 2 were used and viewed as ordinal data. 
Non-gamers reported not playing anything. Low-frequent gamers reported playing games less than three 
hours per week, moderate gamers reported three to nine hours per week, and frequent gamers reported more 
than nine hours per week. To answer Research Question 2, the game titles given in the follow-up question 
were used to categorize students according to the principles of the SSI model (Sundqvist, 2013; see Table 
3).4 The SSI model was chosen since it allowed for quantitative analysis. In cases where students had listed 
multiple game titles, perhaps two SP games and one MP game, they were classified according to highest 
order (in this case, MP). 
For Research Question 3, Sample A was split into two groups based on responses to questionnaire Item 1 
(Non-gamers = never or almost never; Gamers = remaining options).5 Data from both samples were used 
to answer Research Question 4. 
Table 3. Distribution of Sample A Participants According to the SSI Model 
Group N Percentage 
Non-gamers 416 38.90 
SP 77 7.20 
MP 338 31.60 
MMO 86 8.00 
Unclassified 110 10.30 
Missing 42 3.90 
Total 1,069 100.00 
Analytical Procedures Employed 
This study is an example of quantitative-dominant mixed-methods research, or QUAN+qual, which is a 
subtype of mixed-methods research (Johnson, Onwuegbuzie, & Turner, 2007). In QUAN+qual studies, 
qualitative data and approaches are included into an otherwise quantitative research design. Quantitative 
data were analyzed using inferential statistics, whereas interview data were analyzed inductively with the 
goal for findings to emerge from the focus on games and learning (cf. Mackey & Gass, 2016). These 
procedures allowed for triangulation (Mackey & Gass, 2016). 
All statistical tests were run in IBM SPSS Statistics 25. Pearson’s chi-squared (χ2) and Cramér’s V (φc) 
were used for tests of association between nominal variables. To calculate significance and effect sizes for 
tests with numeric variables, independent samples t-tests and one-way analyses of variance (ANOVAs) 
were used, with classical eta squared (η2) for calculating the effect size. As for ANOVA, Gabriel’s post-
hoc test was used in order to provide additional indications of which groups differed from which. The non-
parametric independent samples Kruskal-Wallis test was employed when the assumptions for ANOVA 
were not met; effect size was calculated following Jawinski (2017). Spearman’s rank order correlation 
coefficient (rs) was used in correlation analyses (linear regression) involving ordinal data. Multiple 
regression analysis was used in examining two predictor variables (Time Played and Types of Games) in 
relation to an outcome variable (L2 Vocabulary). 
For interpretation of effect sizes, Cohen’s conventions were used, so that φc = .2 is a small effect size, φc 
= .5 is medium, and φc = .8 is large (Aron, Aron, & Coups, 2005, p. 192). Regarding eta squared, η
2 = .01 
was a small effect size, η2 = .06 was medium, and η2 = .14 was large (Dörnyei, 2007, p. 221). 
Pia Sundqvist 95 
 
Ethical Considerations 
The project adhered to the ethical guidelines used by the Swedish Research Council. Written forms of 
consent were collected from all participants, who were informed of their rights to withdraw at any time. In 
this article, pseudonyms are used to ensure anonymity. 
Results 
Research Question 1 
The results for non-gamers, low-frequent, moderate, and frequent gamers on the vocabulary tests are shown 
in Table 4. The frequent gamers scored the highest on the PLT, followed by the moderate gamers, which 
in turn were followed by the non- and low-frequent gamers. This pattern was repeated for the VLT. There 
were significant correlations (p < .000) between time spent playing COTS games and scores on both tests; 
the correlation coefficient was slightly greater for the VLT (rs = .31) compared with the PLT (rs = .28). 
Table 4. PLT and VLT Scores Across Groups Based on Gameplay per Week 
 PLT  VLT 
 M SD N  M SD N 
Non-Gamers 16.88 9.24 404  57.25 16.85 380 
Low-Frequent Gamers 16.86 9.24 155  56.46 17.72 145 
Moderate Gamers 20.45 10.36 168  62.02 18.92 162 
Frequent Gamers 24.42 10.72 250  70.34 17.54 238 
Total 19.42 10.33 977  61.33 18.39 925 
Research Question 2 
Responses to questionnaire Item 2 yielded 136 game titles that were classified as SP, MP, or MMO games, 
in accordance with the SSI model (see Appendix B). Based on their answers about gaming habits and game 
titles, students were coded as Non-gamers or as SP, MP, or MMO following the principle of highest order. 
Sometimes there were insufficient data; these students were coded as Unclassified. 
Table 5. Cross-Tabulation of Groups (Type-of-Game-Preference Versus Gameplay per Week) 
Gameplay 
(Hours per Week) 
Non-Gamers 
(0) 
Low-Frequent 
(< 3) 
Moderate 
(3–9) 
Frequent 
(> 9) 
Total 
Non-Gamers (n) 416 0 0 0 416 
SP (n) 0 42 26 9 77 
MP (n) 4 61 102 171 338 
MMO (n) 0 3 15 68 86 
Unclassified (n) 3 55 33 4 110 
Total (N) 423 161 176 267 1,027 
The variable with the type-of-game-preference groups was cross-tabulated with the time variable gameplay 
per week (see Table 5). A chi-squared test revealed that there was a significant relation between these 
variables, with a medium effect size (χ2 = 1078.742, df = 9, p < .001, φc = .626).6 In other words, it was 
common that students who had a preference for playing SP also reported not spending a great deal of time 
on gaming, whereas students who had a preference for playing MP or MMO reported the opposite. For 
96 Language Learning & Technology 
 
obvious reasons, the non-gamers did not report any time. 
The results on the relation between type-of-game-preference groups (i.e., non-gamers, SP, MP, and MMO) 
and L2 English vocabulary test measures are presented in Figure 2 (for the PLT) and Figure 3 (for the VLT). 
 
Figure 2. Mean scores for the PLT are shown above for the four type-of-game-preference groups: Non-
Gamers, SP, MP, and MMO. 
The MP group had the highest mean score, followed by the scores for the MMO, SP, and Non-gamer groups 
(Figure 2). When comparing these means, the Levene’s test was significant (p < .001), indicatinig that the 
variances were significantly different. Therefore, the assumption of homogeneity of variances had been 
violated, and so the Kruskal-Wallis test was employed instead (χ2 = 222.58; dfn = 3; dfd = 867; resulting in 
F = 74.19; p < .001; η² = .20). In short, for the PLT, the differences between the groups were significant 
and the effect size was large. 
This pattern of mean scores (i.e., MP > MMO > SP > Non-Gamers) was repeated for the VLT (see Figure 
3). ANOVA showed that the differences between the groups were significant (F(3, 818) = 25.43; p < .001). 
Gabriel’s post-hoc test revealed that the MP group had a significantly higher mean than the non-gamer (p 
< .001) and SP gamer (p < .001) group, and so did the MMO group (non-gamer: p < .001; SP: p = .007). 
There was a medium to large effect size (η2 = .085). 
 
Figure 3. Mean scores for the VLT are shown above for the four type-of-game-preference groups: Non-
Gamers, SP, MP, and MMO. 
Pia Sundqvist 97 
 
These results showed that Type of Game was related to L2 Vocabulary, but it was also related to Frequency 
of Playing (time), which was equally related to L2 Vocabulary. Since the two predictor variables (Time and 
Type) were found to correlate with one another, the question arose whether there might be a mediating 
effect between them. In order to assess this, both predictor variables were entered into a multiple regression 
analysis with L2 Vocabulary as the outcome variable (for PLT and VLT, respectively). For the PLT, the 
effect from Type of Game disappeared when it was entered into the multiple regression model (standardized 
beta coefficient = -.09; p = .205), whereas Time remained significant (beta = .39; p < .001). Similarly, for 
the VLT, the effect from Type of Game disappeared (beta = -.07; p = .328), while Time remained significant 
(beta = .38; p < .001). This suggested that frequency of Playing was the best predictor of L2 vocabulary, 
and that Type of Game only appeared to predict L2 vocabulary due to mediation. For a sense of the practical 
significance of the effect identified for Time, students scored on average 3.1 points higher on the PLT per 
level of the Time variable (unstandardized beta = 3.14). 
Research Question 3 
The PLT results on the solution rate per word at each frequency level are presented in Figures 4–7. The 
solution rate represents the proportion or percentage of correct answers for a specific vocabulary item or 
target word. For each target word, there are two bars, one representing the solution rate for gamers (N = 
664), the other non-gamers (N = 362; Missing: N = 43). 
There was a significant difference in mean K2-scores between gamers (10.01, SD = 4.46) and non-gamers 
(8.43, SD = 4.34; p < .001). An examination of the 17 words tested revealed that the solution rates were 
significantly different between the groups for 13 items (Figure 4). In all cases, the gamers had a higher 
solution rate. No significant difference (p > .05) between gamers and non-gamers was found for cream, 
pupils, introduced, and popular. 
 
Figure 4. Solution rates per K2-level word and in total are shown above for both gamers and non-gamers. 
There was also a significant difference in mean K3-scores between gamers (6.09, SD = 3.49) and non-
gamers (4.53, SD = 3.14; p < .001). Of the 15 words at this level, the solution rates were significantly 
different between the groups for all but one (gown), again with the gamers ahead of the non-gamers when 
the individual items were analyzed (see Figure 5). As expected, the words at the K3-level were more 
difficult than at the K2-level, reflected in the lower solution rates for the totals, for both gamers and non-
gamers. Very few students knew the words gown, proclaimed, perceived, and slender. In contrast, more 
than 70% of the students knew naked, most likely because of the Swedish cognate naken. On the other 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Productive Levels Test K2-Level
(Solution Rate)
Gamers Non-gamers
98 Language Learning & Technology 
 
hand, there are Swedish cognates also for import and nerves but these items, nevertheless, appeared difficult 
for the students. 
 
Figure 5. Solution rates per K3-level word and in total are shown above for both gamers and non-gamers. 
A similar result was found for the words at the K5-level. Again, gamers had a significantly higher mean 
score (3.05, SD = 1.96) than non-gamers (2.09, SD = 1.39; p < .001). Of the eight words, the solution rates 
were significantly different for oath, vault, ledge, cavalry, and mature (see Figure 6). Gamers outperformed 
non-gamers. The high solution rate overall for ignore can be explained by the Swedish cognate ignorera. 
 
Figure 6. Solution rates per K5-level word and in total are shown above for both gamers and non-gamers. 
At the academic level, five words were tested. Gamers had a higher mean (1.78, SD = 1.45) than non-
gamers (1.49, SD = 1.29; p = .002). No difference was found for section and motive (both have Swedish 
cognates), whereas the gamers had significantly higher solution rates for inspect, saturated, and rely (see 
Figure 7). There is a Swedish cognate for inspect, which probably explains why it was the most well-known 
word at this level. Interestingly, saturated was known by Gamers only. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Productive Levels Test K3-Level
(Solution Rate)
Gamers Non-gamers
0
20
40
60
80
100
oath vault ledge ballot Eve cavalry ignore mature TOTAL
Productive Levels Test K5-Level
(Solution Rate)
Gamers Non-gamers
Pia Sundqvist 99 
 
 
Figure 7. Solution rate per word and in total, Gamers and Non-gamers, Academic words. 
It is noteworthy that for particularly difficult words (i.e., words that had low solution rates compared to 
other words at the same level), the solution rates for the gamers were double (or more than double) those 
of the non-gamers (K2: lack and wealth; K3: acid, lawn, proclaimed, perceived, and slender; K5: oath, 
vault, ledge, cavalry, and mature; Academic: saturated). In fact, there was a tendency that the proportion 
of such words increased at higher levels (K2: 2/17; K3: 5/15; K5+Academic: 6/13). Thus, not only were 
gamers’ average solution rates significantly higher at all tested vocabulary levels, they also excelled at 
particularly difficult words. In sum, the results revealed that gamers had more advanced productive 
vocabulary than non-gamers. 
Research Question 4 
Counts of tokens and types in student essays are presented in Table 6. The type–token ratio is a measure of 
complexity and, thus, indicative of advanced vocabulary use. Table 7 gives the counts of students’ use of 
polysyllabic tokens, polysyllabic types, and own polysyllabic types and also lists the students’ own 
polysyllabic types. Table 8 presents the demographic information of the students, their engagement in EE, 
and so forth. The level of engagement in EE was established based on interview and questionnaire data, 
where high meant that the students devoted several hours daily to English in the digital wilds (n = 9). For 
medium, the dedication was not as pronounced (n = 4), even though they too were present in the digital 
wilds, with the remaining three low students considerably less so. 
Table 6. Results of VP Classic Analysis of Tokens and Types in Essays 
Student Tokens (N) Types (N) Type–Token Ratio 
Agnes 422 185 .44 
Bengt 254 103 .41 
Cathrine 373 147 .39 
Daniela 320 139 .43 
Emmy 344 176 .51 
Fredrik 257 128 .50 
Greta 453 200 .44 
Henrik 424 183 .43 
Ingela 255 128 .50 
Jessica 459 212 .46 
0
20
40
60
80
100
section motive inspect saturated rely TOTAL
Productive Levels Test Academic
(Solution Rate)
Gamers Non-gamers
100 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Klara 399 168 .42 
Lovisa 454 166 .37 
Mira 474 177 .37 
Naomi 464 189 .41 
Ottilia 529 233 .44 
Peter 436 155 .36 
M 395 168 .43 
Table 7. Use of Polysyllabic Words in the Essays 
Student Polysyllabic 
Tokens (N) 
Polysyllabic 
Types (N) 
Own Polysyllabic 
Types (N) 
Own Polysyllabic Types 
Agnes 32 20 14 character-everyone-favorite-happening-
importance-improving-membership-
memory-outgoing-participate-
participating-possible-technology-
understand 
Bengt 15 8 4 easier-hospital-interested-telephones 
Cathrine 21 10 5 another-bullying-communication-example-
understand 
Daniela 17 13 11 addicted-another-available-capable-easier-
electronic-everything-experience-family-
realized-wherever 
Emmy 19 8 5 amazing-anxiety-favourite-probably-
themselves 
Fredrik 22 15 11 beginning-commercials-community-
computers-concentrating-confidence-
everyone-situation-suffering-technology-
wonderful 
Greta 29 20 16 anonymous-another-anything-apartment-
escalate-everyone-family-impression-
influence-insecure-opinion-ordinary-
realizing-realize-responsibility-studying 
Henrik 28 20 17 activities-activity-Africa-amazing-another-
desire-educate-everyone-excited-imagine-
medical-opinion-opportunity-perspective-
physical-video 
Ingela 14 12 6 communicate-electronics-everything-
example-expensive-family 
Pia Sundqvist 101 
 
Jessica 35 31 28 activity-anorexia-automatically-bananas-
beautiful-customers-encourage-especially-
everywhere-extrovert-genetics-happiness-
idiotic-industry-insecure-interest-
obviously-outgoing-outsider-positive-
probably-rejection-society-surprisingly-
technology-themselves-trustworthy-
understand 
Klara 6 6 5 already-everyone-interest-listening-
Saturdays 
Lovisa 22 11 7 carbon dioxide-community-creating-
factories-happening-hopefully-understand 
Mira 24 17 11 another-celebrities-changing rooms-
connection-easier-electronics-example-
expensive-included-interesting-mobile 
phone 
Naomi 17 11 10 alcohol-another-community-difference-
especially-everybody-example-headmaster-
popular-serious 
Ottilia 42 28 20 anywhere-bullying-challenges-community-
computers-considered-ethnicity-everybody-
everyone-everything-example-hopefully-
including-inspired-interesting-personally-
possible-probably-together-unfortunately 
Peter 24 12 10 alcoholic-apartment-dangerous-expensive-
family-negative-positive-themselves-
unhealthy-video 
The interviews added valuable information about students’ gaming habits. While the majority had ticked 
questionnaire options that indicated a certain amount of gameplay, the analytical work clarified that six 
seemed to consider gaming as a significant part of their lives. 
Fredrik used to play extensively for some years (mainly MP and MMO games) until his gaming, according 
to himself, went too far: “I became pissed and just threw all games consoles around and now they’re all 
broken except for like maybe half of one, so it was an effective end to my gaming.” Fredrik produced 22 
polysyllabic tokens and 11 own polysyllabic types in his essay (Grade B), which was on par with or better 
than the mean for the highest scoring same-age students on a comparable essay task in a previous study 
(Sundqvist & Wikström, 2015). His type–token ratio was also high (see Table 6). This ratio, however, is 
affected by length, and Fredrik’s essay was among the shortest. 
Henrik was a serious gamer with a preference for multiplayer sports games. His essay was excellent in 
many ways. It was long, and the polysyllabic counts were indeed indicative of advanced vocabulary use 
(Table 7). Jessica was also serious about gaming and, similar to Henrik, she played every day. She described 
how she could be a bit “on-and-off” when it came to gaming, but at the time of the interview, she was 
definitely “on” (adding “please, don’t tell my dad”). In terms of learning, Jessica said that she was “writing 
a lot in the game” and that “it is possible to speak, but I don’t dare,” thereby describing a threshold many 
L2 players may experience when gaming with strangers (cf. Sundqvist, 2015), as Jessica was doing in 
Heroes of Order & Chaos, an MMORPG. 
  
102 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Table 8. Demographics, Grades, Gameplay, and Beliefs 
Name Gender EG* FEG* LOE* Class L1 Frequency 
of 
Gameplay 
Time Spent 
on Gameplay 
(Hours per 
Week) 
Examples 
of Games 
Played 
Beliefs About 
Where English 
is Learned 
Agnes F A B High 4 Swedish Never/almost 
never 
0 n/a Mostly in school 
Bengt M D- E Low 1 Swedish A few times 
per week 
< 3 FIFA, NHL Mostly in school 
Cathrine F E+ E Low 1 Swedish Never/almost 
never 
0 n/a Mostly in school 
Daniela F C- C Medium 2 Swedish Never/almost 
never 
0 n/a Mostly in school 
Emmy F B A High 2 Swedish Daily < 3 Juice Jam Mostly outside 
school 
Fredrik M B B High 1 Swedish A few 
times/month 
< 3 n/a Mostly in school 
Greta 
 
F B B High 2 Serbian and 
Swedish 
A few 
times/week 
< 3 Nemo’s 
Reef, 8 Ball 
Pool 
Mostly outside 
school 
Henrik M A A High 2 Swedish A few 
times/week 
> 9 NBA 2K15 Mostly outside 
school 
Ingela F C- C High 1 Swedish A few 
times/month 
0 n/a Mostly in school 
Jessica F B B High 2 Swedish Daily 3–9 Heroes of 
Order & 
Chaos 
Mostly in school  
Klara F C- C Medium 3 Swedish Never/almost 
never 
0 n/a Mostly in school 
Lovisa F C- C Medium 4 Swedish Never/almost 
never 
0 n/a Mostly in school 
Mira F D+ D Low 1 Swedish A few 
times/month 
0 n/a Mostly in school 
Naomi F C+ D High 4 Swedish Daily < 3 Dota2, 
Assassin’s 
Creed 
Mostly outside 
school 
Ottilia F A B High 2 Swedish 
and English 
A few 
times/month 
0 n/a Mostly outside 
school 
Peter M C+ C Medium 1 Swedish A few 
times/week 
3–9 GTA Mostly in school 
Notes. EG = Essay Grade; FEG = Final English Grade; LOE = Level of Engagement in EE Activities 
The remaining three students had very different approaches to gaming in the wild. Naomi described a habit 
of occasional intense gameplay (“I have to play”), mainly during holidays. She would prepare with salads, 
finger food, and candy, and then go all-in, often pulling an all-nighter playing Assassin’s Creed (SP). In 
short, Naomi was serious when she was gaming, but she was not a serious gamer in the same sense as 
Henrik and Jessica. Naomi’s essay and productive vocabulary were of average quality, except for the length: 
she produced many tokens. Although speculative, it is possible that without her gaming experience, she 
would not have been as productive. 
Greta and Emmy described how difficult it could be to stay away from gaming. Compared with Naomi, 
they played more regularly. In comparison with Henrik and Jessica, however, they played much less. Emmy 
preferred playing League of Legends (MP), but only with Swedish friends, while Greta enjoyed casual 
Pia Sundqvist 103 
 
games, such as Kim Kardashian (SP). Greta’s essay was of high quality, as indicated not least by her 
polysyllabic counts. In terms of advanced vocabulary, Emmy’s essay had a good type–token ratio but was 
otherwise poorer than Greta’s; it was still awarded a higher grade, but there are, obviously, other aspects 
than vocabulary that may affect assessment. 
Among the remaining essays written by non-gaming students, those by Agnes and Ottilia stuck out in terms 
of advanced vocabulary use (especially own polysyllabic types), whereas the rest were of average quality 
or below. 
In their personal stories (Pinter, 2016), many of the students attested to developing their English skills in 
the digital wilds (that is, not only the gamers). Regarding vocabulary production, ways of developing 
writing skills came up when Agnes told Naomi that she used a WhatsApp chat group to stay in touch with 
Italians she had made friends with during a study abroad experience. The girls’ conversation continued, 
then Naomi suddenly started talking about texting friends in English (Excerpt 1). 
Excerpt 1. Agnes and Naomi 
Naomi: well I don’t normally write to people but well like this I write to Swedish people in English 
I: yeah 
Naomi: I’m not sure 
I: yeah 
Naomi: we just start writing in Swedish and then we start bri- well like this we just bring in English 
words 
Agnes: yes 
Naomi: and then we just start talking in English 
Agnes: sometimes I also do so with [name] 
Naomi: and it’s like this it’s not on purpose y’know we just go on like this haha so cute 
Agnes: like why do you write in English 
Naomi: I dunno we can just have like a totally normal conversation and then just like what are you 
doing yes but sort of like that 
Agnes: but with whom with [name] 
Naomi: [name] or if it’s like I sort of want to flirt with someone the you can start writing in English 
and I’m like okay 
I: but you 
Agnes: are you a 
Naomi: you’re so cute sort of just stuff sort of like that 
Alicia: you’re so cute are you and angel did you fall from the sky 
Naomi: sort of 
Agnes: yes 
Naomi: yes things like that 
Notes. I = Interviewer; translated from Swedish; bold = English in the original. 
Excerpt 1 shows how easily English was used by these girls in conversations on their smartphones, and 
during the interview. In fact, both girls described switching frequently between Swedish and English in 
104 Language Learning & Technology 
 
everyday conversations—both in text messages and oral interactions—especially with their best friends. 
Agnes gave an apt description of how fluent her English had become: “Using English is like washing my 
hands after having been to the toilet,” indicating that English is internalized (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006, p. 
179) and seemingly part of her identity. Other students gave similar accounts, not least the gamers. Henrik 
revealed that he found it totally normal to read English articles online every day, and his peers Daniela and 
Ottilia agreed. Reading everything online in English did not bother them “at all” (quoting Ottilia). 
By and large, the results of the qualitative analysis to a great extent support the conclusions drawn in RQ1–
RQ3, but in relation to productive vocabulary in essays instead of in vocabulary tests. 
Discussion 
The results about the relation between time spent on playing COTS games in the digital wild and L2 English 
vocabulary largely corroborate previous research (e.g., Hannibal Jensen, 2017; Sundqvist & Wikström, 
2015). It needs to be mentioned though that in comparison, this study stands out in terms of its scale. While 
some have suggested that MMOs may be more beneficial for L2 learning than other types of games (e.g., 
Peterson, 2012; Rankin et al., 2006), to my knowledge, this study is the first (of size) to specifically zoom 
in on the relation between the types of games played and L2 vocabulary. Using the type-of-game-preference 
groups, there was an identical pattern for both productive and receptive vocabulary. The MP group scored 
the highest, followed by the MMO, SP, and non-gamer groups—but with no significant difference between 
the MP and MMO group nor between non-gamers and SP game players. It was concluded that the types of 
games played could be tied to the scores. Thus, both time played and types of games appeared connected 
with L2 vocabulary. However, the multiple regression analysis revealed that it was time that mattered the 
most, as type became non-significant in the model, underscoring the great importance of time on task for 
vocabulary learning. Expressed differently, at least the categorization of games used here could not predict 
L2 vocabulary per se. These findings, combined with the fact that game preference seemed associated with 
essay results and final grades in English for the interviewed students, call for more research on the topic of 
game preference. 
The examination of productive vocabulary revealed that gamers’ average solution rates were significantly 
higher at all tested vocabulary levels, and they also excelled at words that were notably difficult. This is a 
key finding. It was beyond the scope of this study to examine whether any of these words were salient in 
game terminology, but that could be one possible explanation of why gamers outscored non-gamers. As for 
the word saturated, known solely by gamers, the test sentence read “The victim’s shirt was satu........ with 
blood”, and it seems likely that those who knew this word knew it either directly from game terminology 
(e.g., clothing drenched in blood), or from image settings on PCs (i.e., saturation). 
From a teaching and learning perspective, an implication of these findings is that it seems important for 
learners, or players (cf. Reinhardt, 2017), to move from playing only SP to also playing MP or MMO games. 
But above all, they should invest time in gaming for incidental vocabulary learning to happen—and learners 
who have never tried gaming may well be encouraged to do so. The SSI model (Sundqvist, 2013) was 
revised in light of these new findings to illustrate the division between SP and MP, and the non-difference 
between MP and MMO (Figure 8). 
 
Figure 8. The SSI model revised 
Pia Sundqvist 105 
 
Regardless of gaming habits, this study has shown evidence of teenagers who had internalized English and 
used the language effortlessly in ordinary conversations. Perhaps more importantly, they did not identify 
themselves as L2 learners, but as L2 users (cf. Carroll, 2000; Kasper, 2004). This was evidenced in many 
of the interviews and exemplified here by the conversation between Agnes and Naomi (Excerpt 1). 
Limitations and Implications 
There are some limitations to this study. While it may be authentic and ecologically valid, as discussed in 
Reinhardt (2017), it is difficult to specify the association between L2 outcomes and game titles or genres. 
For ethical reasons, such as following regulations about hours of English instruction and respecting 
teachers’ work load, data collection could not take up too much lesson time. Consequently, relatively few 
items were included in the questionnaire. Another limitation concerns the principle of highest order when 
classifying students. It is possible that some were coded for a group that was not necessarily the best 
representation for them. However, to a certain degree, the size of Sample A should compensate for any such 
misclassifications. Further, other English-mediated activities than gaming may have influenced the 
findings. 
Pedagogical implications of this study include encouraging collaborative classroom work (cf. multiplayer 
games) and approaching students appropriately when suggesting L2 tasks, depending on how they identify 
themselves (learners or users). The latter is important not least for learner motivation, as learners benefit 
from engaging with digital media in the wild and from the affinity spaces for those texts and practices (Gee, 
2007). 
Conclusions and Outlook 
Some important conclusions can be drawn. First, playing COTS games in the wild is clearly related to L2 
English vocabulary proficiency. Second, whereas time spent gaming is found to predict L2 vocabulary, 
types of games appear only to have a mediating effect. However, more research is needed to detangle this 
specific interplay of variables because it is possible that another type of game categorization than the one 
employed here (where learners were classified as non-gamers or as gamers preferring to play SP, MP, or 
MMO games) may yield other findings. Third, compared with non-gamers, gamers show more advanced 
productive vocabulary and they excel at particularly difficult words in the tests used. Since these findings 
are based on data collected from a very large sample of teenagers, it makes the study unique. Fourth, the 
examination of advanced vocabulary use in essays reveal a similar picture in that gamers performed very 
well. However, so did some non-gamers, and the interviews reveal that other English-mediated activities in 
the digital wild also seem to contribute to learning (cf. EE in Sundqvist & Sylvén, 2016). Therefore, future 
research can focus on learning more about the role of different EE variables in player-learner-oriented 
research (Reinhardt, 2017) as well as on exploring learners-as-users in more depth (Eskildsen & Cadierno, 
2015). A corpus of specialized vocabulary in digital games would also be a welcome contribution to the 
field. 
Acknowledgements 
This research was supported by the Center for Language and Literature in Education (CSL) and by Research 
On Subject-specific Education (ROSE), Karlstad University, Sweden. I would like to thank Professor Piet 
Desmet for his feedback on the design of this study at the CALICO conference in 2016; Peter Wikström, 
PhD, for assisting me with the multiple regression analysis; and Liliann Byman-Frisén, doctoral candidate, 
for assisting me with the vocabulary tests and data input. I would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers 
for their careful reading of the manuscript and many insightful and constructive suggestions. 
106 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Notes 
1. In reality, the ratio of participation was even higher. Some students were listed as belonging to a specific 
class, but for various reasons, such as being home schooled or having recently arrived in Sweden, they 
did not participate in regular English lessons and could, therefore, not participate in the study. 
2. A test of internal consistency for Item 1 and Item 2 yielded a Cronbach’s α of .92. 
3. Samples of this test can be found here. 
4. A cross-tabulation of gender and the SSI model groups showed that the groups were unevenly 
distributed in terms of gender (χ2 = 445.225, df = 4, p < .001, φc = .658). Gender falls outside the scope 
of this study. 
5. Questionnaire Item 1 was preferred over Item 2 for this split, since it had been used successfully before 
(e.g., Sylvén & Sundqvist, 2012). 
6. The Unclassified participants were excluded from the chi-squared test and the multiple regression 
analyses. 
References 
Aron, A., Aron, E. N., & Coups, E. J. (2005). Statistics for the behavioral and social sciences: A brief 
course (3rd ed.). London, UK: Prentice Hall International. 
Block, D. (2003). The social turn in second language acquisition. Washington, DC: Georgetown 
University Press. 
Brevik, L. M. (2016). The gaming outliers: Does out-of-school gaming improve boys’ reading skills in 
English as a second language? In E. Elstad (Ed.), Educational technology and polycontextual 
bridging (pp. 39–61). Rotterdam, Netherlands: Sense. 
Carroll, D. (2000). Precision timing in novice-to-novice L2 conversations. Issues in Applied Linguistics, 
11(1), 67–110. 
Cheung, A., & Harrison, C. (1992). Microcomputer adventure games and second language acquisition: A 
study of Hong Kong tertiary students. In M. C. Pennington & V. Stevens (Eds.), Computers in 
Applied Linguistics (pp. 155–178). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Chiu, Y.-h., Kao, C.-w., & Reynolds, B. L. (2012). The relative effectiveness of digital game-based 
learning types in English as a foreign language setting: A meta-analysis. British Journal of 
Educational Technology, 43(4), E104–E107. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8535.2012.01295.x 
Cobb, T. (2017). Web VP Classic (Version 4) [Computer software]. Retrieved from 
https://www.lextutor.ca/vp/eng/ 
Cobb, T., & Horst, M. (2011). Does Word Coach coach words? CALICO Journal, 28(3), 639–661. 
Council of Europe. (2001). Common European framework of reference for languages: Learning, 
teaching, assessment. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
deHaan, J. (2005a). Acquisition of Japanese as a foreign language through a baseball video game. 
Foreign Language Annals, 38(2), 278–282. 
deHaan, J. (2005b). Learning language through video games: A theoretical framework, an evaluation of 
game genres, and questions for future research. In S. P. Schaffer & M. L. Price (Eds.), Interactive 
convergence: Critical issues in multimedia (pp. 229–239). Oxford, UK: Interdisciplinary Press. 
Pia Sundqvist 107 
 
deHaan, J., Reed, W. M., & Kuwada, K. (2010). The effects of interactivity with a music video game on 
second language vocabulary recall. Language Learning & Technology, 14(2), 74–94. 
Dörnyei, Z. (2007). Research methods in applied linguistics. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Eskildsen, S. W., & Cadierno, T. (2015). Advancing usage-based approaches to L2 studies. In T. 
Cadierno & S. W. Eskildsen (Eds.), Usage-based perspectives on second language learning (pp. 1–
15). Berlin, Germany: De Gruyter Mouton. 
Gee, J. P. (2007). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. Revised and updated 
edition. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Hannibal Jensen, S. (2017). Gaming as an English language learning resource among young children in 
Denmark. CALICO Journal, 34(1), 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1558/cj.29519 
Hubbard, P. (1991). Evaluating computer games for language learning. Simulation & Gaming, 22(2), 
220–223. 
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Jawinski, P. (2017). Answer to post ‘Anyone know how to calculate eta squared for a Kruskal Wallis-
analysis’. Retrieved from 
https://www.researchgate.net/post/Anyone_know_how_to_calculate_eta_squared_for_a_Kruskal-
Wallis_analysis 
Johnson, R. B., Onwuegbuzie, A. J., & Turner, L. A. (2007). Toward a definition of mixed methods 
research. Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 1(2), 112–133. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1558689806298224 
Kasper, G. (2004). Participant orientations in German conversation-for-learning. The Modern Language 
Journal, 88(4), 551–567. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0026-7902.2004.t01-18-.x 
Lantolf, J. P., & Thorne, S. L. (2006). Sociocultural theory and the genesis of second language 
development. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
Laufer, B., & Hulstijn, J. H. (2001). Incidental vocabulary acquisition in a second language: The construct 
of task-induced involvement. Applied Linguistics, 22(1), 1–26. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/22.1.1 
Laufer, B., & Nation, P. (1999). A vocabulary-size test of controlled productive ability. Language 
Testing, 16(1), 33–51. https://doi.org/10.1177/026553229901600103 
Levy, M. (2015). The role of qualitative approaches to research in CALL contexts: Closing in on the 
learner’s experience. CALICO Journal, 32(2), 554–568. https://doi.org/10.1558/cj.v32i3.26620 
Mackey, A., & Gass, S. (2016). Second language research: Methodology and design. Oxford, UK: 
Routledge. 
Malvern, D. D., Richards, B. J., Chipere, N., & Durán, P. (2004). Lexical diversity and language 
development: Quantification and assessment. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Miller, M., & Hegelheimer, V. (2006). The SIMs meet ESL. Incorporating authentic computer simulation 
games into the language classroom. Interactive Technology & Smart Education, 3(4), 311–328. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/17415650680000070 
Nation, P. (2001). Learning vocabulary in another language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Oscarson, M., & Apelgren, B. M. (2005). Nationella utvärderingen av grundskolan 2003 (NU-03). 
Engelska. Stockholm, Sweden: Swedish National Agency for Education. 
108 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Peterson, M. (2012). Learner interaction in a massively multiplayer online role playing game 
(MMORPG): A sociocultural discourse analysis. ReCALL, 24(3), 361–380. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0958344012000195 
Pinter, A. (2014). Child participant roles in applied linguistics research. Applied Linguistics, 35(2), 168–
183. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amt008 
Pinter, A. (2016). International perspectives on teaching English to young learners. ELT Journal, 70(1), 
108–110. https://doi.org/10.1093/elt/ccv067 
Ranalli, J. (2008). Learning English with The Sims: Exploiting authentic computer simulation games for 
L2 learning. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(5), 441–455. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09588220802447859 
Rankin, Y. A., Gold, R., & Gooch, B. (2006). 3D role-playing games as language learning tools. Paper 
presented at EuroGraphics 2006, Vienna, Austria. Retrieved from 
http://www.thegooch.org/Publications/PDFs/Rankin_Gold_Gooch.pdf 
Reinders, H. (Ed.). (2012). Digital games in language learning and teaching. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Reinhardt, J. (2017). Digital gaming in L2 teaching and learning. In C. A. Chapelle & S. Sauro (Eds.), 
The handbook of technology in second language teaching and learning (pp. 202–216). Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley & Sons. 
Reinhardt, J., & Thorne, S. (2016). Metaphors for digital games and language learning. In F. Farr & L. 
Murray (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of language learning and technology (pp. 415–430). Oxford, 
UK: Routledge. 
Ryu, D. (2013). Play to learn, learn to play: Language learning through gaming culture. ReCALL, 25(2), 
286–301. http://doi.org/10.1017/S0958344013000050 
Sauro, S., & Zourou, K. (2017). Call for papers for CALL in the digital wilds special issue. Language 
Learning & Technology, 21(1), 186. 
Sundqvist, P. (2009). Extramural English matters: Out-of-school English and its impact on Swedish ninth 
graders’ oral proficiency and vocabulary (Doctoral dissertation). Karlstad University, Karlstad, 
Sweden. 
Sundqvist, P. (2013). The SSI model: Categorization of digital games in EFL studies. European Journal 
of Applied Linguistics and TEFL, 2(1), 89–104. 
Sundqvist, P. (2015). About a boy: A gamer and L2 English speaker coming into being by use of self-
access. Studies in Self-Access Learning Journal, 6(4), 352–364. 
Sundqvist, P., & Sylvén, L. K. (2016). Extramural English in teaching and learning: From theory and 
research to practice. London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Sundqvist, P., & Wikström, P. (2015). Out-of-school digital gameplay and in-school L2 English 
vocabulary outcomes. System, 51, 65–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2015.04.001 
Swedish Media Council. (2008). Unga och medier 2008. Stockholm, Sweden: Regeringskansliet. 
Swedish National Agency for Education. (2004). Engelska i åtta europeiska länder. Stockholm, Sweden: 
Swedish National Agency for Education. 
Swedish National Agency for Education. (2014). Statistik [Grundskolan: Uppdelat per svensk och 
utländsk bakgrund]. Retrieved from https://www.skolverket.se/skolutveckling/statistik 
Sylvén, L. K., & Sundqvist, P. (2012). Gaming as extramural English L2 learning and L2 proficiency 
among young learners. ReCALL, 24(3), 302–321. http://doi.org/10.1017/S095834401200016X 
Pia Sundqvist 109 
 
Theodórsdóttir, G. (2011). Second language interaction for business and learning. In J. K. Hall, J. 
Hellerman, & S. Pekarek Doehler (Eds.), L2 interactional competence and development (pp. 93–116). 
Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Thorne, S. L., Black, R. W., & Sykes, J. M. (2009). Second language use, socialization, and learning in 
Internet interest communities and online gaming. The Modern Language Journal, 93(S1), 802–821. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-4781.2009.00974.x 
Thorne, S. L., Fischer, I., & Lu, X. (2012). The semiotic ecology ad linguistic complexity of an online 
game world. ReCALL, 24(3), 279–301. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0958344012000158 
Thorne, S. L., Sauro, S., & Smith, B. (2015). Technologies, identities, and expressive activity. Annual 
Review of Applied Linguistics, 35, 215–233. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0267190514000257 
Wagner, J. (2004). The classroom and beyond. The Modern Language Journal, 88(4), 612–616. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0026-7902.2004.t01-21-.x 
Van Eck, R. (2009). A guide to integrating COTS games into your classroom. In R. E. Ferdig (Ed.), 
Handbook of research on effective electronic gaming in education (pp. 179–199). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science. 
Xue, G.-y., & Nation, I. S. P. (1984). A university word list. Language Learning and Communication, 
3(2), 215–229. 
Appendix A. Participating Schools, Classes, and Students 
School Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  3-Year Project 
 Classes Students  Classes Students  Classes Students  Classes Students 
1 4 75  4 51  5 86  13 212 
2 1 23  1 23  2 40  4 86 
3 1 21  0 0  0 0  1 21 
4 4 73  3 66  3 52  10 191 
5 4 50  4 57  4 52  12 159 
6 2 38  2 35  1 19  5 92 
7 0 0  3 56  4 57  7 113 
8 0 0  3 69  1 24  4 93 
9 0 0  2 51  3 51  5 102 
Total 16 280  22 408  23 381  61 1,069 
Appendix B. Game Categorization According to the SSI Model 
Game Singleplayer Multiplayer MMO 
50 Cent  1  
Age of Empires Online  1  
AION   1 
Alice: Madness Returns 1   
Amnesia 1   
110 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Game Singleplayer Multiplayer MMO 
Anno 1404 1   
ARMA 2  1  
AruaROSE   1 
Assassin’s Creed 1   
Baldur’s Gate 1   
Batman: Arkham series 1   
Battlefield series (e.g., BF2BC and BF Heroes)  1  
Battlestar Galactica  1  
BioShock 1   
Bloons Tower Defense 1   
Borderlands  1  
Bulletstorm  1  
Burnout  1  
Call of Duty (e.g., Black Ops and Modern Warfare series)  1  
Campus Life 1   
Car Crash 1   
Chivalry: Medieval Warfare  1  
Civilization Revolutions  1  
Counter-Strike (e.g., Global offensive)  1  
Covert Front 2 1   
Crackdown 2  1  
Crysis  1  
Dance Central 4/Just Dance  1  
DarkOrbit   1 
Darksiders 1   
DayZ  1  
DC Universe Online   1 
Dead Block  1  
Dead Island  1  
Dead Space 1   
Deer Hunter 2005 1   
Dekaron   1 
Diablo  1  
Dino Crisis 2 1   
Dirt 3  1  
Dishonored 1   
Dogfight 1   
Pia Sundqvist 111 
 
Game Singleplayer Multiplayer MMO 
Don’t Starve  1  
Doom 3  1  
Dota 2  1  
Dragon Nest   1 
Europa Universalis  1  
Fallout 1   
Far Cry  1  
Farming Simulator  1  
Fiesta  1  
FIFA  1  
Football Manager 1   
Forza Motor Sport  1  
Gears of War 3  1  
Ghost 1   
GMoD  1  
Gran Turismo 5  1  
Grand Theft Auto 1   
GRID  1  
Guild Wars 2   1 
Guitar Hero  1  
Guns of Icarus Online  1  
Half-Life 2 (The Hidden) 1   
Halo: Reach  1  
Happy Wars  1  
Happy Wheels 1   
Harvest Moon: Magical Melody  1  
Heavenly Sword 1   
Heroes of Newerth  1  
Hitman 1   
Horse Saga 1   
Impressive World  1  
Katawa Shoujo 1   
Killing Floor  1  
Kingdom Hearts  1  
L.A. Noire 1   
League of Legends  1  
Left 4 Dead  1  
112 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Game Singleplayer Multiplayer MMO 
LittleBigPlanet  1  
MapleStory   1 
Mass Effect 2 1   
Medal of Honor 1   
Minecraft  1  
Mirror’s Edge 1   
Mount&Blade  1  
Need for Speed  1  
NHL  1  
Nox  1  
Persona 3 Portable 1   
Path of Exile  1  
Payday 2  1  
Pilsner Strip 1   
PlanetSide  1  
Plants vs. Zombies 1   
Portal 1   
Railroad Tycoon 3 1   
Reflex  1  
Roblox   1 
Robot Unicorn 1   
RuneScape   1 
S4 League  1  
Saints Row 2  1  
Sega Rally 1   
Shayia   1 
Skate  1  
Sniper series 1   
Sonic Rush  1  
Splinter Cell: Blacklist  1  
Spore 1   
Spyro the Dragon 1   
Star Wars: The Old Republic (e.g., Cold War)   1 
Starcraft II  1  
Street Fighter  1  
Suburbia 1   
Subway Surfers 1   
Pia Sundqvist 113 
 
Game Singleplayer Multiplayer MMO 
Super Mario 1   
Supremacy 1914  1  
Tales of Pirates   1 
Tamagotchi 1   
Team Fortress  1  
Tetris 1   
The Darkness 1   
The Elder Scrolls series (e.g., Skyrim and Oblivion) 1   
The Legend of Zelda 1   
The Longest Journey 1   
The Simpsons  1  
The Sims 1   
Top Spies 1   
Total War (e.g., Medieval II)  1  
Uncharted 1   
Warcraft III  1  
Warhammer Online   1 
Wartune   1 
World of Warcraft   1 
WRC 3  1  
TOTAL 53 67 16 
Percentage 38.97 49.26 11.76 
Note. Classification finalized in 2014; links from 2018 
About the Author 
Pia Sundqvist is currently an Associate Professor of English Education at the University of Oslo and 
Associate Professor of English Linguistics at Karlstad University. She has a wide range of research interests 
across applied linguistics, such as informal language learning, CALL (especially gaming), L2 vocabulary 
acquisition, and the assessment of L2 oral proficiency. 
E-mail: pia.sundqvist@ils.uio.no 
