Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
June 2019, Volume 23, Issue 2 
pp. 125–144 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2019 Yu-Ju Lan, Bo-Ning Lyu, & Chee Kuen Chin 
 
 
Does a 3D immersive experience enhance 
Mandarin writing by CSL students? 
Yu-Ju Lan, National Taiwan Normal University 
Bo-Ning Lyu, The University of Hong Kong 
Chee Kuen Chin, Singapore Centre for Chinese Language 
Abstract 
This study aimed at enhancing the Mandarin essay writing by learners of Chinese as a second language 
(CSL) in Singapore by using authentic contexts in Second Life (SL). The participants were students in two 
classes of eighth graders from a junior high school in Singapore, and the study lasted for 5 weeks. A quasi-
experimental design was adopted by randomly assigning the two classes to the experimental group (N=26) 
or the control group (N = 34). The two groups received identical writing instructions and were asked to 
write essays about identical topics within an identical time period. The only difference between the two 
groups was the activities performed at the prewriting stage: with or without immersive exploration in SL. 
Three kinds of qualitative data were collected and analyzed: students’ writing plans, students’ compositions, 
and in-class observation data. The analysis results show that the writing motivation and performance of 
the CSL students varied depending on whether or not they performed immersive exploration before writing. 
Those who explored the authentic contexts in SL before writing performed significantly better at 
constructing a prewriting plan and exhibited significantly higher writing quality compared to those without 
such an immersive experience. The former group also demonstrated higher motivation. 
Keywords: Chinese as a Second Language, Mandarin Writing, 3D Immersion, Second Life 
Language(s) Learned in This Study: Mandarin 
APA Citation: Lan, Y. J., Lyu, B.-N., & Chin, C. K. (2019). Does a 3D immersive experience enhance 
Mandarin writing by CSL students? Language Learning & Technology, 23(2), 125–144. 
https://doi.org/10125/44686 
Introduction 
How to teach writing in a foreign language (FL) or second language (L2) is a key issue in education. 
Assessing language abilities requires consideration of the four skills of listening, speaking, reading, and 
writing. In particular, listening and reading can increase language stimulus and thereby expose learners to 
unfamiliar language, helping them to acquire linguistic knowledge (Krashen, 1987). In contrast, writing 
and speaking are forms of language output that can help (a) identify gaps between what a person wants to 
and is able to write or say, (b) recognize gaps between a learner’s interlanguage and the target language, 
and (c) learners pay more attention to the form of a language (Swain, 1995). Writing can be considered a 
combined demonstration of overall language proficiency (Lou, Wu, Shih, & Tseng, 2010). 
L2 and FL learners frequently experience difficulties in mastering writing skills (Lan, Sung, Cheng, & 
Chang, 2015). The relatively small amount of time allocated to writing itself and the instructional methods 
used to teach writing are two major factors that contribute to these difficulties (Applebee & Langer, 2011). 
The challenges faced by general FL or L2 learners are also faced by learners of Chinese as a second 
language (CSL) in Singapore. Technology-enhanced language learning is a possible method for addressing 
this problem in CSL classes, since the results of a survey conducted by the Mother Tongue Languages 
Review Committee (MTLRC) indicated that students showed considerable interest in using technology to 
126 Language Learning & Technology 
 
assist in the learning of mother-tongue languages (Ministry of Education, Singapore, 2011b). Among the 
advanced technologies, 3D virtual worlds have attracted considerable attention from researchers due to their 
unique features of imagination, immersion, and interaction (Lan, Kan, Sung, & Chang, 2016). However, 
despite many studies having identified the benefits of using 3D virtual worlds in FL and L2 learning, there 
is a sparsity of literature focused on CSL writing. 
Literature Review 
Writing Instruction 
Writing is important for FL and L2 learners to understand their performance in using a target language. 
According to the perspective of the output hypothesis, L2 learners recognize the gap between what they 
want to express and what they are able to express during the writing process (Swain, 1995). Given the 
essential role of writing in L2 acquisition, writing instruction should be emphasized in practical L2 
instruction. However, little attention is paid to the implementation of writing instruction due to the relatively 
small amount of time allocated to writing itself and the insufficiency of instructional methods for teaching 
writing (Al-Jarrah & Al-Ahmad, 2013). For example, Chang (2006) reported the inadequate teaching hours 
allocated to writing instruction for teaching English as a foreign language (EFL). After collecting the 
perspective of 20 American English language learners (ELLs) via questionnaires and interviews, Lin (2015) 
concluded that the 14 highest-ranked writing difficulties identified by the interviewed ELLs could be 
divided into 3 categories: linguistic or cognitive deficiencies (e.g., limited vocabulary, lack of writing 
fluency, and poor writing skills), psychological or emotional deficiencies (e.g., anxiety), and sociocultural 
aspects of writing (e.g., adjusting to American thought patterns). 
Students in Mandarin CSL classes in Singapore also experience difficulties. The bilingual educational 
program makes Mandarin Chinese an obligatory course for around three quarters of Singaporean 
elementary-school students, but students in Singapore have little interest in Chinese writing (Sim, 2005). 
Sim (2005) criticized the traditional methods used to teach writing as being limited to forming sentences or 
paragraphs and writing weekly journals and suggested that more assistance and guidance should be 
provided to students. 
In order to address the above-mentioned challenges faced by L2 learners in writing, numerous studies have 
focused on prewriting strategies such as the use of picture prompts (e.g., Lin, 2010) and brainstorming and 
listing during FL writing instruction (Kroll, 2001). Prewriting strategies are used by L2 writers before the 
actual writing stage to test ideas, list words, and explore a range of topics for inclusion in their writing, 
similarly to how an artist makes quick sketches before painting. Most of the existing literature supports the 
position that the writing outcomes of L2 learners can be improved by guiding them to construct writing 
plans at the prewriting stage (e.g., Mohseniasl, 2014). Furthermore, studies of prewriting strategies have 
often employed technology-enhanced learning tools, such as concept maps (e.g., Ciekanski & Chanier, 
2008), to facilitate the writing process. Although most prewriting-related studies focus on using digital tools 
to help learners to write down and organize the words and ideas for use in subsequent writing tasks, this is 
often a de-contextual approach, such as sitting in the classroom and thinking of the words and ideas about 
the assigned writing topics. Such a de-contextual approach usually fails to help L2 writers connect what 
has been learned in the classroom with real-world experience (Henderson, Huang, & Grant, 2012). 
Furthermore, the sociocultural theory of second-language acquisition says that language learning should 
include intimate interactions within authentic and sociocultural contexts (Eun & Lim, 2009). Hence, 
language learning involves both social and mental factors that connect the person and the environment in 
an inseparably dialectic relationship (Lantolf, 2005). 
To address the importance of authentic contexts, L2 researchers have begun integrating 3D virtual worlds, 
such as Second Life (SL) and World of Warcraft (WoW), into FL and L2 settings (Chun, Smith, & Kern, 
2016). For example, Henderson et al. (2012) investigated how SL could enhance the learning motivation 
of CFL learners and other affective constructs such as self-efficacy beliefs. They found potential advantages 
Yu-Ju Lan, Bo-Ning Lyu, and Chee Kuen Chin 127 
 
to using SL for enhancing the motivation of CFL learners in Australia. Most of the studies involving 3D 
virtual worlds are on oral or text-based conversations, virtual experiences, and cross-cultural issues in FL 
or L2 learning (Reisoğlu, Topu, Yılmaz, Yılmaz, & Göktaş, 2017), while few have been on FL or L2 writing. 
Although some studies on 3D virtual worlds have investigated L2 writing ability, the investigated writing 
abilities were actually interavatar conversations (either text-based or oral conversation), unrelated to essay 
writing (e.g., Berns, Gonzalez-Pardo, & Camacho, 2013). For example, Thorne (2012) examined real-time 
writing by ESL learners in WoW and found that various attendant discourses emerged and inspired both 
in-game and out-of-game discourse and enriched the written-language semiosphere of L2 learners. 
However, Thorne did not arrange in-class writing assignments for the L2 learners to complete within a 
fixed amount of time. Xu, Park, and Baek (2011) investigated how a 3D immersive experience can enhance 
writing self-efficacy among college students. The participants were grouped into teams of five or six and 
were asked to explore the SL environment and then compose an exploration story. Although that study 
focused on writing activities, only writing self-efficacy and flow were investigated. As such, whether 3D 
virtual experiences benefitted in-class writing among CSL students was unknown. Moreover, most of the 
existing literature related to the use of 3D virtual worlds is related to EFL or ESL, and not CSL. Thus, how 
a 3D virtual immersive experience affects the writing of CSL learners needs further exploration. 
Mandarin Language Education for CSL Students in Singapore 
In order to cultivate the competitiveness of students in Asia and their comprehensive views of the world, 
the Ministry of Education, Singapore has implemented a bilingual educational program in which all students 
learn both English and their native language from elementary school (Chin, 2011). A population report says 
that more than 74.3% of Singapore’s residents are of Chinese ethnicity. Therefore, around three quarters of 
Singaporean students learn Mandarin Chinese from elementary school as part of the regular school syllabus. 
Although a large proportion of students’ parents are of Chinese ethnicity, few of them speak Mandarin 
Chinese to their children in daily life. A report by the Department of Statistics, Singapore (2010) indicates 
that ethnic Chinese families have tended to use English rather than Chinese as the dominant language at 
home over the last 20 years. This means that the home environment is not favorable for their children to 
learn Chinese (Chin, 2011). The evolving language environment in Singapore—which is increasingly 
emphasizing English—presents challenges for providing Chinese education to students from predominantly 
English-speaking families, especially related to writing (Tan, Puah, Teoh, & Ting, 2014). 
Gong, Chin, Tay, and Soh (2016) have identified three main difficulties faced by Singaporean students 
during the process of writing Chinese: content, structure, and language. The lack of rhetorical tactics 
eventually leads to poor language expressions and low motivation (Sim, 2005). Moreover, current writing 
instruction methods are not considered attractive by teachers in their daily teaching regimes (Sim, 2005). 
To address the need to improve writing instruction as well as enhance the writing performance of CSL 
students, information and communication technology (ICT) has been used in language classes in Singapore 
for many years. There is research evidence that using ICT to facilitate writing instruction improves students’ 
writing in terms of both their motivation and their performance (Goldberg, Russell, & Cook, 2003). 
The government of Singapore has endorsed the use of ICT in language teaching and learning. One of the 
key recommendations from the latest round of the MTLRC review was to increase the use of ICT in mother-
tongue language teaching (Ministry of Education, Singapore, 2011b). For example, Puah, Tan, and Teoh 
(2015) developed a blog platform (the iWrite.sg platform) to teach creative Chinese writing in Singapore. 
They found that writing creativity was improved in the experimental group relative to the control group. 
They also discovered that the teachers and students who used the blog platform to teach and learn evaluated 
it highly due to it enhancing the writing interest and imagination of the students. 
While all the studies mentioned above found that ICT affected the writing performance and motivation of 
CSL learners, none of them focused on cultivating individual writing abilities. However, most Chinese-
writing classes ask students to finish a writing assignment individually within a specific time limit. 
Therefore, in addition to collaborative learning, it is also important to improve CSL students’ ability to 
individually complete writing assignments. This challenge can be addressed by effectively scaffolding 
128 Language Learning & Technology 
 
students during the prewriting stage and helping them to construct an effective writing plan (Lan et al., 
2015), while contextualized instruction is also helpful. Li (2008) proposed that situational writing could 
help students enrich their writing content, express ideas and feelings, and inspire their creativity, 
imagination, and logical thinking. However, it is always a challenge for L2 teachers to provide their students 
with authentic contexts daily in the teaching environment (Lan, 2015). 
3D Virtual Worlds for Mandarin Teaching and Learning 
The difficulties in creating authentic contexts experienced by FL and L2 teachers have prompted language 
instructors and researchers to investigate the use of 3D virtual worlds. A 3D virtual world is a computer 
simulation system in which almost anything (realistic or fanciful) can be created, allowing learners to 
immerse themselves and perform contextual social interactions via their avatars (Lan et al., 2016). 3D 
virtual worlds have already been applied to the teaching and learning of multiple languages. For example, 
Berns et al. (2013) used 3D virtual worlds in a German class to enhance the general conversation and 
reading skills of students. Additionally, Lan (2015) created a virtual English village to help students at an 
elementary school in Taiwan become involved in authentic role playing as soon as they enter an English 
class. 
In addition to the applications in learning alphabetic languages, 3D virtual worlds have also been 
successfully applied to the teaching and learning of Mandarin Chinese (e.g., Tang, Sung, & Chang, 2016). 
Grant developed a Chinese island in SL aimed at providing CFL learners with task-based opportunities to 
use what they had learned in Chinese classes (Henderson et al., 2012). Lan (2014) analyzed the differences 
in student–teacher conversations between traditional and virtual Chinese classes. She found that the 
authentic immersion experience in SL inspired CSL students to improve their oral performance. Lan et al. 
(2016) also found that the oral performance of CSL students improved significantly after they carried out 
the assigned tasks. They found that those carrying out reasoning-gap tasks showed significantly greater 
improvement than those carrying out information-gap tasks. In contrast to using 3D virtual worlds as a 
platform for CSL learning, Cheng, Zhan, and Tsai (2010) used SL for Chinese language teacher training. 
They found that the feedback from participating Chinese language teachers was more positive if the teachers 
had more teaching experience in SL and that the teachers were more willing to adopt SL as their teaching 
platform when technical challenges were reduced. 
Most studies of Mandarin teaching and learning in SL have focused on general text- or oral-based 
communication; few studies have focused on writing, let alone essay writing. Although some studies have 
investigated writing instructions in virtual worlds, most of them (e.g., Xu et al., 2011) only considered 
writing in the first tongue. Although some studies covered practices involved in Chinese writing, the writing 
contents were oriented toward conversations rather than essay writing. Therefore, investigating the effects 
of a virtual immersive experience on the essay-writing performance of CSL learners is an important issue. 
To this end, the current study aimed to determine the effects of exploration experience in SL on the Chinese 
essay-writing performance of CSL learners. Three research questions were answered to address the research 
purpose: 
1. What are the effects of the exploration experience in SL on the prewriting plans of CSL learners? 
2. What are the effects of the exploration experience in SL on the essay-writing performance of CSL 
learners? 
3. What are the effects of the exploration experience in SL on the in-class behaviors of CSL learners 
during the writing process? 
Method 
Participants 
Two classes totaling 60 students from a secondary school in Singapore participated in this study. They were 
Yu-Ju Lan, Bo-Ning Lyu, and Chee Kuen Chin 129 
 
in the second year of secondary school and followed the regular educational program in Singapore. Their 
abilities in writing Mandarin Chinese were at Level 4 on the syllabus standards announced by the 
Curriculum Planning and Development Division of the Ministry of Education, Singapore (2011a). Students 
at Level 4 on the syllabus standards can use basic writing skills to create their own essays in Chinese. In 
addition to mastering narrative writing skills, they are also expected to be able to use Chinese to create 
more-advanced essays, such as expository and argumentative essays. The students in the two classes were 
randomly assigned to two groups: the control group (n = 34, 12 males and 22 females, mean age = 13.56, 
SD = 0.70) and the experimental group (n = 26, 8 males and 18 females, mean age = 13.27, SD = 0.60). 
Additionally, all of the participants had successfully passed an entrance examination, and therefore their 
Mandarin Chinese abilities were at the same level when they entered high school. However, since the study 
was conducted in the second year, their scores in the latest final examination—a regular assessment 
administered at the end of a semester and just before the current study—were collected as a covariant to 
ensure that their Mandarin writing abilities were at the same baseline. Additionally, the contents of the final 
examination regularly administered at the participating school covered all the CSL abilities being 
investigated in the present study, including vocabulary, grammar, and handwriting. 
Research Design 
A quasi-experimental design was adopted in this study by randomly assigning the included students into 
the experimental and the control groups. The students in the two groups received identical writing 
instructions from the same Chinese teacher and were asked to write essays about identical topics within an 
identical time period. Both groups underwent the same procedure, except that during the prewriting stage, 
when the experimental group performed an exploration in SL, the control group followed a traditional 
approach of collecting and writing down their writing ideas while watching a writing guide given by the 
teacher. The time used for collecting ideas (i.e., the prewriting stage) was identical in the two groups. 
Three kinds of data were collected: students’ writing plans, students’ compositions, and in-class 
observations. The collected data were processed by two researchers by (a) scoring the students’ 
compositions and (b) encoding both the writing plans and the in-class observation data. The scores and 
encoded data were then analyzed to confirm the effects of SL exploration at the prewriting stage on the 
writing plans, essay-writing performance, and in-class behaviors of CSL students. 
Instruments 
3D Virtual Platform 
Three different virtual contexts in SL were developed by the authors for the writing activities: a hotel, two 
restaurants (a Chinese one and a Western one), and a zoo. To help the CSL students link what they saw in 
the virtual contexts to the Mandarin Chinese needed for their subsequent writing, keywords and sentences 
were embedded in the corresponding objects. Figure 1 shows two screenshots with the two restaurants used 
for teaching descriptive and comparative writing. These virtual contexts allowed the CSL students to 
explore the virtual restaurants and collect ideas to use in their essay writing by immersing themselves into 
the contexts. 
 
Figure 1. A Chinese restaurant (left) and a Western restaurant (right) in the 3D virtual platform 
130 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Writing Guide 
A writing guide was used as a scaffold for guiding CSL students in the control group to write a topic-
focused essay composition. The guide contained three or four pictures taken from different angles in each 
virtual context. The form of each picture set was similar to that commonly used in writing classes in 
Singaporean schools, except that an additional scaffold was embedded in the pictures exclusively for the 
current study. In addition to the pictures of the scenes, the words and the sentence patterns needed for 
writing the composition corresponding to the scenes were included on the writing guide sheet. The guide 
was given to the control group at the prewriting stage. The pictures and the corresponding words and 
sentences helped the students in the control group collect ideas for their subsequent compositions. Figure 2 
shows the writing guide sheet used for the topic of describing a room in a house. Note that the hints on the 
original guide sheet were only in Chinese; the translation shown in Figure 2 is added to facilitate 
understanding by the readers of this article. 
 
Figure 2. Writing guide sheet used as a scaffold for the CSL students to write a composition on an assigned 
topic. 
Teaching Materials 
Three units designed by the authors were used in this study: (a) describing a room in a house, (b) comparing 
and contrasting a Chinese restaurant and a Western restaurant, and (c) narrating a field trip to a zoo. Each 
lesson followed a 4-step writing instruction aimed at helping the CSL students to successfully write a 
complete composition within 90 minutes: (1) the teacher introduced the topics, including an authentic 
occasion (5 minutes); (2) the teacher explained writing skills, such as writing tips and rubrics (25 minutes); 
(3) the students collected ideas and constructed writing plans (15 minutes); and (4) the students wrote their 
own essays (45 minutes). Once the process was completed, the students’ compositions were collected, 
evaluated, and scored by two researchers, and feedback was then given to the students. A detailed teaching 
plan of Unit 2 can be found here. 
Chinese-Writing Rubrics 
The rubrics were developed by the authors by integrating two documents: the Chinese language syllabus 
implemented by the Ministry of Education, Singapore (2011a), and the writing rubrics proposed by Lan et 
al. (2015). Five dimensions were included in the Chinese-writing rubrics: (a) content, focusing on the 
Yu-Ju Lan, Bo-Ning Lyu, and Chee Kuen Chin 131 
 
relevance between the topic and the article as well as the variety and diversity of the article; (b) organization, 
focusing on the completeness and context of the structure of the article; (c) vocabulary, focusing on the 
accuracy, variety, and creativity of word choices; (d) grammar, focusing on fluency and the variety of 
sentences used; and (e) punctuation and handwriting, focusing on the correctness of punctuation and the 
handwriting of Chinese characters. A detailed description of the rubrics can be found here. 
In-Class Observation Table 
The in-class observation table was designed by the authors and confirmed by two senior CSL researchers 
as being suitable for understanding how the participating CSL students in the experimental and the control 
groups behaved differently in the writing classes. The aim was to identify the writing behaviors of CSL 
students during four activities: (a) instruction, or the introduction of writing tasks and writing tips; (b) 
prewriting, the stage when ideas were collected; (c) writing; and (d) post-writing, or refining. Table 1 lists 
the target behaviors for the observations. 
Table 1. The Target Behaviors for the In-Class Observation 
Activities Target Behaviors 
Instruction Excited about the class 
 Curious about the class 
 Able to complete pre-class tasks 
Prewriting Able to engage in collecting ideas and creating writing plans 
 Positive 
 Active 
Writing Focused 
 Able to complete all tasks successfully 
 Able to complete all tasks on time 
Post-writing Able to refine own writings 
Procedure 
Figure 3 shows the procedure of this study. The study started with both the participants and their parents 
completing the consent forms. Next, a training session on SL was provided to the experimental group using 
a virtual context that was not relevant to the learning topics. The training only focused on how to use SL, 
such as controlling the avatar and moving around in the virtual environment, with no reference to CSL 
writing or learning. Three cycles of CSL writing activities were then conducted. In each essay-writing cycle, 
all the students in both groups received 30 minutes of writing instruction from the same teacher, and they 
were then given 15 minutes to construct their writing plans, including writing down words and sentences 
as well as ideas for the subsequent writing task. Those in the control group made their plans by observing 
the set of scene pictures and a writing guide, while those in the experimental group did so by exploring the 
3D virtual worlds using their avatars in SL. Finally, all the participants were asked to complete their essays 
within 45 minutes. Details of a writing cycle can be found here. 
132 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 3. Procedure of this study 
Results and Discussion 
The Prewriting Plans 
At the prewriting stage, the control group was given the writing guide and a set of pictures relevant to the 
topic of the assigned essay, whereas the experimental group logged in to the virtual contexts in SL. Within 
an identical time period, all of the students were encouraged to construct their writing plans and to write 
down their ideas on a piece of paper for use during their composition writing in the next activity. All the 
written ideas and the student compositions were compiled for further analysis by two researchers. 
Table 2. Coding Scheme for Student Writing Plans 
Themes Categories Descriptions 
Styles Picture-based Drawing pictures in prewriting stage 
Outline-based Outlining main points in prewriting stage 
Vocabulary-based Writing down key words in prewriting stage 
Sentence-based Writing down sentence structures in prewriting stage 
Contents Detail-oriented Noticing the details in prewriting stage 
Overall-theme-oriented Focusing on the overall descriptions in prewriting stage 
Modifier-oriented Using adjectives to modify objects in prewriting stage 
A coding scheme for analyzing the students’ writing plans was developed based on careful checks of the 
writing plans and discussions with two senior CSL researchers. The coding scheme consisted of two main 
Yu-Ju Lan, Bo-Ning Lyu, and Chee Kuen Chin 133 
 
dimensions, listed in Table 2. Two coders analyzed the collected writing plans while following the coding 
scheme. Pearson’s correlation coefficient for the coding results obtained from the two coders was .987 
(p < .001). 
Table 3 lists the number of writing plans constructed by the two groups. Most of the students in the 
experimental group constructed writing plans at the prewriting stage, whereas only a very small percentage 
of students in the control group did, excepting Unit 2. The small number of writing plans constructed in the 
control group for Units 1 and 3 meant that only the plans constructed for Unit 2 could be analyzed further. 
Those writing plans were first analyzed by their styles; the results are listed in Table 4. 
Table 3. Students Making Writing Plans 
 Experimental Group Students Making a Plan  Control Group Students Making a Plan 
Unit N %  N % 
Unit 1 23 92.00  1 2.94 
Unit 2 25 96.15  25 75.76 
Unit 3 25 96.15  3 9.09 
Table 4. Styles of the Writing Plans 
Styles Experimental Group Control Group 
Picture-based 14.29% 0.00% 
Outline-based 28.57% 38.46% 
Vocabulary-based 53.57% 61.54% 
Sentence-based 3.57% 0.00% 
The writing plans were more diverse in the experimental group than in the control group (four types vs. two 
types). A chi-squared analysis also revealed a significant intergroup difference in the style of writing plans 
(χ2(1,3) = 13.96, p = .003). Figures 4–7 show some examples of the students’ writing plans in both groups. 
134 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Examples of vocabulary-based writing plans: (a) control group; (b) experimental group 
Yu-Ju Lan, Bo-Ning Lyu, and Chee Kuen Chin 135 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Examples of outline-based writing plans: (a) control group; (b) experimental group 
136 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 6. An example of a picture-based writing plan: experimental group 
 
Figure 7. An example of a sentence-based writing plan: experimental group 
An interesting finding was that the writing plans differed between the two groups as per the language used 
in constructing the writing plan. As shown in Figure 4, only one language (Chinese) was used by the control 
group: either Chinese characters or Hanyu Pinyin (the official romanization system for standard Chinese). 
The experimental group used Arabic numerals and two languages: Chinese (either Chinese characters or 
Hanyu Pinyin) and English. Additionally, the average number of words or numbers used by the students to 
construct writing plans was greater in the experimental group than in the control group (see Table 5). 
Table 5. Average Numbers of Words and Numerals Used by Students While Making Plans for Unit 2 
Group Chinese Characters Hanyu Pinyin English Arabic Numerals Summary 
Experimental 21.96 1.36 11.68 0.56 35.56 
Control 28.32 0.44 0.00 0.00 28.76 
Finally, analysis of the contents of the writing plans revealed that they could be categorized into three types: 
Yu-Ju Lan, Bo-Ning Lyu, and Chee Kuen Chin 137 
 
(a) detail-oriented (e.g., 灯光是从灯笼发出来的 [the light is shining from the lantern] or 木造的收银台 
[a wooden cashier]), (b) overall-theme-oriented (e.g., 装饰比较现代 [the decoration is much more modern] 
or 红色当主题 [red is the theme]), and (c) modifier-oriented (e.g., 精 zhi餐具 [exquisite tableware] or 简
单的餐具 [simple tableware]). Table 6 lists the proportion for each writing-plan category in the two groups. 
A further chi-squared analysis showed that the contents of the writing plans did not differ significantly 
between the two groups (χ2(1,3) = 1.90, p = .387). These findings indicated that the largest proportion of 
students in both groups paid attention to the details of the objects while constructing writing plans. The next 
most common category was adding modifiers to objects, and the smallest proportion of students focused 
their writing plans on the overall theme of the essay. 
Table 6. Percentage of Each Category of Writing Plans 
Writing Plan Category Experimental Group (%) Control Group (%) 
Detail-oriented 47.92 41.86 
Overall-theme-oriented 22.92 23.26 
Modifier-oriented 29.17 34.88 
The results described above echo Lan’s (2014) arguments that an immersive context serves as an efficient 
platform for L2 learning. Moreover, they are also consistent with the perspective of sociocultural theory, 
stating that interactions between learners (including perception, action, and body) and the environment are 
essential components of L2 learning (Barsalou, 2008). 
The present findings provide further evidence that 3D immersive experiences benefit the writing process 
of CSL students, especially in the prewriting stage. It was found that the virtual exploration experiences of 
CSL students inspired them to construct writing plans with more flexibility pertaining to the styles of the 
plans themselves and how language and symbols were used. Additionally, the quantity of the prewriting 
plans constructed by the students in the experimental group indicated that they were able to use the time 
more wisely in collecting ideas for composition writing at the prewriting stage if they participated in 
immersive and authentic exploration in SL. In contrast, their peers in traditional writing classes ended up 
constructing fewer such plans. 
It is also interesting that while the students in the experimental group used multiple symbols (pictures, 
Chinese characters, Hanyu Pinyin, and English and Arabic numerals) to plan their composition writing, 
only Chinese characters were found in their essays. It appears that immersing themselves in such an 
environment allowed students to write down their ideas without being restricted by their CSL abilities, and 
consequently better express whatever came to their minds while constructing their plans. Additionally, a 
3D virtual world overcomes the spatial limitations encountered in a traditional class, freeing students’ 
imaginations and encouraging them to explore and learn (also see Chun et al., 2016). This aspect is 
emphasized by the process-oriented approach (Kroll, 2001), which concerns the process of how ideas are 
collected, developed, and formulated in writing and which has been found to be beneficial when learning 
to write (Patera, Draper, & Naef, 2008). 
The Performance of Chinese Writing 
In order to confirm that the two groups were homogeneous before the treatment, the scores of the two 
groups obtained from the participants’ regular Mandarin Chinese final examination administered before the 
experiment were analyzed. The result of the test of homogeneity showed that the Mandarin Chinese abilities 
did not differ significantly between the two groups (F(1,25) = 0.72, p = .205). 
The scores determined by two researchers based on Chinese-writing rubrics for the three written 
compositions were also analyzed. Before a further statistical analysis was conducted, the Spearman 
coefficient of concordance was computed from the scoring results obtained from the two researchers. The 
Pearson correlation coefficient was .981 (p < .001). Table 7 lists the average scores obtained by the two 
138 Language Learning & Technology 
 
researchers including those for the three individual units and the average of the three units. 
Table 7. Scoring Results of the Three Compositions 
Rubric 
Dimension 
 Unit 1  Unit 2  Unit 3  Average 
 Ex Con  Ex Con  Ex Con  Ex Con 
Total M 20.24 17.12  20.52 18.29  20.75 19.13  20.51 18.17 
 SD 2.34 2.92  2.25 3.13  1.81 2.42  2.13 2.93 
Content M 4.12 3.13  4.02 3.52  3.56 3.49  3.90 3.38 
 SD 0.60 0.77  0.66 0.68  0.54 0.67  0.64 0.72 
Organization M 3.82 2.99  3.85 3.00  3.77 3.57  3.81 3.19 
 SD 0.72 0.85  0.77 1.02  0.57 0.83  0.68 0.94 
Vocabulary M 3.78 3.26  3.94 3.72  4.15 3.56  3.96 3.51 
 SD 0.72 0.76  0.73 0.69  0.61 0.70  0.70 0.74 
Grammar M 3.94 3.46  4.21 3.68  4.42 3.91  4.19 3.68 
 SD 0.53 0.71  0.45 0.75  0.48 0.71  0.52 0.74 
Punctuation and 
Handwriting 
M 4.58 4.28  4.50 4.36  4.85 4.59  4.64 4.40 
SD 0.55 0.81  0.81 0.78  0.46 0.61  0.64 0.74 
Notes. Ex = experimental group, Con = control group 
Table 7 indicates that students in the experimental group outperformed their peers in the control group, 
achieving higher scores in all dimensions on the rubrics, including content, organization, vocabulary, 
grammar, and punctuation and handwriting. Additionally, with the exception of the vocabulary dimension 
for Unit 2, all of the standard deviations were smaller in the experimental group than in the control group. 
This indicates that students who explore in authentic and immersive contexts at the prewriting stage show 
reduced differences in their writing performance when compared to those without do not have virtual 
exploration experiences. The differences in writing performance between the two groups were statistically 
significant for all the dimensions except punctuation and handwriting, as indicated by the results of a one-
way ANCOVA analysis presented in Table 8. The covariate was the participants’ CSL scores obtained from 
their regular CSL final examination before the experiment, with the cutoff for statistical significance set at 
α=.05. The largest significant difference between the two groups was in grammar, followed by content, 
organization, and vocabulary. 
Table 8. One-Way ANCOVA for CSL Essay Rubric Scores 
 SS df MS F p 
Total 62.69 1 62.69 25.80 .000*** 
Content 3.09 1 3.09 19.32 .000*** 
Organization 4.72 1 4.72 15.49 .000*** 
Vocabulary 2.15 1 2.15 11.64 .001** 
Grammar 2.96 1 2.96 24.06 .000*** 
Punctuation and Handwriting 0.67 1 0.67 2.66 .109 
*p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001 
A Cohen’s d effect-size analysis was conducted to confirm the results obtained in the current study due to 
the smallness of the sample. The results presented in Table 9 are consistent with those mentioned above 
Yu-Ju Lan, Bo-Ning Lyu, and Chee Kuen Chin 139 
 
and confirm the effects of authentic and immersive context exploration on the writing performance of CSL 
students. 
Table 9. Effect Sizes for CSL Essay Rubric Scores 
 Effect Size p 
Total 1.149 .000*** 
Content 1.062 .000*** 
Organization 1.022 .000*** 
Vocabulary 0.857 .002** 
Grammar 1.093 .000*** 
Punctuation and Handwriting 0.475 .072 
*p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001 
This study found that the experience of SL exploration helped improve the writing performance of CSL 
students. As argued by Jonassen, Peck, and Wilson (1999), meaningful technological integration can 
encourage learners to construct their own meaning from their experiences. The experiences of exploring 
SL in the present study seemed to help the students link their real-life understanding with what they had 
explored in the virtual worlds. For example, one student in the experimental group wrote the following in 
his composition for Unit 1 about describing a room in a house: 
桌子上放着一个古典的花瓶，里面插满了许多娇艳欲满 (this is a typographical error; the term 
should have been 娇艳欲滴) 的鲜花，靠近一闻便芳香四溢，令人陶醉。 
[On the table is a classical vase with bunches of beautiful flowers. When I come close, it smells so good 
that I have become intoxicated.] 
While the student was unable to actually smell the fragrance of the flowers in SL, the authentic and 
immersive experience seemed to remind the student about the fragrance of a flower in the real world and 
allowed him to express this in his composition writing. 
Furthermore, the improvements in the writing performance of the CSL students were consistent with the 
findings of Patera et al. (2008), who confirmed the effects of exploring in 3D virtual worlds on the writing 
performance of elementary-school students. They found that students who explored the virtual worlds 
performed significantly better in writing performance and writing motivation than did those receiving a 
traditional approach to teaching writing. However, the study of Patera et al. was about writing activities in 
the native language (i.e., English), rather than a L2. Additionally, the application of 3D virtual worlds to 
FL learning by Suh, Kim, and Kim (2010) confirmed the effects of exploration in 3D virtual worlds on the 
FL learning of students (including listening, speaking, and writing). However, the target language in their 
study was English rather than Mandarin Chinese. Furthermore, the above-mentioned literature only focused 
on overall writing performance, and it did not provide details about the effects of 3D virtual exploration on 
specific writing abilities (e.g., content, organization, and grammar). 
Although there were positive effects of 3D virtual exploration on CSL students’ writing performance, the 
positive effects were not observed in their punctuation and handwriting abilities. Two possible reasons for 
this are (a) the lack of a scheme for reminding students to pay attention to the usage of punctuation and (b) 
the lack of text-based interaction during the exploration process in SL. Since the ability to use punctuation 
correctly and to write or choose Chinese characters are as important as the other abilities when performing 
CSL writing, this topic should be addressed in future research. 
Target Behaviors of CSL Students in Writing Classes 
In addition to attempting to understand how exploration in SL influences the writing performance of CSL 
140 Language Learning & Technology 
 
students, this study also investigated differences in student behaviors in CSL writing classes. Strict privacy 
rules about making in-class observations meant that the teaching process could not be videoed. The in-class 
observations therefore aimed at supplementing the quantitative evidence, by sketching what happened, and 
providing information about the writing behaviors of CSL students during the four activities listed in Table 
1. The in-class observation records qualitatively focused on briefly describing events that occurred during 
the writing process, rather than precisely quantifying the frequencies of particular events. All the in-class 
observations were confirmed by the participating teacher after each class in order to ensure that the teaching 
process was faithfully reported. Table 10 summarizes the in-class behaviors of students in the two groups. 
Table 10. Target Behaviors in CSL Essay-Writing Classes 
Activities Experimental Group Control Group 
Instruction Students were very excited about what would 
happen in class and wondered whether there 
would be such writing activities in following 
classes. 
Students behaved boringly. They even 
cried out 啊~ [Naah], showing an 
unwillingness to do CSL writing 
when they learned that they had to do 
it. 
Prewriting Some students were too excited in the virtual 
environment to focus on making writing plans in 
Unit 1. But from Unit 2 on, they explored the 
contexts and jotted down their ideas. They often 
raised critical questions to correctly express what 
they wanted to say in their compositions. 
Students argued that it was difficult to 
think of what to write based on the 
pictures, even if the teacher had just 
provided the needed writing 
instruction before this activity. Few of 
them wrote down their ideas. 
Actually, most of the time was used 
for arguing or doing nothing, rather 
than thinking about the plans. 
Writing Students were proactive in writing. All the 
students concentrated on the task. 
Students needed the teacher’s 
frequent reminders and urges to focus 
on writing. The situation was worse 
for Unit 3. Six students did not write a 
word for a long period time even after 
the teacher’s request. 
Post-writing Overall, there was little time for refining their 
writing. All the students used up the time to write 
about their exploration experience in SL. Some of 
them failed to complete their compositions for 
Unit 3, because there was too much they wanted 
to express to be completed within the time limit. 
None of the students made any 
modifications although there was 
much time left. Some of them even 
laid their heads on their desks to take 
a nap. 
The students in the experimental group were expected to perform CSL writing with SL exploration. Those 
students used their learning time more wisely in writing activities when compared with their peers in the 
control group. They also tended not to complain or show signs of boredom. These findings were consistent 
with those reported in Patera et al. (2008), both confirming that active immersion in a 3D virtual 
environment increased students’ active engagement in writing activities. Furthermore, they also identified 
that a 3D virtual immersive experience was more beneficial to boys than girls, although all of the children 
in the 3D group in their study behaved more actively than their peers in the control group. Gender 
differences were not investigated in the current study. Because the boys in the study by Patera et al. (2008) 
reported feeling bored in writing classes, gender differences in the effects of using 3D virtual worlds for 
CSL writing merit further research. Moreover, the boredom displayed by the students in the control group 
is reportedly common in CSL classes in Singapore (Puah et al., 2015), mostly due to the inadequate CSL 
Yu-Ju Lan, Bo-Ning Lyu, and Chee Kuen Chin 141 
 
abilities of the students (Puah, Liao, Yan, Lee, & Zheng, 2017). However, the results obtained from the 
current study reflected the study of Puah et al. (2015): boredom among students could be improved by 
cleverly integrating technology into traditional CSL writing classes. 
It is interesting that the teacher played different roles when teaching the two groups in the current study. In 
the experimental group, she acted as a learning facilitator, answering critical questions from the students 
actively engaged in their writing activities. In the control group, she was a supervisor, constantly reminding 
the students to focus on writing. This difference in the role of the teacher is consistent with Collentine’s 
(2011) finding that a 3D virtual world enhanced task involvement among Spanish learners. 
In summary, the unique features of immersion, interaction, and imagination of 3D virtual worlds have the 
potential to improve the learning motivation of FL and L2 students and improve their learning behaviors. 
These positive effects can occur regardless of the target language, and have already been demonstrated for 
Chinese, English, German, or Spanish. Due to the associated promotion of writing motivation, CSL students 
who experienced SL exploration made more writing plans and made better use of their learning time for 
completing the assigned writing tasks. They consequently outperformed their peers who had no such 
experiences. However, while this study obtained positive findings, its limitations of having only one 
researcher enter the classroom and only rough sketches of the writing processes restrict its ability to 
generalize these findings. 
Conclusions 
This study aimed at determining how authentic and immersive exploration in SL influenced CSL students’ 
prewriting planning, writing performance, and behavior during the writing process. The results obtained in 
the study indicated that such an immersive experience improved the ability of Singaporean CSL students 
learning to write while preparing themselves for writing, constructing writing plans, and completing essays. 
Traditional CSL writing classes are usually constrained by restricted authentic contexts, and they therefore 
fail to motivate students to write or improve their writing performance. Integrating 3D virtual worlds in 
CSL classes is a potential approach to freeing the minds and imaginations of students and consequently 
improving their writing abilities and learning motivation. Future studies should investigate the possibility 
of gender differences in technology-integration CSL classes as well as the design of an effective approach 
for enhancing the usage of punctuation and handwriting among CSL students. 
Acknowledgements 
We thank the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan, ROC, under grant numbers MOST 105-2511-
S-003-018-MY3 and MOST 106-2511-S-003-015-MY3 for financially supporting this research. We are 
also grateful that this research was partially supported by the Chinese Language and Technology Center of 
National Taiwan Normal University from The Featured Areas Research Center Program within the 
framework of the Higher Education Sprout Project by the Ministry of Education in Taiwan. 
References 
Al-Jarrah, R. S., & Al-Ahmad, S. (2013). Writing instruction in Jordan: Past, present, and future trends. 
System, 41(1), 84–94. 
Applebee, A. N., & Langer, J. A. (2011). A snapshot of writing instruction in middle schools and high 
schools. English Journal, 100(6), 14–27. 
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. The Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 617–645. 
Berns, A., Gonzalez-Pardo, A., & Camacho, D. (2013). Game-like language learning in 3-D virtual 
environments. Computers & Education, 60(1), 210–220. 
142 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Chang, V. W. (2006). English language education in Taiwan: A comprehensive survey. Educational 
Resources and Research, 69, 129–144. 
Cheng, H. J., Zhan, H., & Tsai, A. (2010). Integrating Second Life into a Chinese language teacher 
training program: A pilot study. Journal of Technology and Chinese Language Teaching, 1(1), 31–
58. 
Chin, C. K. (2011). Studies on Chinese language curriculum and pedagogies of Singapore. Nanjing, 
China: Nanjing University Press. 
Chun, D., Smith, B., & Kern, R. (2016). Technology in language use, language teaching, and language 
learning. The Modern Language Journal, 100(S1), 64–80. 
Ciekanski, M., & Chanier, T. (2008). Developing online multimodal verbal communication to enhance 
the writing process in an audio-graphic conferencing environment. ReCALL, 20(2), 162–182. 
Collentine, K. (2011). Learner autonomy in a task-based 3D world and production. Language Learning & 
Technology, 15(3), 50–67. 
Department of Statistics, Singapore. (2010). Census of population 2010 statistical release 1: 
Demographic characteristics, education, language, and religion. Retrieved from 
https://www.singstat.gov.sg/-/media/files/publications/cop2010/census_2010_release1/ 
cop2010sr1.pdf 
Eun, B., & Lim, H. (2009). A sociocultural view of language learning: The importance of meaning-based 
instruction. TESL Canada Journal, 27(1), 13–26. 
Goldberg, A., Russell, M., & Cook, A. (2003). The effect of computers on student writing: A meta-
analysis of studies from 1992 to 2002. Journal of Technology, Learning, and Assessment, 2(1). 
Retrieved from http://ejournals.bc.edu/ojs/index.php/jtla/article/view/1661/1503 
Gong, C., Chin, C. K., Tay, B. P., & Soh, K. C. (2016). Dominance analysis of the online interactive self-
directed writing course. Global Chinese Language and Culture Education, 33, 30–40. 
Henderson, M., Huang, H., Grant, S. (2012). The impact of Chinese language lessons in a virtual world 
on university students’ self-efficacy beliefs. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 28(S3), 
400–419. 
Jonassen, D., Peck, K., & Wilson, B. (1999). Learning with technology: A constructivist perspective. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Krashen, S. (1987). Principles and practice in second language teaching. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press. 
Kroll, B. (2001). Considerations for teaching an ESL/EFL writing course. In M. Celce-Murcia (Ed.), 
Teaching English as a second or foreign language (pp. 219–232). Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle. 
Lan, Y. J. (2014). Does Second Life improve Mandarin learning by overseas Chinese students? Language 
Learning & Technology, 18(2), 36–56. 
Lan, Y. J. (2015). Contextual EFL learning in a 3D virtual environment. Language Learning & 
Technology, 19(2), 16–31. 
Lan, Y. J., Kan, Y. H., Sung, Y. T., & Chang, K. E. (2016). Oral-performance language tasks for CSL 
beginners in Second Life. Language Learning & Technology, 20(3), 60–79. 
Lan, Y. J., Sung, Y. T., Cheng, C. C., & Chang, K. E. (2015). Computer-supported cooperative prewriting 
for enhancing young EFL learners’ writing performance. Language Learning & Technology, 19(2), 
134–155. 
Yu-Ju Lan, Bo-Ning Lyu, and Chee Kuen Chin 143 
 
Lantolf, J. (2005). Sociocultural and second language learning research: An exegesis. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), 
Handbook of research on second language teaching and learning (pp. 335–354). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Li, J. L. (2008). The experiment and construction of situational classes. Beijing, China: Foreign 
Language Teaching and Research Press. 
Lin, S. M. (2015). A study of ELL students’ writing difficulties: A call for culturally, linguistically, and 
psychologically responsive teaching. College Student Journal, 49(2), 237–250. 
Lin, S. Y. (2010). The impact of picture prompt on the development of six graders’ English writing ability 
(Unpublished master’s thesis). National Taipei University of Education, Taiwan, ROC. 
Lou, S. J., Wu, S. C., Shih, R. C., & Tseng, K. H. (2010). Adoption of blogging by a Chinese language 
composition class in a vocational high school in Taiwan. Australasian Journal of Educational 
Technology, 26(6), 898–916. 
Ministry of Education, Singapore. (2011a). 2011 Chinese language (secondary) syllabus. Retrieved from 
https://www.moe.gov.sg/docs/default-source/document/education/syllabuses/mother-tongue-
languages/files/chinese-secondary-2011.pdf 
Ministry of Education, Singapore. (2011b). Nurturing active learners and proficient users: 2010 mother 
tongue languages review committee executive summary of recommendations. Retrieved from 
https://www.moe.gov.sg/docs/default-source/document/media/press/2011/executive-summary-of-the-
mtl-review-committee-s-report.pdf 
Mohseniasl, F. (2014). Examining the effect of strategy instruction on writing apprehension and writing 
achievement of EFL leaners. Theory and Practice in Language Studies, 4(4), 811–817. 
Patera, M., Draper, S., & Naef, M. (2008). Exploring magic cottage: A virtual reality environment for 
stimulating children’s imaginative writing. Interactive Learning Environments, 16(3), 245–263. 
Puah, L. D., Liao, Y. P., Yan, J., Lee, W. H., & Zheng, Y. (2017). Chinese language learning difficulties 
in Singapore students: An investigation of primary five and secondary three students. Journal of 
Chinese Language Education, 15(2), 59–72. 
Puah, L. D., Tan, C. L., & Teoh, H. S. (2015). On Singapore’s Chinese teaching through blog writing: A 
case study based on iWrite.sg platform. The Journal of Modernization of Chinese Language 
Education, 4(2), 80–107. 
Reisoğlu, I., Topu, B., Yılmaz, R., Yılmaz, T. K., & Göktaş, Y. (2017). 3D virtual learning environments 
in education: A meta-review. Asia Pacific Education Review, 18(1), 81–100. 
Sim, S. H. (2005). Teaching Chinese composition in Singapore secondary school. In M. S. Shum & D.-L. 
Zhang (Eds.), Teaching writing in Chinese speaking areas (pp. 245–258). New York, NY: Springer. 
Suh, S., Kim, S. W., & Kim, N. J. (2010). Effectiveness of MMORPG-based instruction in elementary 
English education in Korea. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 26(5), 370–378. 
Swain, M. (1995). Three functions of output in second language learning. In G. Cook & B. Seidlhofer 
(Eds.), Principle and practice in applied linguistics: Studies in honor of H. G. Widdowson (pp. 125–
144). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Tan, C. L., Puah, L. D., Teoh, H. S., & Ting, P. K. H. (2014). Integrating iPad into the teaching of 
creative writing: A school-based research. Journal of Chinese Language Education, 12(2), 67–84. 
Tang, J. T., Sung, Y. T., & Chang, K. E. (2016). Action research on the development of Chinese 
communication in a virtual community. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 29(5), 942–967. 
144 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Thorne, S. L. (2012). Gaming writing: Supervernaculars, stylization, and semiotic remediation. In G. 
Kessler, A. Oskoz, & I. Elola, (Eds.), technology across writing contexts and tasks (pp. 297–316). 
San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Xu, Y., Park, H., & Baek, Y. (2011). A new approach toward digital storytelling: An activity focused on 
writing self-efficacy in a virtual learning environment. Educational Technology & Society, 14(4), 
181–191. 
About the Authors 
Yu-Ju Lan is currently a Professor in the Department of Chinese as a Second Language at National Taiwan 
Normal University. Her research interests include technology-enhanced foreign language learning, 
language learning in virtual worlds, mobile learning, and online synchronous teacher training. 
E-mail: yujulan@gmail.com 
Bo-Ning Lyu is a PhD student at the Faculty of Education, the University of Hong Kong. She is also a 
lecturer of Mandarin Chinese at the Putonghua Education and Assessment Centre, the University of Hong 
Kong. Her research topic is technology-enhanced language learning. 
E-mail: milly910714@gmail.com 
Chee Kuen Chin is a Distinguished Principal Lecturer at Singapore Centre for Chinese Language. His 
research interests include curriculum development and design for Chinese as a second language, Chinese 
language pedagogy, and ICT-mediated teaching and learning in Chinese. 
E-mail: chen_zhiquan@hotmail.com 
