Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2019, Volume 23, Issue 1 
pp. 8–25 
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES  
 
 
Copyright © 2019 Robert Godwin-Jones 
 
 
Riding the digital wilds: Learner autonomy and 
informal language learning 
Robert Godwin-Jones, Virginia Commonwealth University 
APA Citation: Godwin-Jones, R. (2019). Riding the digital wilds: Learner autonomy and informal 
language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 23(1), 8–25. https://doi.org/10125/44667 
Introduction 
In the 20th anniversary issue of this journal, Reinders and White (2016) describe the relationship between 
computer-assisted language learning (CALL) and autonomy as having become “both more complex and 
more promising” (p. 143). This is, they assert, in large part due to the rise of informal language learning 
online, with an accompanying diminution for many learners in the role of formal education. In the process, 
they claim, education theory and practice have begun to take “the learner’s lives and their experience as a 
central point for their learning” (p. 143). In this column, I will be arguing that in fact this trend has 
accelerated, with new opportunities for autonomous language learning through mobile devices and the ever-
increasing availability and use of streaming video and other authentic materials in the target language. The 
choice of learning resources is wide and personal, but inevitably draws the learner into contact—and into 
learning opportunities—with fellow learners and native speakers. 
Given that learner autonomy in language learning entails the use of innate cognitive functions and a social 
tool—language—its manifestation necessarily combines independence and interdependence. That has been 
widely recognized in research in recent decades with the move away from understanding autonomy as self-
paced individualized learning to viewing it in a social context (Benson, 2001, 2006). The growing emphasis 
placed on social factors in recent years has led to autonomy being studied from the perspective of ecological 
theories, emphasizing the multiple and intertwined connections among users, tools, artifacts, and settings, 
including cultural and educational contexts. Reinders and White (2016) comment the following: 
Social technologies for language learning draw our attention back to the value of ecological 
approaches to understanding learner autonomy. They focus on the multiple environments in which 
individuals pursue their learning, the role of others and their contributions, and the ways in which 
learners work with and restructure aspects of their learning environments to establish more optimal 
learning conditions moment by moment. (p. 149) 
The variety of learner options online makes narrative inquiry especially effective in analyzing individual 
language learning, which is affected by many factors including the learner’s linguistic and educational 
background; the availability and suitability of chosen or found online resources; the learner’s motivation, 
knowledge, and ability to use and re-use the resources productively; and the degree to which the experience 
fits the learner’s self-concept in the present and for the future. 
While the principal focus here will be on language learning in the digital wilds, we will also consider how 
that process intersects with formal language instruction and how language teachers can facilitate out-of-
school learning. We will be looking first at the learner and then at the learning contexts, but we need to 
keep in mind that there is no dichotomy but rather a synergy at work in a “fluid interweaving relationship” 
(Lai, 2017, p. 15) akin to a yin–yang relationship of mutual dependence and interaction. 
The Autonomous Learner From an Ecological Perspective 
Placing more emphasis in education on the individual learner has been described as enabling a kind of 
Robert Godwin-Jones 9 
 
personal authorship, with the learner being the “author of one’s own world” (Oxford, 2003, p. 89). To my 
mind, that metaphor, in the context of informal language learning, conveys too high a level of control. A 
more appropriate, ecological metaphor may be that of the surfer. Riding the waves successfully is only 
partly dependent on the surfer’s athletic ability, experience, and training. It also depends on the weather 
conditions, with the wind speed and direction, the water temperature, and other environmental factors 
affecting the size, nature, and frequency of waves. Other factors may come into play, such as the presence 
or absence of other surfers and observers or the nature of the surfing—casual or competitive. One could 
imagine numerous other factors, including familiarity with a particular beach and its wave patterns, or the 
physical conditions of both the surfboard and the surfer. The complex ecological system here mirrors that 
of the informal language learner in that successful outcomes are not assured and are dependent on both the 
individual’s background, initiative, and competence, as well as on local conditions. The surfer’s trajectory, 
like that of the language learner, is susceptible to the kind of initial conditions at hand (of the individual 
and of the environment), both of which are subject to constant change. Second language (L2) development 
is a dynamic process, often nonlinear and episodic, making static or linear metaphors of mastery or 
programmatic progression invalid (Schulze & Smith, 2015). Palfreyman (2014) uses a similar aquatic 
metaphor in describing the autonomous language learner as not being “simply swept along in the stream of 
schooling/work/life,” but making “efforts to float, swim, and navigate” (p. 183). The degree of learner 
agency in the learning process will vary depending on multiple factors, some of which the learner can affect, 
others not. 
One ecological approach that emphasizes and traces change has frequently been used of late as a metaphor 
for describing the developmental process of learner autonomy—namely complexity theory (CT), also 
known as complex dynamic systems (Murray & Lamb, 2018; Paiva, 2011; Paiva & Braga, 2008; Reinders 
& White, 2016; Sade, 2014; Tatzl, 2016; Zhang, 2016). This is in large part out of recognition that learner 
autonomy is not a simple construct. Rather, it is influenced by a large array of factors, including learner 
beliefs, motivation, external guidance, the learner’s sense of self (and of a potential future self), 
metacognitive knowledge, and language learning history. In the recently revised edition of her study on 
learner self-regulation, Oxford (2017) states that “complexity theory might well help us understand 
sociocultural identities and imbalances of power, misrecognition of the individual, and different trajectories 
of various strategy-using L2 learners” (p. 2). She expresses the hope that her book “might start a new, 
complexity-related movement in strategy assessment, instruction and research” (p. 2). 
In fact, CT has been applied to a number of areas related to learner autonomy in online language learning, 
including intentionality (Kostoulas & Stelma, 2016), learning strategies (Griffiths & İnceçay, 2016), teacher 
beliefs (Kramsch & Zhang, 2018), distance learning (Braga, 2013), data-driven learning (Boulton, 2002), 
contextual vocabulary learning (Godwin-Jones, 2018b), language learning advising (Castro, 2018), learner 
agency (Mercer, 2011b), phonological development (Moyer, 2017), social learning centers (Murray, 
Fujishima, & Uzuka, 2018), online group dynamics (Poupore, 2018), motivation (Sade, 2011), 
metacognitive knowledge (Zhang, 2016), online gaming (Scholz & Schulze, 2017), and informal language 
learning (Godwin-Jones, 2018a; Sockett, 2013). The recognition of how interdependent the interactions of 
these elements are has led to a “reconceptualization of autonomy as a multifaceted construct that operates 
on a number of dimensions” (Reinders & White, 2016, p. 144). There has been a growing consensus that 
autonomy is not a state but rather a “non-linear process, which undergoes periods of instability, variability, 
and adaptability” (Paiva, 2011, p. 63). The dynamic quality points to the importance of looking at the 
development of learner autonomy longitudinally, as both internal and external factors over time affect 
language learning development. That is particularly the case for informal language learning, for which 
learners typically use a variety of resources whose type, availability, and usefulness are likely to evolve. 
Possible learner resources include tools, media, and online communities, all embedded in historical and 
cultural contexts, shaping the nature of their use and interactions with individuals. This makes cultural 
historical activity theory (Engeström, 2001) also helpful in analyzing the ecology of online language 
learning (Blin, 2004; Isbell, 2018). From an activity theory perspective, systems interact and evolve over 
time, with breakdowns and contradictions as expected and normal phenomena (Blin, 2004). Applying a 
10 Language Learning & Technology 
 
broad ecological lens to language learning, developmental spurts and backslidings are not anomalies, as 
they have traditionally been considered, but are part of a normal, nonlinear development trajectory (Schulze, 
2017). These changes in trajectories signal phase shifts in which the introduction of new variables can affect 
development positively (e.g., gaining access to streaming video in the L2) or negatively (e.g., episodes from 
a favorite TV series becoming unavailable) and can lead to new system dynamics with unpredictable results. 
Social action theory (Palfreyman, 2014) and positioning theory (Davies & Harré, 1999; Wu, 2018) are 
helpful as well in exploring learner autonomy as an interaction between the individual and the social context. 
Ecological approaches allow for an exploration of how, over time and in stages, L2 development progresses, 
as the learner interacts with an evolving set of tools, artifacts, and communities. 
Motivation and Self-Regulation 
Ecological approaches to understanding L2 development emphasize the importance of examining all the 
dimensions of the process. That begins with the individual learner, whose cognitive abilities, beliefs about 
language learning, and motivation to learn formed the main focus of attention in early conceptualizations 
of learner autonomy in language learning (Holec, 1981). Learner characteristics were seen as individually 
different, but stable, allowing for a predictable development pattern (see discussion in Dörnyei, 2015). This 
view was consistent with the conceptualization of language as a set of rules to be learned and applied. That 
static and linear perspective has shifted to a more dynamic and differentiated view of both language and 
learner (Reinders & White, 2016). The individual self-concept is seen as a “complex, multi-layered, multi-
dimensional network of interrelated self-beliefs” (Mercer, 2011a, p. 335). This self-image is differently 
situated, dependent on context, and may even be self-contradictory at times. While some learner traits are 
stable, others are in constant evolution as L2 development progresses. Individuals are subject to a variety 
of influences in their views of themselves and in their beliefs about language learning. These include the 
pedagogical approach used in school, interactions with peers or family, and aspirational goals. Such 
influences carry over when learners interact with online tools, services, and communities. 
One of the central components for understanding the dynamics of learner autonomy development in online 
spaces is learner motivation. This is an area within the fields of second language acquisition (SLA) and 
applied linguistics that has seen significant research in recent years, leading to a new understanding of 
motivational factors (see Dörnyei, 2015). Studies on motivation have moved away from an effort to develop 
generalizable models of motivation to instead focus on a framework of individuality and on the dynamic 
process of motivation or de-motivation tied to evolving and overlapping subject positions (Ushioda, 2011). 
While learners have a “core sense of self” (Mercer, 2016 p. 4), they adopt in their lives a variety of identity 
formations. Learners today tend to be “active members of multiple collectives—real, virtual, imagined” 
(Mercer, 2013, p. 29). Another way to envision that phenomenon is that learning an L2 “involves coping 
with fractal dimensions of the identity complex system” (Paiva, 2011, p. 66). Fractals are self-similar 
entities, here different identity constructions replicated within one individual, exhibiting “infinite 
possibilities of internal subdivisions, limited by an external area, and self-similarity” (Sade, 2011, p. 47; 
see also Braga, 2013). Fracticality helps “to identify patterns at different scales in these nonlinear 
trajectories” (Schulze, 2017, p. 47). Such conceptualizations help to describe metaphorically the added 
dimensions of identity created by learning a new language and to further the notion that change, rather than 
stability, is the normal pattern of second language development (SLD). 
Studies of learner motivation are often linked to language learning strategies. Here, too, ecological 
approaches have shown how dynamic and complex the evolution of individual learning strategies can be 
(Oxford, 2017). That process depends on context. This is particularly the case for informal language 
learning, as the choice of materials and methods is nearly unlimited. Resources will be useful or not 
depending on the learner in question, so that learning strategies “can only be defined relative to a particular 
agent, because a specific learning activity may be strategic for one and non-strategic for another” (Tseng, 
Dörnyei, & Schmitt, 2006, p. 81). The effectiveness of a particular resource or strategy will depend on 
where the learner is in the development process and how that new element interacts with other components 
Robert Godwin-Jones 11 
 
(i.e., level of difficulty, ability to customize through glossing or subtitling, etc.). Increasingly, this is seen 
as a process of self-regulation, in which successful learners will have the willingness and ability to “reassess, 
revise, restart, reinvent” (Moyer, 2017, p. 401) when encountering new learning options. The self-
regulatory process goes beyond learner strategies, and includes an array of factors including, but not limited 
to, the following: 
goal setting, strategic planning, action plans and action schemata, monitoring and metacognition, 
action control and volitional control mechanisms, strategic tactics and operations, effective time 
management, self-motivational beliefs (self-efficacy, outcome expectations, intrinsic interest, and 
goal orientation, etc.), evaluation and self-reflection, receiving and processing feedback, 
experiencing pride and satisfaction with one’s efforts, and establishing a congenial environment. 
(Tseng et al., 2006, p. 81) 
Self-regulation involves above all learners being active participants in their own learning (Rose, Briggs, 
Boggs, Sergio, & Ivanova-Slavianskaia, 2018). Dörnyei (2015) has been especially influential in the 
concept of learners’ “possible selves,” representing what they might become in the future (Markus & Nurius, 
1986). This is a helpful concept in considering learner autonomy, as the learner’s visualization of an L2 
future self can contribute substantially to the desire and intent to develop further target language knowledge 
and skills. 
Cultural Contexts 
Part and parcel of considering learners as individuals is the cultural context in which SLD takes place. That 
includes national cultures, institutional cultures (especially schools), and small cultures (Holliday, 1999), 
self-constituting physical or online discourse communities. How languages are taught in school can have 
an influence that is “subtle and abiding” (Benson, 2016, p. 34), carrying over when learners take on the role 
of independent learners online. In a recent study looking at Hong Kong adults learning German, Italian, and 
Korean independently, Chik (2018) discovered that in their online learning practices, the learners “desired 
to re-create a language classroom learning experience that included structured learning materials” (p. 50). 
They learned vocabulary by writing words multiple times and created notebooks with parallel columns for 
the target language and English or Chinese, just as they were required to do in school. Rather than sampling 
materials such as YouTube videos or user-supplied podcasts, the learners looked for structured materials 
from what they perceived to be reputable, credentialed sources, such as the BBC or university-affiliated 
websites. Chik comments, “When learners were given the autonomy to decide their foreign language 
learning, they seemingly decided to go back to the classroom” (p. 52). That lingering influence of school 
culture extended to learners’ sense of indulging in “guilty pleasures” when using unstructured materials 
such as pop culture resources, or even newspapers, as learning spaces (p. 54). In an earlier study, Chik 
(2014) found that even in online gaming, L2 learners were “transferring learning strategies learned at 
schools” (p. 96) to game-related online resources. It may well be that in other cultures, school environments 
do not mark student habits so strongly. In fact, in studies on informal language learning in Europe, no 
carryover from formal language instruction was reported (Sockett & Toffoli, 2012; Sundqvist & Sylvén, 
2016). Indeed, users, or learners of English, enthusiastically embraced pop culture as an avenue toward L2 
development that was both entertaining and effective. 
The influence of national cultures on the development and exercise of learner autonomy has been a 
controversial issue. Oxford (2017) termed the debate over culture and learner autonomy a “firestorm” (p. 
80). That debate has centered on whether learner autonomy should be seen as universal in its application or 
as a Western cultural construct that may have less relevance in non-Western cultures. A number of studies 
have used Hofstede’s (1984) cultural taxonomies, including categories such as individualism versus 
collectivism, power distance, and uncertainty avoidance to frame behaviors (Lai, 2017; Lai, Wang, Li, & 
Hu, 2016; Viberg & Grönlund, 2013). Although often couched in cautionary terms, expressing the intention 
to use the categories applied to individuals only and not to national stereotypes, such studies inevitably type 
learners as being constrained by national origins. That leads to the advocacy of technology as a means to 
12 Language Learning & Technology 
 
neutralize what is perceived as problematic cultural orientations (e.g., Asians as passive learners). The wide 
use of mobile learning, for example, is seen as showing that “existing local cultures are not insurmountable” 
(Viberg & Grönlund, 2013, p. 178). While national culture may supply an initial “orientation point” 
(Palfreyman, 2003, p. 13), today’s learners—especially those learning online—are exposed to too many 
cultural influences to be able to reduce their identities to national origins, particularly given the growing 
multilingual and multiethnic makeup of so many countries today. In our real world and virtual lives, we are 
inevitably drawn into membership in small cultures that develop and dissolve spontaneously. Those groups 
can have influences—sustaining or temporary—on our values and behaviors and, as such, add a dimension 
to our identities, potentially affecting SLD. Cultural norms and behaviors are not static and, in fact, in 
learning a new language, learners “may be modified by their ongoing engagement with target language 
cultures” in a bidirectional process (Benson, Chik, & Lim, 2003, p. 24). 
It is undoubtedly the case that patterns of behavior and institutional cultures can affect learner beliefs and 
behaviors. That may include institutional obstacles through an emphasis on standardized exams, the 
presence of a rigid educational bureaucracy, or a heavily centralized educational system. Analyses of 
learning autonomy in different cultures have looked at how local conditions affected the development and 
use of autonomy: the transition from rote learning in secondary education in Arabic countries to instruction 
at the tertiary level oriented toward critical thinking (Dewaele & Al-Saraj, 2015), the use of song lyrics in 
Sri Lanka due to a lack of technology resources (Fonseka, 2003), cultural traditions in China that impose 
high expectations on teachers with an accompanying potential for societal censure of teachers' professional 
practices (Gao, 2018), the impact of family views on language learning in the United Arab Emirates 
(Palfreyman, 2014), and the preference for socially-oriented, communal activities in Brazil over self-study 
materials (Silva, 2018). As shown in a recent study on learner autonomy in the Chinese context (Lin & 
Reinders, 2018), issues of learner autonomy may have less to do with nationality or ethnicity and more to 
do with local educational objectives and pedagogical methodologies. 
According to Holliday (2003), autonomy should not be seen as a single construct, but as taking on different 
forms in different groups and individuals. This may take the form of “social autonomy,” moving away from 
the individualistic and sometimes competitive model of autonomy to a mutually supportive dynamic 
(Kumaravadivelu, 2001). In fact, this is a view increasingly embraced in SLA, that autonomy is universal 
but diverse (Oxford, 2017) and that collective forms of autonomy actually enhance individual autonomy 
(Schmenk, 2008). Schmenk (2005) suggests reframing autonomy in consideration of local language 
learning environments, “glocalizing autonomy” (p. 116), allowing local conditions to determine appropriate 
variations on the concept and on the role of autonomy in language learning. Smith, Kuchah, and Lamb 
(2018) suggest that the concept of learner autonomy may “have a particular relevance in the developing 
world” (p. 11), in that there may be a substantial gulf between school practices and “what many learners 
want and actually attempt to gain for themselves” (p. 11). Lamb (2004, 2013) found this to be the case for 
young English learners in Indonesia. In contexts where resources are in short supply or class sizes are large, 
fostering learner autonomy can be seen as a means to address difficult educational circumstances (Smith et 
al., 2018). Even in resource-poor areas, many students have access to online resources through their phones. 
In fact, discussing how mobile devices are being used in support of learning (online or in school) is likely 
to be a valid and useful discussion topic across cultures. A useful starting point for exploring learner 
autonomy in any instructional setting is, as Holliday (2003) suggests, to discuss those examples of 
autonomous learning behavior already in use by students, even if that may be just using online dictionaries. 
Narrative Inquiry 
The many options L2 learners have online to pursue incidental or dedicated SLD result in endless 
combinations of variables, making generalizations difficult. Qualitative studies of the learning trajectories 
of small groups, or even of individual learners, followed over time, can show how the different stages of 
SLD are affected by the use of specific digital tools or services or by participating in online affinity groups. 
In the process, characteristic patterns may emerge. Due to the complexity of developmental paths, studies 
Robert Godwin-Jones 13 
 
of individual independent learners do not provide simple cause-and-effect results, but they do “suggest the 
benefits of developing certain facilitating learning conditions” (Mercer, 2011b, p. 435). Sade (2011) 
describes a single Brazilian male English learner who, as is the case for many, had little interest in English 
in school. But upon moving to a new city, he made friends with peers who were fans of English and North 
American rock music. None of the friends knew English, placing him in the role of the language informant 
for the group and motivating him to improve his English. He did that principally through working with song 
lyrics online. Sade (2011) describes the desire to join and contribute to the group as “motivation as 
belonging” (p. 53). 
Another case study of the power of music to motivate SLD is described by Oxford (2017), based on an 
earlier study (Kao & Oxford, 2014): 
Tung-An grew up in the exam-oriented, cram-school culture of Taiwan, where learning English 
was matter of rote memorization. He hated that approach and refused to be overpowered by cultural 
and familial expectations. However, he adored hip-hop music, so he created a macro-strategy (he 
called it his Learning Strategy) of developing English skills through hip-hop. He listened to the 
songs repeatedly, wrote them down as English language samples, and created his own 
everexpanding English “textbook” (his chosen terminology for the book) containing lyrics and his 
lyrics-based lists of vocabulary, grammar points, explanatory notes, and information on culture and 
pragmatics. He used and added to his textbook everywhere, on public transportation and while 
walking on the street, and many hours a day over years, thus engineering a personal environment 
that focused as much as possible on learning English. He was well aware of the street-language of 
hip-hop lyrics but was so motivated by hip-hop that he also taught himself academic English. 
(Oxford, 2017, p. 104) 
Tung-An’s story demonstrates the power of individual initiative and creativity, forging a unique path to 
learning. His example shows as well that the relationship between learner and context is bidirectional, with 
the learner in this case not just using existing resources, but changing, consolidating, remixing. 
By collecting and examining language learning histories, taking into consideration variables such as cultural 
contexts, stages of life, and patterns of change, it may be possible to develop a “typology of language learner 
narrative identities” (Dörnyei, 2015, p. 204). This could point to patterns of change, helpful in refining SLA 
theories as well as in improving pedagogical practices. While self-reporting, learner diaries, questionnaires, 
and interviews have been typically used in qualitative studies, Oxford (2017) recommends additional 
methods that might provide more detailed information over different time frames, including micro-
observations, video recordings, various elicitation methods (think-aloud protocols, for example), and thick 
description. In evaluating data, a grounded approach can be illuminating (i.e., looking for emergent patterns 
and building hypotheses arising from the data, instead of using a priori categories of analysis; see Mercer, 
2011b; Moyer, 2017). Such a bottom-up, iterative approach is likely to uncover unforeseeable results 
(Schwienhorst, 2008). Paiva & Braga (2008) suggest that through examining language learning histories, 
profiles of successful learners can be identified that might include “their willingness for autonomy, their 
ability to share their achievements with other learners and borrow from them; teachers who are themselves 
autonomous” (p. 464). Some of those factors are internal, others are external. The latter include teachers 
providing learners choices, educational systems allowing teacher freedom, and “a fair social, political, and 
economic system which gives every learner good learning opportunities and every teacher good teaching 
conditions” (p. 464). 
Language learning histories show the variation in trajectories with nonlinear development, and 
unpredictable results. Small changes or seemingly random occurrences can have major and unexpected 
outcomes. Chance encounters, new resources, or changes in life status can result in “tipping points” that 
shift learners’ approaches to SLD (Oxford, 2017, p. 125). That might involve motivational changes or new 
strategies. Paiva (2011) gives the example of a Japanese housewife, who hated English in school, but who 
became motivated to learn the language through a seemingly unrelated question from her husband: 
14 Language Learning & Technology 
 
One day in those days, my husband once said to me: “I will take you to Hawaii some day.” As I 
heard from him, I thought that’s it. It was what I wanted to do. The idea of going shopping with 
fluent English in Hawaii suddenly popped in my mind. But at the same time I thought the English 
I would take must be practical, not useless. Now I come to think of my choice then, it was too 
childish, wasn’t it? (p. 67). 
As a consequence, she started following English language lessons on the radio. Later, a North American 
girl enrolled in her daughter’s kindergarten class and the two girls—and their families—became friends, 
providing both the motivation and opportunity to use English. 
Such examples provide evidence that opportunities for SLD only become genuine affordances (van Lier, 
2000) when the time and place are right, when they coalesce with real, virtual, or imagined communities—
in short when they become part of an “integrative life narrative” (Dörnyei, 2015, p. 12). That concept, 
combining coherence and vision, is defined by McAdams and Pals (2006) as “internalized and evolving 
life stories that [reconstructs] the past and [imagines] the future to provide a person’s life with identity 
(unity, purpose, meaning)” (p. 212). In learning a new language, we add a new chapter to our life story, in 
the process constructing “new ways of linking the self to new worlds and words” (Ushioda, 2011, p. 202). 
We forge new identities, develop new relationships, and imagine potential new futures. There are 
constraints on this process, as not all claimed identities may be available (Sade, 2011). Participation might 
be restricted due to discrimination related to gender, race, or nationality. Power relations and politics may 
come into play as well (see Norton, 2001; Toohey & Norton, 2003). In online communities, lack of group 
acceptance may relate to the failure to follow cultures-of-use or genre conventions (Thorne, 2003). 
Writing a personal language learning history can be an illuminating experience, making the learner 
conscious of the stages in personal SLD as well as creating a general awareness of language and language 
learning (Benson & Chik, 2010). The self-reflection involved can lead to critical language awareness. The 
learner gains insight, through personal experience and comparisons with others, into the relationship 
between language and social contexts. Chik and Breidbach (2014) have shown that having future language 
teachers share language learning histories across cultures through a telecollaborative project can show 
participants how individual, collective, and social forces influence SLD. That is a crucial personal learning 
experience for language teachers. 
Tools and Services for Autonomous Learning 
Recent studies have shown that SLD occurs autonomously through L2 learners or users finding rich sources 
of L2 learning in multimedia consumption (e.g., pop music, entertainment videos; Sockett, 2014; Sundqvist 
& Sylvén, 2016), social media (e.g., social networks, user forums; Warner & Chen, 2017), online affinity 
groups (e.g., fanfiction or leisure-based communities; Sauro, 2017), and individual language exchanges 
(e.g., tandem learning, commercial language learning services; Chik & Ho, 2017). These activities may not 
be initially or primarily related to SLD, but rather to entertainment or socialization (Sockett, 2014). In the 
process, L2 learners become L2 users. At the same time, this may lead to a consciousness that SLD is 
occurring through the online activities. That may in turn result in more deliberate attention to language 
development, occurring along with the primary leisure-oriented motivation. The extent to which SLD 
occurs is enhanced by language awareness and self-reflection. This kind of largely incidental learning is in 
line with evolving views of language and language acquisition in applied linguistics. What is sometimes 
labeled “self-directed naturalistic learning” (Benson & Chik, 2010, p. 74) calls into question the traditional 
approach to SLD, based on sequential curricula, learning grammar rules, and developing discrete skills. 
Instead, it aligns with a usage-based model of language, in which patterns and chunks (i.e., multi-word units 
of lexis and grammar) are seen as a basis for language acquisition (Ellis, 2017). 
For that to be possible, learners need “exposure to language in rich contexts” (Sockett, 2013, p. 55), 
including how language is used idiomatically and how it varies according to changing contexts such as 
registers or speech acts. In fact, repeated listening to songs, watching multiple episodes of a TV series, or 
Robert Godwin-Jones 15 
 
engaging in repetitive gaming scenarios can aid the acquisition of patterns through “high frequency, high 
context exposure to salient examples” (Sockett & Toffoli, 2012, p. 148). In the process of repeated listening 
and viewing, the learner undergoes a series of cognitive processes, including “forming categories, detecting 
patterns, and noticing novelty, as well as imitation” (Sockett, 2013, p. 51). This process is likely not 
effective for all users, with studies showing that it may be most appropriate at intermediate and or higher 
levels (Lai, Hu, & Lyu, 2018; Moyer, 2017; Trinder, 2016). The availability of appropriate resources may 
be limited as well. Many of the studies of naturalistic language learning deal with English, for which popular 
media is readily available. In Chik’s (2018) study of Hong Kong learners of other languages, the availability 
of media varied considerably with language. A learner of Korean easily found pop-culture materials, which 
in fact were the starting point for the learner’s exploration of the language. In contrast, a learner of German 
found he could not use the same strategies and resources he had used for learning English, as he had “limited 
access to, and thus knowledge of, German popular culture in mainstream media” (p. 48). 
It is also the case that not all online communities of practice involving L2 use will provide a sufficient 
volume of L2 to facilitate language acquisition. In a recent study on a Korean language-oriented Reddit 
forum, Isbell (2018) reported little target language use and “a great deal of learning about language” (p. 82). 
Of course, as Isbell comments, such discussions can be helpful to learners, depending on their proficiency 
level and learning context (i.e., good for lower-level learners or those in formal instruction seeking 
clarification on specific language issues). While Isbell’s study focuses on an online community specifically 
oriented to language learning, other studies have shown that general interest social media, such as Facebook, 
may frequently be used in a similar fashion. This, too, may be a residue of school culture. Lai et al. (2018) 
found that learners surveyed in Hong Kong used social media to solve problems with homework or to elicit 
error corrections, connecting more often and more comfortably with their classmates than with native 
speakers: “Thus, these social-oriented technological experiences were reinterpreted, by the participants for 
various reasons, into contrived learning experiences” (p. 123). 
In fact, using social media for communicating with strangers was characterized by learners as “limited and 
inauthentic, and hence boring” (Lai et al., 2018, p. 123). Some also expressed the concern that social 
networks were “full of inaccurate language use” (p. 124) and that their use by learners violated the 
conventions of use. Lai et al. provide this example: 
Once I chatted with a Spanish speaker in an online chatting program. We greeted each other and 
then we asked about how the day went, what we had for lunch, and what we ate and did yesterday. 
Then just after a while, I felt, and I think he felt too, bored (p. 123). 
Trinder (2016) found similar results, further examples that the same technology can result in quite different 
learning experiences. They also indicate that leveraging students’ personal interests—through, for example, 
popular entertainment media—is likely to engage learners much more initially than looking to approaches 
which overtly emphasize language learning. It is also the case that for certain L2-related learning activities, 
there may be some degree of knowledge and autonomy necessary as preconditions for success. Benson 
(2001) gives the example of using concordances independently, requiring some knowledge of the process 
and its rationale. 
Lai et al. (2018) reported that the learners in her study had little trouble locating and using tools and services 
for out-of-class language learning. That is echoed by Chik (2018). Other recent studies emphasize the extent 
to which “all participants tried to capitalize on the advantages of mobile-assisted language learning” (Chik, 
2018, p. 52). Lamb (2013) found that in a relatively remote rural area of Indonesia, young learners were 
listening to English songs and watching English TV. They were especially enthusiastic about using their 
phones for social connections in which they communicated in both English and Indonesian. The widespread 
use of mobile devices, especially smartphones, is one of the principal enablers of the growth in online 
informal language learning (Godwin-Jones, 2017b). Streaming services such as Netflix are available for 
mobile devices, as are virtually all online services today, usually through dedicated apps. Smartphones 
allow for extensive customization, leading to highly personal configurations of apps, content, and settings. 
Since these devices have become ubiquitous companions, they are always available and support anytime, 
16 Language Learning & Technology 
 
anyplace learning. Chik (2018) describes the learners in her study as “immersed in their portable learning 
spaces” (p. 52). That immersion, aided by earbuds and today’s vivid and large smartphone screens, can 
result in flow experiences, intense focus and involvement in activities to the extent that the user loses track 
of time and place (see Dörnyei, 2015). That is one of the wonders of the smartphone: the power to provide 
a full immersive experience (while sitting comfortably at home) or a 5-minute vocab learning session (while 
waiting in line at Starbucks), as well as many experiences in between, representing a range of time, energy, 
and attention commitments. Smartphones serve to bridge the divide between local and global and between 
leisure and work or study. They provide situated learning that can connect real-life settings and experiences 
with worldwide communities online. These contextualized learning experiences contribute to an ecological 
model of learning that encompasses the learner, the learner’s network of friends and family, educational or 
professional contexts, and global communities. Mobile devices provide the high degree of access on 
demand and freedom of choice often associated with learner autonomy (see Murray, 2014). 
The Teacher’s Role 
For L2 learners to become L2 users with the skills and motivation to develop a lifelong connection to the 
language, there need to be personal connections in place. Those could happen in any variety of ways, but 
they are facilitated today by the rich resources available online. They might involve interactions with 
specific target language communities with shared interests, passions, or professional or personal aspirations. 
Learners may well find such opportunities for online engagement with the L2 on their own, but that process 
can be assisted in different ways: through peer recommendations (e.g., via social media), through language 
advising or self-access centers, or through formal instruction. Teachers can play a pivotal role in 
encouraging each student to leverage his or her “transportable identities (e.g., as football fan, amateur 
photographer, and film buff)” (Ushioda, 2011, p. 204) into language learning opportunities outside the 
classroom: 
We need to engage their own identities and interests in our lessons and promote a sense of 
continuity between what they learn and do in the classroom, and who they are and what they are 
interested in doing in their lives outside the classroom, now and in the future. (Ushioda, 2011, p. 
204) 
Studies have shown that simple encouragement to students may not suffice (Lai, 2015); specific guidance 
on resources and on their use can have a significant impact on student actions, as can demonstrating the use 
of tools and services in class (Lai, 2015; Rosell-Aguilar, 2017). Additionally, students can be assigned or 
invited to report on online learning resources. Having students themselves help in the selection of learning 
materials can enhance motivation and contribute to metacognitive knowledge (Benson, 2016; Lai, 2017). 
Part of that review process should include opportunities to reflect on tools, services, and strategies through 
learner diaries or online journals (Chik & Breidbach, 2014). 
The in-class discussions and hands-on experiences ideally should include the mobile devices that form such 
an important part of our students’ lives (Godwin-Jones, 2018d). Many school systems and individual 
instructors, however, ban phone use in class, cutting off a key tool for information retrieval and 
communication: 
This makes the classroom into an even more unreal environment, where language learning is an 
artificial enterprise, serving as potential practice for the real world, but not actually part of that 
world. Banning phones from the language classroom discourages the notion that language 
acquisition is something students can integrate directly into their lives, with the smartphone helping 
to bridge the gap between school and life. (Godwin-Jones, 2017b, p. 10) 
Indeed, studies have shown that use of phones for learning in the classroom can lead to more use of phone-
mediated learning outside school (Byrne & Diem, 2014; Leis, Tohei, & Cooke, 2015). 
Deeper insight into language and language learning can come from having students jointly create learning 
Robert Godwin-Jones 17 
 
materials, such as the modules described by Schwienhorst (2008) in which students selected authentic texts, 
created exercises collaboratively, and then shared them with peers. Godwin-Jones (2018c) describes a 
similar process of online materials curation and joint faculty–student module development. Student-created 
materials may be even more expansive, as in the case of global simulations in which learners take on 
authentic cultural roles (e.g., residents of an apartment complex or workers at particular jobs) and create 
interactions in the target language (Michelson & Petit, 2017). Kronenberg (2018) describes how such a 
gamified imagined community simulation (students creating the virtual German city of Pfefferhausen) was 
integrated into his department’s German language curriculum. 
An open, collaborative, and decentralized class environment contributes to the development of learner 
autonomy (Murray & Lamb, 2018). For many teachers, it is likely to be a challenge “to surrender control 
of carefully designed tasks and curricula” (Warner & Richardson, 2017, p. 220). Teachers may embrace 
learner autonomy in theory, but they may face difficulties putting it into practice (Benson, 2016). 
Encouraging students to become autonomous learners not only results in a loss of control for the teacher, 
but it also means enabling “divergent student outcomes,” as students follow different trajectories based on 
interest and ability (Benson, 2016, p. 39). That involves providing a wider selection of choices than is 
typically the case in instructed language learning. Silva (2018) comments the following: 
In order to expand students’ possibilities of becoming autonomous, language learning contexts 
should offer different sorts of experiences. Furthermore, these opportunities need to cater for 
different students’ identities by providing them with a wide variety of activities, from which they 
will choose the ones that they feel attracted to and that will give them a sense of language as it is 
used in the real world. (p. 221) 
Godwin-Jones (2017a) describes providing intermediate-level students with a broad selection of subject 
matters, modes, genres from which to choose to fulfill course requirements. Michelson and Petit (2017) 
describe a similar set-up in which students have the choice of selecting activities recommended by the 
teacher or of discovering their own to use. This aligns with calls for encouraging broader student digital 
literacy (Warner & Dupuy, 2018), but it may be difficult to implement in formal instruction, especially if 
instruction is centered around the use of a traditional print textbook. Given the diversity and ever-changing 
nature of online learning resources, Sockett and Toffoli (2012) suggest that training students in the 
development of communication and media skills in general would be more beneficial than guidance on 
specific tools or strategies. Certainly, developing capabilities for critical evaluation of resources is a 
valuable ability for all students and teachers. 
Teachers trying to incorporate online resources and skills in their classes may well run up against official 
curricula and the dictates of locally or nationally accepted educational methodologies. Teacher autonomy 
can be a necessary condition for the development of learner autonomy (Lamb & Reinders, 2008; Tatzl, 
2016). A central aspect of teacher autonomy is the ability to employ approaches the teacher selects, 
including the use of technology. Choice may be limited by school policies, lack of digital literacy, or simply 
a workload that allows scant opportunities for exploration or professional development. Having teachers 
work together—especially in resource-strapped contexts—offers a possible avenue for both professional 
development through peer networking and for resource exchange (see Smith and Kuchah, 2016). Being 
informed consumers of technology can help teachers in guiding students in out-of-class learning. Having 
insight into software development and the basics of coding is even more helpful, as more knowledge in 
those areas can provide a better basis for making wise technology choices (Godwin-Jones, 2015). For many 
language teachers, the technology options supplied by a school or university may be limited. Instructors are 
often strongly encouraged to use only the officially supported and supplied software. In many cases, that is 
likely to be a learning management system (LMS, also known as a virtual learning environment). 
Some argue that the use of a LMS can be helpful in guiding students toward learner autonomy. Reitbauer 
and Fromm (2016) assert that such a closed learning system “allows for a greater means of control and 
therefore is likely to result in a more efficient learning process” (p. 235). In this view, encouraging affinity-
based learning “comes at a cost: the loss of control on the part of the teacher and the questionable efficiency 
18 Language Learning & Technology 
 
of a self-governed but largely unguided learning process” (Reitbauer & Fromm, 2016, p. 237). Others have 
argued for the convenience of a LMS and against introducing a variety of e-tools out of practical concerns 
“as a multitude of passwords would be required” (Orsini-Jones, 2010, p. 203). Using a LMS does not mean 
that other tools and services cannot be added, particularly as now most learning systems enable the 
integration of third-party tools. Lee (2016) used a LMS (Blackboard) and the digital workbook 
MySpanishLab, but she also introduced a variety of other tools, including Blogger, AudioBoo, and a wiki. 
If part of our task as language teachers is to prepare students for engaging in the world beyond school, 
introducing students to a variety of digital tools would seem beneficial. Skills in using a LMS hardly carry 
over to the real world (Godwin-Jones, 2012). 
Conclusion. Resisting Reductionism 
Language learning is complex, embracing as it does “the cognitive context (e.g., working memory or 
intentionality…), the social context (e.g., educational system, relationships with other learners and the 
teacher), the physical environment, the pedagogical context (e.g., the task, materials, and ways of teaching 
and learning), and the sociopolitical environment” (Zhang, 2016, p. 151). That complexity and contextual 
embeddedness is characteristic as well of what constitutes ideal conditions for autonomous language 
learning (Paiva & Braga, 2008). In analyzing SLD, this complexity is often reduced, so as to study 
individual components of the system (Blin, 2004)—as is also the case in CALL (Schulze, 2017). With 
something as complex as learner autonomy, simplification decontextualizes and misrepresents the dynamic 
process at work: 
The impromptu nature of informal learning is also an indication that it is emergent in nature, taking 
place in a complex dynamic system in which interactions between the many components in the 
system lead to the emergence of collective outcomes which might not have been easy to predict 
from an analysis of the individual components. … These outcomes depend as much on the character 
of the interactions between components as they do on the character of the components themselves. 
(Sockett & Toffoli, 2012, p. 140) 
Studying variables in isolation can be informative but may convey a cause-and-effect impression that belies 
the interdependence of individual traits, social interactions, institutional forces, socio-economic factors, and 
political or power relations. 
CT favors a retrodictive approach that works backward from outcomes (positive or negative) to analyze the 
factors that interact to guide the learner’s language trajectory. That retrospective process may point to 
aspects of the initial conditions of the learner that are meaningful or to significant encounters with particular 
online tools, services, or interest communities. Phase shifts in the trajectory—where learners move to a 
different space in their learning trajectories—can be revelatory. Discovering such dynamic turns is only 
possible if enough detail is collected about the interactions over an extended period, allowing changes to 
be seen in context, not in isolation. According to Schulze and Smith (2015), the main goal of an analysis of 
learner–computer interactions ought to be “detecting, localizing, describing, explaining, and interpreting 
change” (p. iii). In fact, ecological approaches eschew prediction in favor of explanation or description. In 
that way, they help us move beyond binary opposites, looking for reciprocal relationships, not cause and 
effect (Murray & Lamb, 2018). 
Applying ecological approaches to learner autonomy encourages us to see the learner or user in the full 
interdependence of individual and social context. In the case of learner autonomy, those connections have 
led to some quite divergent views on its meaning in social, economic, and political contexts. Some scholars 
have emphasized the relationship of autonomy to the global educational climate today, with its emphasis 
on independent skills development, lifelong learning potential, and adaptability (Benson, 2016). Warner 
and Richardson (2017) point out that the revised ACTFL World-readiness standards for learning languages 
(American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages, 2015) redefine the community standards to 
emphasize the role of language in a “global society” of “global economies and consumers” (cited in Warner 
Robert Godwin-Jones 19 
 
& Richardson, 2017, p. 203). This positions the learner as “a consumer who partakes in a new linguistic 
economy rather than as a participant in social activity” (Warner & Richardson, 2017, p. 203). Schmenk 
(2008) has shown that some aspects of the description of autonomy fit characteristics associated with 
successful business managers. 
Rather than viewing learner autonomy in the context of consumerism or business practices, another 
perspective emphasizes individual agency, through encouraging critical reflection, creativity, and personal 
initiative. Schmenk (2008) points to the discussion on education in Germany in the 1960s and 1970s when 
learner autonomy was seen in the context of social and political emancipation. In this view, language 
learning is a liberating process. Kumaravadivelu (2001) echoes this perspective in evoking “liberatory 
autonomy” (p. 547), empowering learners to become critical thinkers (see discussions in Mercer, 2013 and 
Schmenk, 2008). Liberatory autonomy seeks “to help learners recognize sociopolitical impediments that 
prevent them from realizing their full human potential, and … providing them with the intellectual and 
cognitive tools necessary to overcome them” (Kumaravadivelu, 2001, p. 547). This aligns with the idea of 
collaborative, democratic, and decentralized learning, which is instrumental in the development of learner 
autonomy. It also supports the call in recent SLA theory to look at empowering the individual learner 
(Larsen-Freeman, 2018) and developing critical literacy pedagogies that encourage learners to address real 
world issues (Warner & Dupuy, 2018). Sade (2011) suggests that a recognition of the unpredictability and 
nonlinearity in language learning 
can inspire social actions that favor those learners who, many times, are victims of the school 
system and are excluded from it due to linear and prejudiced views. The perspective of complexity 
theory helps reveal the complex nature of human beings and why, due to this nature, it is impossible 
to fit them in pre-fabricated, homogenous and essentialist models, be they theoretical or 
methodological. (p. 54) 
Viewing and treating learners as unique individuals and full-fledged human beings, rather than as learners, 
“defined by, limited and therefore reduced to measurable skills” (Holliday, 2003, p. 115) can both empower 
learners to see language learning as integral to real-world experiences and also help instructors to see the 
bigger picture of contributing to fighting stereotypes, encouraging empathy, and working toward social 
justice. 
Riding the digital wilds successfully involves learner choices and actions, along with the further 
development of internal attributes of initiative, persistence, and creativity. Also needed is the recognition 
that human development is tied to group participation and respect for the autonomous choices of others 
(Schmenk, 2008). The idea of individual autonomy can be traced back to the enlightenment and Kant’s 
conception of the modern sovereign subject (Schmenk, 2008). However, for Kant, free will can only be 
exercised by socially-integrated individuals (Lewis, 2014). Lewis (2014) applies this vision to learner 
autonomy in language learning, seeing autonomy as linked to behaviors associated with human sociality: 
“that is, identifying with other learners, helping them, responding to help received, practicing fairness, and 
collaborating as and when appropriate” (p. 57). Through social participation, individual autonomy is 
enhanced, language skills are developed, and personal identity is expanded. 
References 
American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages. (2015). World-readiness standards for 
learning languages (4th ed.). Alexandria, VA: American Council on the Teaching of Foreign 
Languages. 
Benson, P. (2001) Teaching and researching autonomy in language learning. Harlow, UK: Longman. 
Benson, P. (2006). Learner autonomy 8: Insider perspectives on autonomy in language teaching and 
learning. Dublin, Ireland: Authentik. 
20 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Benson, P. (2016). Language learner autonomy: Exploring teachers’ perspectives on theory and practices. 
In R. Barnard & J. Li (Eds.), Language learner autonomy: Teachers’ beliefs and practices in Asian 
contexts (pp. 114–133). Phnom Penh, Cambodia: IDP Education. 
Benson, P., & Chik, A. (2010). New literacies and autonomy in foreign language learning. In M. J. 
Luzón, M. N. Ruiz-Madrid, & M. L. Villanueva (Eds.), Digital genres, new literacies, and autonomy 
in language learning (pp. 63–80). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Scholars. 
Benson, P., Chik, A., & Lim, H. Y. (2003). Becoming autonomous in an Asian context: Autonomy as a 
sociocultural process. In D. Palfreyman & R. C. Smith (Eds.), Learner autonomy across cultures (pp. 
23–40). London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Blin, F. (2004). CALL and the development of learner autonomy: Towards an activity-theoretical 
perspective. ReCALL, 16(2), 377–395. 
Boulton, A. (2002). Computer corpora in language learning: DST approaches to research. Mélanges 
Crapel, 33, 79–91. 
Braga, J. D. C. F. (2013). Fractal groups: Emergent dynamics in on-line learning communities. Revista 
brasileira de linguística aplicada, 13(2), 603–623. 
Byrne, J., & Diem, R. (2014). Profiling mobile English language learners. JALT CALL Journal, 10(1), 3– 
19. 
Castro, E. (2018). Complex adaptive systems, language advising, and motivation: A longitudinal case 
study with a Brazilian student of English. System, 74, 138–148. 
Chik, A. (2014). Digital Gaming and Language Learning: Autonomy and Community. Language 
Learning & Technology, 18(2), 85–100.  
Chik, A. (2018). Learning a language for free: Space and autonomy in adult foreign language learning. In 
G. Murray & T. Lamb (Eds.), Space, place, and autonomy in language learning (pp. 56–72). New 
York, NY: Routledge. 
 Chik, A., & Breidbach, S. (2014). ‘Facebook me’ within a global community of learners of English: 
Technologizing learner autonomy. In G. Murray (Ed.), Social dimensions of autonomy in language 
learning (pp. 100–118). London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Chik, A., & Ho, J. (2017). Learn a language for free: Recreational learning among adults. System, 69, 
162–171. 
Davies, B., & Harré, R. (1999). Positioning and personhood. In R. Harré & L. Van Langenhove (Eds.), 
Positioning theory: Moral contexts of intentional action (pp. 32–52). Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
Dewaele, J. M., & Al-Saraj, T. M. (2015). Foreign language classroom anxiety of Arab learners of 
English: The effect of personality, linguistic, and sociobiographical variables. Studies in Second 
Language Learning and Teaching, 5(2), 205–228. 
Dörnyei, Z. (2015). The psychology of the language learner: Individual differences in second language 
acquisition. London, UK: Routledge. 
Ellis, N. C. (2017). Cognition, corpora, and computing: Triangulating research in usage‐based language 
learning. Language Learning, 67(S1), 40–65. 
Engeström, Y. (2001). Expansive learning at work: Toward an activity theoretical reconceptualization. 
Journal of Education and Work, 14(1), 133–156. 
Fonseka, E. G. (2003). Autonomy in a resource-poor setting: Enhancing the carnivalesque. In D. 
Palfreyman & R. C. Smith (Eds.), Learner autonomy across cultures (pp. 147–163). London, UK: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
Robert Godwin-Jones 21 
 
Gao, X. (2018). Language teacher autonomy and social censure. In A. Chik, N. Aoki, & R. Smith (Eds.). 
Autonomy in language learning and teaching (pp. 29–49). London, UK: Palgrave Pivot. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2012). Challenging hegemonies in online learning. Language Learning & Technology, 
16(2), 4–13. https://doi.org/10125/44279 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2015). The evolving roles of language teachers: Trained coders, local researchers, 
global citizens. Language Learning & Technology, 19(1), 10–22. https://doi.org/10125/44395 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2017a) Designing an intermediate level language textbook for mobile access and 
learner autonomy. Folio, 17(2), 4–11. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2017b). Smartphones and language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 
21(2), 3–17. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2018a). Chasing the butterfly effect: Informal language learning online as a complex 
system. Language Learning & Technology, 22(2), 8–27. https://doi.org/10125/44643 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2018b). Contextualized vocabulary learning. Language Learning & Technology, 
22(3), 1–19. https://doi.org/10125/44651 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2018c). Restructuring intermediate language instruction with open and student-curated 
materials. In J. Colpaert, A. Aerts, F. Cornillie (Eds.), CALL your DATA Proceedings (pp. 136–143). 
Antwerp, Belgium: University of Antwerp. Retrieved from https://www.call2018.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/07/proceedings-CALL-2018.pdf 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2018d). Using mobile devices in the language classroom. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. Retrieved from http://www.cambridge.org/elt/blog/wp-
content/uploads/2018/03/Whitepaper-mobiles-in-class.pdf 
Griffiths, C., & İnceçay, G. (2016). Styles and style-stretching: How are they related to successful 
learning? Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 45(3), 599–613. 
Hofstede, G. (1984). Culture’s consequences: International differences in work-related values. New 
York, NY: Sage. 
Holec, H. (1981). Autonomy and foreign language learning. Oxford, UK: Pergamon. 
Holliday, A. (1999). Small cultures. Applied Linguistics, 20(2), 237–264. 
Holliday, A. (2003). Social autonomy: Addressing the dangers of culturism in TESOL. In D. Palfreyman 
& R. C. Smith (Eds.), Learner autonomy across cultures (pp. 110–126). London, UK: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Isbell, D. R. (2018). Online informal language learning: Insights from a Korean learning community. 
Language Learning & Technology, 22(3), 82–102. https://doi.org/10125/44658 
Kao, T. A., & Oxford, R. L. (2014). Learning language through music: A strategy for building inspiration 
and motivation. System, 43, 114–120. 
Kostoulas, A., & Stelma, J. (2016). Intentionality and complex systems theory: A new direction for 
language learning psychology. In C. Gkonou, D. Tatzl, & S. Mercer (Eds.), New directions in 
language learning psychology (pp. 7–23). New York, NY: Springer. 
Kramsch, C., & Zhang, L. (2018). The multilingual instructor. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Kronenberg, F. (2018). Gamified imagined community simulations (ImSims) for language learning. 
FLTMag. Retrieved from https://fltmag.com/gamified-imagined-community-simulations-imsims-
language-learning/ 
Kumaravadivelu, B. (2001). Toward a postmethod pedagogy. TESOL Quarterly, 35(4), 537–560. 
22 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Lai, C. (2015). Modeling teachers’ influence on learners’ self-directed use of technology for language 
learning outside the classroom. Computers & Education, 82(1), 74–83. 
Lai, C. (2017). Autonomous language learning with technology: Beyond the classroom. London, UK: 
Bloomsbury. 
Lai, C., Hu, X., & Lyu, B. (2018). Understanding the nature of learners’ out-of-class language learning 
experience with technology. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 31(1–2), 114–143. 
Lai, C., Wang, Q., Li, X., & Hu, X. (2016). The influence of individual espoused cultural values on self-
directed use of technology for language learning beyond the classroom. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 62, 676–688. 
Lamb, M. (2004). ‘It depends on the students themselves’: Independent language learning at an 
Indonesian state school. Language, Culture, and Curriculum, 17(3), 229–245. 
Lamb, M. (2013). ‘Your mum and dad can’t teach you!’: Constraints on agency among rural learners of 
English in Indonesia. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 34(1), 14–29. 
Lamb, T., & Reinders, H. (Eds.). (2008). Learner and teacher autonomy: Concepts, realities, and 
responses. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2018). Looking ahead: Future directions in, and future research into, second 
language acquisition. Foreign Language Annals, 51, 55–72. 
Lee, L. (2016). Autonomous learning through task-based instruction in fully online language courses. 
Language Learning & Technology, 20(2), 81–97. https://doi.org/10125/44462 
Leis, A., Tohei, A., & Cooke, S. D. (2015). Smartphone assisted language learning and autonomy. 
International Journal of Computer-Assisted Language Learning and Teaching, 5(3), 75–88. 
Lewis, T. (2014). Learner autonomy and the theory of sociality. In G. Murray (Ed.), Social dimensions of 
autonomy in language learning (pp. 37–59). London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Lin, L., & Reinders, H. (2018). Students’ and teachers’ readiness for autonomy: Beliefs and practices in 
developing autonomy in the Chinese context. Asia Pacific Education Review, 19, 1–21. 
Markus, H., & Nurius, P. (1986). Possible selves. American Psychologist, 41(9), 954–969. 
McAdams, D. P., & Pals, J. L. (2006). A new big five: Fundamental principles for an integrative science 
of personality. American Psychologist, 61, 204–217. 
Mercer, S. (2011a). Language learner self-concept: Complexity, continuity, and change. System, 39(3), 
335–346. 
Mercer, S. (2011b). Understanding learner agency as a complex dynamic system. System, 39(4), 427–436. 
Mercer, S. (2013). Towards a complexity-informed pedagogy for language learning. Revista brasileira de 
linguística aplicada, 13(2), 375–398. 
Mercer, S. (2016). The contexts within me: L2 self as a complex dynamic system. In J. Kind (Ed.), The 
dynamic interplay between context and the language learner (pp. 11–28). London: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Michelson, K., & Petit, E. (2017). Becoming social actors: Designing a global simulation curriculum for 
situated language and culture learning. In S. Dubreil & S. Thorne (Eds.), Engaging the world: Social 
pedagogies and language learning (pp. 138–167). Boston, MA: Cengage. 
Moyer, A. (2017). Autonomy in second language phonology: Choice vs. limits. Language Teaching, 
50(3), 395–411. 
Robert Godwin-Jones 23 
 
Murray, G. (2014). Exploring the social dimension of autonomy in language learning. In G. Murray (Ed.), 
Social dimensions of autonomy in language learning (pp. 3–14). London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Murray, G., & Lamb, T. (2018). Space, place, autonomy, and the road not yet taken. In G. Murray & T. 
Lamb (Eds.), Space, place, and autonomy in language learning (pp. 249–262). New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Murray, G., Fujishima, N., & Uzuka, M. (2018). Social learning spaces and the invisible fence. In G. 
Murray & T. Lamb (Eds.), Space, place, and autonomy in language learning (pp. 233–246). New 
York, NY: Routledge. 
Norton, B. (2001). Non-participation, imagined communities, and the language classroom. In M. Breen 
(Ed.), Learner contributions to language learning: New directions in research (pp. 159–171). 
London, UK: Pearson Education. 
Orsini-Jones, M. (2010). Task-based development of language students’ critical digital multiliteracies and 
cybergenre awareness. In M. J. Luzón, M. N. Ruiz-Madrid, & M. L. Villanueva (Eds.), Digital 
genres, new literacies, and autonomy in language learning (pp. 197–224). Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge Scholars Publishing. 
Oxford, R. L. (2003). Toward a more systematic model of L2 learner autonomy. In D. Palfreyman & R. 
C. Smith (Eds.), Learner autonomy across cultures (pp. 75–91). London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Oxford, R. L. (2017). Teaching and researching language learning strategies: Self-regulation in context. 
London, UK: Routledge. 
Paiva, V. L. M. O. (2011). Identity, motivation, and autonomy in second language acquisition from the 
perspective of complex adaptive systems. In G. Murray, X. Gao, & T. Lamb (Eds.), Identity, 
motivation, and autonomy in language learning (pp. 57–72). Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Paiva, V. L. M. O., & Braga, J. D. C. F. (2008). The complex nature of autonomy. DELTA: 
Documentação de estudos em lingüística teórica e aplicada, 24(SPE), 441–468. 
Palfreyman, D. (2003). Introduction: Culture and learner autonomy. In D. Palfreyman & R. C. Smith 
(Eds.), Learner autonomy across cultures (pp. 1–19). London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Palfreyman, D. (2014). The ecology of learner autonomy. In G. Murray (Ed.), Social dimensions of 
autonomy in language learning (pp. 175–191). London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Poupore, G. (2018). A complex systems investigation of group work dynamics in L2 interactive tasks. 
The Modern Language Journal, 102(2), 350–370. 
Reinders, H., & White, C. (2016). 20 years of autonomy and technology: How far have we come and 
where to next? Language Learning & Technology, 20(2), 143–154. 
Reitbauer, M., & Fromm, H. (2016). Scaffolding 2.0 - Redefining the role of the teacher in online 
language learning environments. In C. Gkonou, D. Tatzl, & S. Mercer (Eds.), New directions in 
language learning psychology (pp. 233–247). New York, NY: Springer. 
Rose, H., Briggs, J. G., Boggs, J. A., Sergio, L., & Ivanova-Slavianskaia, N. (2018). A systematic review 
of language learner strategy research in the face of self-regulation. System, 72, 151–163. 
Rosell-Aguilar, F. (2017). State of the app: A taxonomy and framework for evaluating language learning 
mobile applications. CALICO Journal, 34(2), 243–258. 
Sade, L. A. (2011). Emerging selves, language learning, and motivation through the lens of chaos. In G. 
Murray, X. Gao, & T. Lamb (Eds.), Identity, motivation, and autonomy in language learning (pp. 42–
56). Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
24 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Sade, L. A. (2014). Autonomy, complexity, and networks of learning. In G. Murray (Ed.), Social 
dimensions of autonomy in language learning (pp. 155–174). London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Sauro, S. (2017). Fandom and online interest groups. In S. L. Thorne (Ed.), Language, education, and 
technology (pp. 1–12). Berlin, Germany: Springer. 
Schmenk, B. (2005). Globalizing learner autonomy. TESOL Quarterly, 39(1), 107–118. 
Schmenk, B. (2008). Lernerautonomie: Karriere und sloganisierung des autonomiebegriffs. Tübingen, 
Germany: Narr. 
Scholz, K., & Schulze, M. (2017). Digital-gaming trajectories and second language development. 
Language Learning & Technology, 21(1), 99–119. 
Schulze, M. (2017). Complexity approaches to computer-assisted language learning. In S. Thorne & S. 
May (Eds.), Language, education, and technology (pp. 301–312). Berlin, Germany: Springer. 
Schulze, M., & Smith, B. (2015). In theory–We could be better. CALICO Journal, 32(1), i–vi. 
Schwienhorst, K. (2012). Learner autonomy and CALL environments. London, UK: Routledge. 
Silva, W. (2018). Autonomous learning support base: Enhancing autonomy in a TEFL undergraduate 
program. In G. Murray & T. Lamb (Eds.), Space, place, and autonomy in language learning (pp. 
219–232). New York, NY: Routledge. 
Smith, R., & Kuchah, K. (2016). Researching teacher associations. ELT Journal, 70(2), 212–221. 
Smith, R., Kuchah, K., & Lamb, M. (2018). Learner autonomy in developing countries. In A. Chik, N. 
Aoki, & R. Smith (Eds.). Autonomy in language learning and teaching (pp. 7–27). London, UK: 
Palgrave Pivot. 
Sockett, G. (2013). Understanding the online informal learning of English as a complex dynamic system: 
An emic approach. ReCALL, 25(1), 48–62. 
Sockett, G. (2014). The online informal learning of English. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Sockett, G., & Toffoli, D. (2012). Beyond learner autonomy: A dynamic systems view of the informal 
learning of English in virtual online communities. ReCALL, 24(2), 138–151. 
Sundqvist, P., & Sylvén, L. K. (2016). Extramural English in teaching and learning. London, UK: 
Palgrave Macmillan.  
Tatzl, D. (2016). A systemic view of learner autonomy. In C. Gkonou, D. Tatzl, & S. Mercer (Eds.), New 
directions in language learning psychology (pp. 39–53). New York, NY: Springer. 
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38–67. 
Toohey, K., & Norton, B. (2003). Learner autonomy as agency in sociocultural settings. In D. Palfreyman 
& R. C. Smith (Eds.), Learner autonomy across cultures (pp. 58–72). London, UK: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Trinder, R. (2016). Blending technology and face-to-face: Advanced students’ choices. ReCALL, 28(1), 
83–102. 
Tseng, W. T., Dörnyei, Z., & Schmitt, N. (2006). A new approach to assessing strategic learning: The 
case of self-regulation in vocabulary acquisition. Applied Linguistics, 27(1), 78–102. 
Ushioda, E. (2011). Language learning motivation, self, and identity: Current theoretical perspectives. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 24(3), 199–210. 
Robert Godwin-Jones 25 
 
van Lier, L. (2000). From input to affordance: Social-interactive learning from an ecological perspective. 
In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 245–260). Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press. 
Viberg, O., & Grönlund, Å. (2013). Cross-cultural analysis of users’ attitudes toward the use of mobile 
devices in second and foreign language learning in higher education: A case from Sweden and China. 
Computers & Education, 69, 169–180. 
Warner, C., & Chen, H. I. (2017). Designing talk in social networks: What Facebook teaches about 
conversation. Language Learning & Technology, 21(2), 121–138. 
Warner, C., & Dupuy, B. (2018). Moving toward multiliteracies in foreign language teaching: Past and 
present perspectives… and beyond. Foreign Language Annals, 51(1), 116–128. 
Warner, C., & Richardson, D. (2017). Beyond participation: Symbolic struggles with(in) digital social 
media in the l2 classroom. In S. Dubreil & S. Thorne (Eds.), Engaging the world: Social pedagogies 
and language learning (pp. 199–226). Boston, MA: Cengage. 
Wu, Z. (2018). Positioning (mis)aligned: The (un)making of intercultural asynchronous computer-
mediated communication. Language Learning & Technology, 22(2), 75–94. 
https://doi.org/10125/44637 
Zhang, L. J. (2016). A dynamic metacognitive systems perspective on language learner autonomy. In R. 
Barnard & J. Li (Eds.), Language learner autonomy: Teachers’ beliefs and practices in East Asian 
contexts (pp. 150–166). Phnom Penh, Cambodia: IDP Education 
