Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2019, Volume 23, Issue 1 
pp. 72–86 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2019 Signe Hannibal Jensen 
 
 
Language learning in the wild: A young user 
perspective 
Signe Hannibal Jensen, University of Southern Denmark 
Abstract 
Through the analytical lens of activity theory (Leontiev, 1978, Lantolf & Thorne, 2006), the present study 
investigates the uptake of affordances for language learning by young (ages 7–11) Danish children (N = 
15) in their engagement with English language media in the digital wild. Drawing on ethnographic 
interviews (Spradley, 1979), during which the participants engaged in online English language activities 
(e.g., gaming, snapchatting, etc.), the study shows that most of the participants were motivated in their 
engagement with English by social and higher cognitive motives (Lompscher, 1999). They engaged 
substantially with affordances for language learning (i.e., deliberately chose English-language content 
over Danish), engaged in chats, and read and listened to online content. Some, on the other hand, were 
found to be motivated by lower cognitive motives, resulting in less engagement with the affordances. The 
study also found a substantial difference between perceptions of English in and outside school. The study 
adds new insights to an under-researched area, while giving voice to young users of English, as called for 
by Ushioda (2008, p. 29). 
Keywords: Extramural English, Young Learners, Motivation, Activity Theory 
Language(s) Learned in This Study: English 
APA Citation: Hannibal Jensen, S. (2019). Language learning in the wild: A young user perspective. 
Language Learning & Technology, 23(1), 72–86. https://doi.org/10125/44673 
Introduction and Aims 
This article focuses on the engagement of Danish 7- to 11-year-old children (young users)1 with English-
language activities in the wild2—an “exogenous activity system … not directly related to education” 
(Lantolf & Thorne, 2006, p. 225)—and the specific uptake of language-learning affordances related to this 
engagement (Gibson, 2012). Research on children’s use of English as a mediating language for activities 
in the wild is becoming increasingly important with English as the lingua franca of the world—even being 
coined a “basic educational skill” (Ushioda, 2011, p. 1)—and the popularity of Web 2.0. Only few studies 
have been conducted on the content of, or engagement with, English in the wild for young users. A few 
qualitative studies exist (e.g., Piirainen-Marsh, 2011; Turgut & İrgin, 2009), but studies are mostly 
quantitative in nature (e.g., De Wilde & Eyckmans, 2017; Hannibal Jensen, 2017; Kuppens, 2010; Lindgren 
& Muñoz, 2013; Sundqvist & Sylvén, 2014; Sylvén & Sundqvist, 2012; Unsworth, Persson, Prins, & De 
Bot, 2014). While providing useful mappings and overviews of type and intensity of engagement and 
identifying possible correlations with language learning, quantitative studies do not reveal specific details 
of the engagement, such as the nature of the engagement, the nature of the activities engaged in, and the 
specific purposes of the engagement with the second language (L2). However, these questions seem 
particularly apt for gaining knowledge on the nature of the learning process in the wild. 
This study adds details of young users’ engagement with English in the wild and additionally provides a 
description of the affordances for language learning that are taken up by children in their engagement. 
Through an emic focus grounded in an activity-theory framework, the study provides a thick description of 
the informal activity system (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006, p. 225), thus providing insights into an informal 
young learner context. As Ushioda (2008) notes, “research insights from learners themselves in a variety 
Signe Hannibal Jensen 73 
 
of learning contexts are much needed to substantiate and inform our theorizing” (p. 29). 
Following an introduction of the research topic, the article briefly describes some previous studies on 
engagement with English in the wild among young users. Hereafter, the activity theory (AT) theoretical 
framework is introduced, by relating a few studies within AT. Subsequently, the study is described (i.e., 
methodology, ethics, and design), followed by its findings and a discussion. Finally, remarks on limitations 
and suggestions for further research are made and the paper is rounded off with a conclusion including 
pedagogical implications. 
Background 
English in Denmark 
Anglo language and culture enjoy high status in Denmark, with English being promoted top-down as well 
as bottom-up. A 2014 governmental decision to lower the starting age for learning English from 3rd to 1st 
grade in primary school, as well as the decision by Danish universities to offer many degree programs 
exclusively in English (Study in Denmark, 2017), bear evidence of such top-down promotions of English. 
Furthermore, with the airing of locally produced shows by Danish national television with titles such as 
Iza’s Stepz or Pendler kids, the value of Anglo culture is clearly recognized. A case in point of the bottom-
up promotion of English is YouTube productions made by children and young people; where popularity 
lists reveal that 50% of the 100 most popular Danish YouTubers have assumed English names 
(DreamModels.dk, 2017). 
English, to a considerable extent, gains its status bottom-up via digital and online media. It is difficult to 
overestimate the importance of the rise of Web 2.0 or to disregard the importance of children as digital 
consumers. Mascheroni and Ólafsson (2014) report in a summary of a European survey, EU Kids Online, 
that the average European child goes online at the age of nine; for Danish children, the online debut starts 
at the age of seven. Furthermore, 79% of European children use the Internet every day, compared to the 
Danish average of 94%. Additionally, 55% of European children between the ages of 9 and 16 have access 
to the Internet at home in their own bedroom, compared to 77% in Denmark. It is fair to assume that a lot 
of this engagement is mediated in English and is spent on various leisure activities, as the default language 
of digital games is English (Waters, 2007). In fact, Hannibal Jensen (2017) found that Danish children 
between the ages of 8 and 10 spend an average of six hours weekly engaging in English-language activities 
in the digital wild. 
Previous Studies on Language Learning in the Wild 
Research on language learning by young users in the wild is scarce. However, existing research suggests 
that language learning in such a context is possible. In an Icelandic study, Lefever (2010) showed how 
parents attribute their children’s L2 English knowledge, gained before formal English schooling, to 
extramural English language activities. It was speculated that the boys’ conversational skills, which were 
superior to the girls’, might be attributed to gaming. In a study on 11- to 12-year-old children, Sylvén and 
Sundqvist (2012) found a positive relationship between extramural English gaming and listening 
comprehension, reading abilities, and vocabulary. Similarly, Sundqvist and Sylvén (2014), in a study on 
10-year-olds, reported that frequent gamers were highly motivated for language learning. In a study on 
extramural English gaming, Hannibal Jensen (2017) showed how Danish children’s—notably boys’—
gaming activities were related to their vocabulary scores (see also, Kuppens, 2010; Lindgren & Muñoz, 
2013). In a study using conversation analysis, Piirainen-Marsh and Tainio (2009) investigated gameplay 
between young Finnish boys (10–14 years old) and found evidence for language learning through 
engagement with game terminology, repetition, and imitation. Also, Turgut and İrgin (2009), through 
observational studies and semi-structured interviews, found that Turkish children (ages 10–14) playing 
games at an internet café had opportunities for vocabulary learning through their motivated use of strategies 
for understanding unknown vocabulary. Thus, research confirms the fruitfulness of investigating language 
learning in the wild and the need to add more qualitative perspectives to the research. 
74 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Theoretical Background 
The present study focuses on “learning through activity” (Lompscher, 1999, p. 13) in the wild, often referred 
to as incidental learning, through an AT framework. Incidental learning is understood as “learning in 
various activity modes (play, everyday communication, work, etc.) without any special learning goal 
(incidental learning as a result of activity directed towards other goals than learning)” (Lompscher, 1999, 
pp. 13–14). A variety of factors are considered important for incidental and intentional language learning. 
In particular, the importance of motivation has a long history in L2 acquisition research and a prominent 
place within AT. This following section discusses motivation in relation to language learning, mainly from 
an AT perspective. 
In the past decades, L2 motivation research has moved beyond considering learner-internal variables in 
isolation to recognizing the importance of social and contextual factors, such as the learning environment 
and experience for motivation (see Djigunovic & Basaric, 2007; Dörnyei, 2009a; Lantolf & Thorne, 2006; 
Pavlenko, 2002; Ushioda, 2008). Importantly, motivation is increasingly being viewed as an unstable force 
subject to fluctuations, rather than as a stable learner-internal variable (see Lantolf & Thorne, 2006; Nardi, 
1996). Notably, the notion of investment has become important, recognizing that the presence of motivation 
does not guarantee investment in language learning. Learners may show little investment in learning a 
language, despite being very motivated. They may find the learning experience detrimental to their values 
and consequently refrain from investing in language learning. On the other hand, if the learning experience 
supports the learner’s sense of identity and is seen to enable attractive future identities, the learner is likely 
to invest in the learning process (Norton, 2013). The concept of identity has long been of interest in 
motivational L2 research in relation to motivated behavior. This could be driven either by desire for 
integration into a specific ethnolinguistic community (as especially espoused by Gardner, 1988) or by 
identification wanting to “become part of a wider, global community” (Henry & Cliffordson, 2015, p. 2; 
see also Dörnyei, 2009a; Ushioda, 2008). Generally, it is found that positive identification with the target 
language community (be it for integration or not) may positively affect the motivation to learn and speak 
the language of a given community or culture (Dörnyei, 2009b). 
The underlying motives for the action of individuals is central in AT, making it a useful method for 
investigating motivational processes in learning (Ushioda, 2007). In AT, the notion of activity denotes the 
specific doings of individuals when they participate in various tasks, thus differing from the conventional 
definition of an activity (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006, p. 234). Importantly, the idea that tasks are carried out in 
a uniform manner is rejected—that is, that individuals will invariably carry out different activities although 
engaging in similar tasks (for a discussion of task vs. activity, see Coughlan & Duff, 1994). This is because 
individuals are guided in their personal actions by, among other factors, their motives and goals. In other 
words, “the orientation of the individual is key to how any task is carried out” (McCafferty, Roebuck, & 
Wayland, 2001, p. 293). 
AT distinguishes three overall analytical levels of behavior in an activity system. The first level, called the 
activity level, is “motivated by needs and desires” (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006, p. 216) and may help uncover 
why actions take place. This level is concerned with the underlying motives guiding the direction and nature 
of an activity (Lompscher, 1999, p. 13). That is, a need or desire creates in the individual a motive for 
pursuing an objective. The way this objective is carried out is determined by the nature of the motives. 
Second, the level of action aims to uncover the actual actions taking place—that is, the character and 
direction of the activity (based on its motives). Third, the level of operations uncovers how actions are 
carried out (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006). Three groups of motives are identified as being of key significance 
for learning, whereof social and cognitive motives are important in the present context (Lompscher, 1999, 
p. 16). The social motive for engagement and learning involves identification with other persons, as well as 
the desire to be part of significant groups. Thus, an overarching socially-based motive is the personal 
significance of a given activity (i.e., leaners will act on motives of personal significance to them; see Lantolf 
& Pavlenko, 2001). Thus, AT also draws on the relevance of emotions, as what is significant to individuals 
is tied to their emotions (Lompscher, 1999). Higher and lower cognitive motives for learning are also 
Signe Hannibal Jensen 75 
 
important. The former type of motive is intrinsic and develops through intensive recurring activities 
(Lantolf & Thorne, 2006). The type of motivation arising from such a motive inspires learners to engage 
with learning, not for the sake of a concrete end result, but for the sake of learning and engaging with the 
subject. The latter type of motive refers to learning for the mere purpose of meeting requirements, such as, 
for example, passing a course. These different motives lead to different types of motivation and different 
ways of engagement (Lantolf & Pavlenko, 2001; Lantolf & Thorne, 2006; Nardi, 1996). AT studies, as 
those presented below, show the significance of these different types of motives for learning. 
Based on learner logs and interviews, Gillette (1994) conducted a study of learners of French, half effective 
and the other half ineffective learners (based on proficiency tests). Findings showed that learners’ motives 
and past learning experiences guided their behavior in class. Engagement in class was based either on the 
motive of truly wanting to learn the language (higher cognitive motives), or by more instrumental motives 
of fulfilling the course requirements (lower cognitive motives). Learners motivated by lower cognitive 
orientations were found to limit their efforts to a minimum. Whereas, in contrast, the effective learners put 
in more effort than required. The students were found to both differ in their levels of investment (cf. Norton, 
2013) as well as ways of engagement. For example, only the effective learners utilized the more effective 
strategy of inferencing (p. 203) along with using dictionaries. The ineffective learners relied merely on 
dictionary use, which they found frustrating and ineffective, speculated to be due to a failure to 
meaningfully integrate the words into the appropriate context. Gillette noted that effective learners used 
more functional strategies which are more productive (1994, p. 204). 
Another AT study, carried out by McCafferty et al. (2001), also emphasized the importance of the 
functionality of language use for incidental learning. In an experimental study on foreign language learning, 
the researchers found that in specific tasks created for the experiment, words which were closely connected 
to carrying out goal-directed actions were better retained than less-prominent words in the tasks. Words 
closely connected to carrying out the goals of the tasks were learner-generated words, pre-given words that 
learners actively used themselves, or words that needed defining for learners to proceed with the activity 
(p. 292). 
The significance of the learning environment in shaping learner motives has also been investigated by AT 
studies, highlighting the inherently unstable nature of motivation (cf. Lantolf & Pavlenko, 2001). Lantolf 
and Genung (2002) found that a highly-motivated language learner became increasingly demotivated by 
the learning context and shifted from having higher cognitive to lower cognitive motives for learning 
(Lantolf & Thorne, 2006). Their subject, PG, was a graduate student and colonel in the U.S. Army learning 
Chinese. Initially PG was very motivated to learn the language. However, she quickly found that the 
learning environment was counterproductive to her identity as a learner, being based on drills rather than 
interaction (cf. Norton, 2013). Consequently, PG’s motivation went from a higher cognitive orientation of 
genuine interest in learning the language to a lower cognitive orientation where she merely put in the effort 
needed to pass the course. 
Agency and motives are also mediated by material and symbolic tools, as well as by social formations 
(Lantolf & Thorne, 2006, p. 239). In a study on a university student (Kristen) studying French, Thorne 
(2003) found that technology and sociality changed Kristen’s motives and engagement in the learning 
process in a positive direction toward what could be interpreted as social and higher cognitive motives for 
engagement. For a French university course, Kirsten was assigned a French partner, Oliver, with whom she 
was to engage in exchange via email. After a delay where Kirsten did not hear from Oliver, causing her 
much frustration, they started chatting and quickly replaced email with and online instant messenger, 
providing quick and flexible communication. The use of this more flexible tool along with the social nature 
of the exchanges—where Kirsten and Oliver became friends rather than educational partners—afforded 
much language learning. Through the chats, Kirsten discovered, to her pride, that she was able to engage 
in meaningful conversations in French. She also picked up on grammar points that she had previously not 
been able to learn. Oliver’s feedback along with Kirsten’s attention to his conversational use of the language, 
helped her internalize these uses. One benefit of the chat exchange highlighted by Thorne (2003) was that, 
76 Language Learning & Technology 
 
besides creating a highly authentic L2 environment, it also afforded possibilities to co-construct meaning 
with others within the zone of proximal development (Vygotsky, 1978), identified as highly beneficial for 
language learning (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006). 
Vosburg (2017) conducted a study with American college students studying German. The students played 
World of Warcraft on a German server for eight weeks by attending two 90-minute gaming sessions each 
week. They played from home, trying to create an out-of-school environment. Each was assigned to a team 
consisting of a German native speaker, (a language guide, or LG), one experienced player, one novice, and 
other randomly assigned players. The study examined the effects of native speaker presence and effect of 
group dynamics on language learning, specifically on the productive use of the L2 and on motivation. The 
study was based on chat transcripts and interviews. Participants were instructed to use as much German as 
possible, and the LG was asked to let conversations arise naturally. The study found that the LG was 
perceived as the single most important factor in relation to motivation and language practice and in relation 
to gains from feedback and interaction. Group dynamics, however, were primarily viewed negatively. The 
groups had little in common, little to talk about, and had different levels of motivation for learning German. 
Some were highly motivated, and others merely wished to pass their class. Thus, the potential benefits of 
being part of a community of practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991), possibly leading to social and higher 
cognitive learning motives, were absent. The potential benefits of participation in a community of practice 
is to learn from social participation through engagement. Participation in such communities is inspired by 
a common ground around which the community is formed (Lave & Wenger, 1991). 
Despite the difference in focus between the studies above and the present study (i.e., formal vs. informal 
contexts), the AT framework seems particularly apt for investigating learning in informal contexts due to 
the emic view of learner motives and actions (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006, p. 238; see also Nardi, 1996). By 
investigating which motives lie behind the engagement with English-language mediated activities and by 
examining the actions that are carried out based on these motives (i.e., how the language is being engaged 
with), much knowledge may be gained about young users’ engagement with affordances for language 
learning in the wild. 
The present study poses the following two research questions: 
1. Which motives (social and cognitive) are children driven by in their use of English in L2 English-
mediated activities? 
2. How do children engage with L2 English based on their motives? 
The Study 
Method 
Participants 
Fifteen children were part of the present study (see Table 1). The participants were tied to a government-
funded project on the importance of age for learning English (Cadierno & Eskildsen, 2014). Participants 
were selected for the present study based on two criteria: (a) they engaged regularly in English-language 
activities outside school (set to seven hours of weekly engagement) and (b) they engaged in gender-typical 
activities as described by Hannibal Jensen (2017; i.e., the boys primarily engaged in gaming and YouTube 
watching and girls in net-based activities, music, and some gaming). Selection was based on language 
diaries (LDs) and talks at project schools. The participants had all reported engagement with English in the 
wild in a 1-week LD, (for details, see Hannibal Jensen, 2017). Furthermore, the researcher was present in 
the project schools during the three data collection rounds, providing opportunities to talk to children about 
their L2 habits in the wild as well as to establish rapport (Gibson, 2012). Based on the LDs and talks, seven 
focal participants were selected for interviews in congruence with the above-mentioned selection criteria 
(see the names in bold type in Table 1). For the focus children who engaged in such activities with friends 
(i.e., Alvira, Ferdinand, Sean, and Vivian), the friends were also recruited, providing an authentic view of 
Signe Hannibal Jensen 77 
 
their engagement in focus group interviews. Three focal participants engaged primarily alone and were, 
therefore, and for ecological validity, interviewed individually (i.e., Antonio, Arnold, and Nina). 
Table 1. Participants 
Interview Type Interview No. Name Gender Age 
Group 1 Ferdinand M 11 
  Karl (friend) M 11 
Group 2 Alvira F 11 
  Karen (friend) F 11 
  Katharina (friend) F 11 
  Sheila (friend) F 11 
Group 3 Sean M 9 
  Niels (friend) M 9 
  Robert (friend) M 9 
Group 4 Vivian F 9 
  Serena (friend) F 9 
  Johanne (friend) F 9 
Individual 5 Antonio M 11 
Individual 6 Arnold M 9 
Individual 7 Nina F 7 
Notes. The names in this study are aliases. The ages are those at the time of the interviews. 
Ethics 
Informed parental consent was obtained via emails prior to all interviews. Participants appeared 
comfortable and interested in sharing their knowledge. All the data were anonymized, and the participants 
were given pseudonyms. 
Design 
Interviews were conducted in Danish after school hours in the fall of 2016. The study employed descriptive 
ethnographic interviewing (Spradley, 1979). The participants took the interviewer on a guided tour through 
the English-mediated activities they engaged in on a regular basis by engaging in the activities while being 
interviewed. Spradley notes that “descriptive questions aim to elicit a large sample of utterances in the 
informants’ native language” (1979, p. 49) and can provide an extensive knowledge about the lifeworlds of 
the participants. In total, there were four focus group interviews and three individual interviews. Each 
interview was video recorded and lasted 60–90 minutes. 
Analysis and Methodology 
Data were transcribed verbatim including non-linguistic details of relevance to the utterances (e.g., “child 
typing: ‘Best goals ever,’”) and were subsequently imported into NVivo. All instances of engagement 
(actions) with English, along with details of the engagement were identified (e.g., “watching YouTube”) 
and coded as engagement with English. Subsequently, these actions were grouped according to motives 
(social and higher and lower cognitive). When possible, motives were grounded in an emic perspective (i.e., 
the child would explicitly state a motive). When not, they were grounded in the researcher’s interpretation 
and analysis of the child’s action. Within the coding for motives, actions were also coded according to 
strategy (i.e., strategies for understanding unknown linguistic items and for using English, thus highlighting 
78 Language Learning & Technology 
 
strategy use in relation to motive). These categories were found relevant given their focus in previous AT 
studies (cf. Gillette, 1994). 
The coding process was iterative throughout. Recordings were watched on numerous occasions, the 
transcripts scrutinized for familiarization, and the coding was subject to numerous discussions with fellow 
researchers. One code, speaking English (i.e., instances where children code-switched and used English 
rather than Danish), was very comprehensive and was therefore left out, to be discussed elsewhere. All the 
examples were translated into English by the researcher. 
Findings and Discussion 
Findings showed that the young users, to a large degree, seemed driven by social and higher cognitive 
motives in their engagement with English. By token of their great interest in the activities, the children 
engaged extensively with English. 11-year-old Alvira, for example, engaged in many different activities. 
She watched Netflix series, such as Gossip Girls, with English dialogue (sometimes Danish subtitles), 
subscribed to English-language written lifehacks via Instagram (for good advice or daily quotes), followed 
people on Snapchat, and watched various American vloggers (for advice on fashion and their lives in 
general). Many of the older girls read and listened to English-language updates on various social media 
sites (e.g., Snapchat) and occasionally also made written comments in English. 7-year-old Nina, on the 
other hand, played games and watched a great number of fairytale-like YouTube videos on these games. 
Similarly, the boys would play different games and watch YouTube videos on different topics, such as 
gaming walkthroughs or various challenges. Some (Antonio, Arnold, Ferdinand, and Karl) would also 
engage in online chats. Below, children’s specific engagements with the L2 are discussed in two subsections: 
(a) higher cognitive and social motives and (b) lower cognitive motives. 
Higher Cognitive and Social Motives 
Personal Significance 
Findings showed that both the content and the mediating language of the activities were of great personal 
significance to the children. The following statements exemplify such positive sentiments: 
Ferdinand: I think English sounds kinda more, it’s a cooler language. 
Arnold: I know that here [YouTube/game] they speak English fluently and I like that better [than school 
English]. 
Antonio: Well, the other [school English] that’s kind of a lot stranger than what I normally hear—it’s 
like a different accent and stuff. 
Serena: They [English-speaking YouTubers as opposed to Danish] know more [in general]. 
Most of the children stated that English-language activities were more interesting (more up to date) than 
Danish language activities, motivating them to seek to understand the content. In fact, based on content and 
language, most of the children clearly stated that they preferred to watch YouTube videos mediated in 
English rather than Danish. It is interesting to note that Antonio (above) stated how “school English” was 
stranger than what he “normally hears,” indicating that, to him, English was the norm in the wild, even at 
the early age of 11. Similarly, Arnold (age nine) found English in the wild to be preferred over school 
English, and even over Danish. Alvira, on the other hand, noted that she found English inside and outside 
school complementary, stating that she learned “girly” words outside school, whereas her basic vocabulary 
was learned in school. 
Clearly, engaging with and investing in the English language outside school offered the children attractive 
possibilities, and was of great personal significance, motivating investment in using the language (cf. 
Dörnyei & Ushioda, 2009; Norton, 2013). 
Another salient reflection of the positive status of English was found in the children’s use of Anglo-
Signe Hannibal Jensen 79 
 
sounding names for their gaming characters (e.g., Milky, Hank, Fluff, GGUSA)—a custom identified by 
Bechar-Israeli (1995) as a way of “highlighting” and “playing” with identity (p. 15). This practice mirrored 
Danish YouTubers’ use of Anglo names (cf. DreamModels.dk, 2017), clearly testifying of the bottom-up 
promotion of English. The children thus identified positively with the people and the content of the Anglo 
space, stating this explicitly and showing it implicitly by playing with Anglo identities themselves. Keeping 
in mind the importance of personal significance and positive emotions toward using (and learning) the 
language found in studies by Gillette (1994) and Thorne (2003), it is safe to assume that the children in the 
present study, when possible, had the incentive to engage actively and positively with the mediating 
language (see also Lantolf & Pavlenko, 2001; Norton, 2013). 
Sociality of Engagement 
AT emphasizes how language learning is inherently social in nature, initially taking place in the social 
sphere to later become internalized by the individual. Thus, learning is not seen as an individual process 
aimed at the mere acquisition of linguistic forms, but rather as a socially-, externally-, as well as internally-
mediated process aimed at participation in the sociocultural world (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006). 
Findings in the present study highlight how the use of L2 English in the wild offers opportunities to become 
part of a wider community of practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991). Indeed, they show that some of the children 
were motivated to use English by their wishes to engage in and be part of different communities of practice 
(e.g., communities around specific games). The participants were aware of—and most were not reluctant 
to—the fact that engagement with English was required to participate. A good example of this was the 
choice of English-mediated activities over Danish-language activities, even when the language settings 
offered a choice. Antonio noted the following: 
I mostly have [games] in English because then it’s easier to find something when everybody else has it 
in English and then if [YouTubers] call it something I can’t just go look it up when it’s in Danish [in 
the game] … And then what is it really called in Danish, umm? 
Thus, the choice of English was not only founded on necessity or because the fun activities were in English, 
but also, importantly, on the wish to be part of a larger community of expertise. That is, in order to benefit 
from knowledge, as found on YouTube for example (which, according to the children, offered an immense 
community of expertise within the gaming world), it was advisable to keep within the default language, 
English. Furthermore, the example shows an important interrelation between the language of playing games 
and watching YouTube videos, which was evident throughout the data and which seemed to provide ample 
opportunities for situated engagement with English. All children who played games would watch some type 
of complementary YouTube video on the gaming topic. We may speculate that the association between 
images from the games—relatable from personal, meaningful engagement in games—coupled with words 
and images on YouTube would be beneficial for language learning. This is because the user was personally 
engaged in the activity of playing the game as well emotionally engaged with the cognitive operations 
surrounding the engagement with the YouTube videos. Summed up by Gee, (2012) “players learn by doing, 
and they have images and experiences to give deep meaning to the words and texts they read [and hear] 
later, in order to resource their play and learning.” (p. xii). 
Some of the children would play online games and would join English-speaking teams. Through this, they 
gained access to an extended world of English and engaged with affordances for language learning by 
putting the language to active use (cf. McCafferty et al., 2001; Swain, 2000). They told the researcher that 
participation in online games required attention to the chat or one could be “thrown off the team.” Game 
play and advancement was not the only reason for engaging in chats. Karl also specifically noted the 
importance of the social aspect. Interestingly, Arnold (age nine) told the researcher that he would engage 
in chats in accordance with his abilities; he would try to read the chats but, due to his age, was unable yet 
to write chats himself. However, he was clearly drawn by the interesting universe offered by the chat.  
Antonio described engaging in a series of chats with an American gamer (called Big Ace) and getting help 
in Sky Factory (a mod pack for Minecraft): 
80 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Well, through Sky Factory in the beginning Thomas [a friend] and I helped each other. Then he didn’t 
want to play anymore, and I couldn’t ask him to help because then he was no longer updated on the 
game…then umm we had been getting help from someone called Big Ace… and he often helps me—
he’s the kinda guy that just knows everything and runs all mods and stuff and then he’s just really game-
like. He’s had everything automatized—I also have that now but in the beginning, he helped me with 
stuff if I didn’t know how to do it.… He was really nice and I could add him to my island… 
This situation seemed to offer a classic example of scaffolding, where a mentor and a novice co-created 
learning and development together within the zone of proximal development (i.e., within the confines of 
what, in this case, Antonio might achieve individually and the higher level of potential development that 
they were able to reach together; see Lantolf & Thorne, 2006). This situation resembles that of Kirsten and 
her chats with Oliver (in Thorne, 2003). 
LeVelle and Levis (2014) point to another benefit of “social involvement” with speakers of the L2, arguing 
it provides “opportunities to notice how people talk, how they interact, the ways in which they package 
their words and gestures, and the sociolinguistically marked variants that evoke comfort in interactions” (p. 
452). This became evident through the perception of the target community speakers’ language as more 
authentic and through the fact that the young users did indeed notice “how they talk.” In fact, Nina (age 
seven) pronounced the English words she would occasionally use to describe different YouTube videos 
(e.g., the names of characters, Ramona, or names of items, pickaxe), with the accent of the YouTuber (i.e., 
either American or British accent). 
Strategies 
In her study, Gillette (1994) found that effective learners employed several productive strategies in order 
to fulfill their goals of learning the language. Swain (2000) notes that “one might hypothesize that learners 
seek solutions to their linguistic difficulties when the social activity they are engaged in offers them an 
incentive to do so, and the means to do so” (p. 100). And, indeed, such is also the case for users in the wild. 
In the present study, language learning was not the primary goal. However, the significance of and interest 
in the activities prompted the users to employ various strategies in order to understand the language. 
Sometimes the children would use strategies for understanding the language of the activities, and sometimes 
language was used as a strategy for advancing, or simply participating, in an activity. 
Musical.ly, an app used to create personal sing-along videos while simultaneously making gestures to match 
the words, was specifically mentioned as a medium where one could attend to and understand the language. 
Giving a tour of Musical.ly, Alvira said the following:  
You need to listen to the lyrics and then find out what it means and then make gestures. 
Also, when listening to music online, the younger girls occasionally added lyrics to help them understand 
the song. The most common strategies were guessing from the context (or inferencing), using an online 
translation tool, and asking family members (similar to strategies used by Turkish children as discussed in 
the study by Turgut & İrgin, 2009). 
Inferencing was commonly used as a strategy to understand unknown words: 
Sean: Well [outside as opposed to inside school] they don’t say hello that means hi that they don’t like 
say in the games. There they just say it and then it’s up to you to figure it out. 
Karen: Then sometimes there are some things that you don’t quite understand but if you then understand 
other things then it’s easier to understand it when you see the connection between things. 
Nina (using the context of her first language): If I cannot understand it, I try to remember something in 
Danish and then see if I will then know what it is and stuff like that. 
As noted, Gillette (1994) found that inferencing was only employed by her effective learners who were 
motivated by higher cognitive motives for language learning. Evidently, children as young as seven (Nina) 
Signe Hannibal Jensen 81 
 
likewise employed such strategies, creating for themselves affordances for language learning. Apart from 
the importance of the children’s motivation for understanding the language, the multimodal nature of the 
activities was undoubtedly helpful. Previous research suggests that multimodal cues offer important 
information in the deciphering of unknown words (Elley, 1989; for the importance of multimodality for 
language development, also see Ortega, 2015). 
Many children also used Google Translate for online translation: 
Antonio: And then I can also for example if someone writes to me: “No you have to wait for a while”, 
in the beginning I did not know what “wait” was in English and then they said it and I thought what 
kind of word is that? And then I went to Google translate and then I found out that something is called 
patience or something like that. 
Interestingly, Gillette (1994) found that her ineffective learners relied solely on dictionary use for unknown 
vocabulary, with little success. She argues that this might have been due to the analytical rather than 
functional nature of their dictionary use where words were merely looked up and not incorporated into 
meaningful use. As is evident from Antonio’s example, his type of dictionary use was functional. A key 
function was to provide pragmatic knowledge which was called for by the social context. The use was 
highly meaningful as the knowledge was needed for Antonio’s participation in the gaming team (i.e., he 
seemed to be driven by a social motive). 
Even if they found Google Translate useful, some children also used Google translate as a derogatory term, 
indicating awareness that use of this tool also required a certain amount of critical sense. As a positive 
consequence, this tool may also draw attention to meta- knowledge about language and language use, 
causing the users to reflect on the language (Swain, 2000). 
The above engagements with English are examples of the goal-oriented nature of language use, be it through 
incorporating words and phrases into songs to fit gestures, through inferencing words and trying to 
understand the bigger picture, or through looking up words to understand a personal message. These uses 
were all functional and personally meaningful. Thus, keeping with the findings of McCafferty et al. (2001), 
they seem potentially beneficial for the retention of lexical items (i.e., they all serve as important lexical 
items for goal-directed behavior). 
The children also used strategies, involving English, for advancing in their activities. Thus, some children 
wrote in English when they searched the web for information. Antonio, for example, often searched the 
web for game-related information: 
And then there’s this grill and stuff and then you have to use gasoline for it. Initially I didn’t know how 
to make gasoline—it didn’t say anywhere and not many knew kind of, well, Thomas [friend] didn’t 
know, my big brother didn’t know and then I went to YouTube to search “How to make benzin”… umm 
“gasoline” and then I figured it out like that. 
Karl also writes English in Minecraft to make so-called command blocks, enabling him to build bigger 
structures faster and offering him the possibility to teleport and heal. The children were thus goal-oriented 
in their use of opportunities to listen to and write English, providing the possibility to engage with authentic 
English and, for some, the possibility to produce English language through writing. 
In sum, higher cognitive motives for engaging with the English language—making it a sub in goal-directed 
engagement with the activities goal (Lantolf & Thorne, 2007)—was salient in the data and led the children 
to many affordances for language learning. However, as discussed below, a few children were driven by 
lower cognitive motives. 
Lower Cognitive Motives 
Not all children were equally motivated to engage with the L2. Niels, for example, expressed annoyance 
that the FIFA commentary was in English: “I wish you could switch to Danish.” He primarily sought out 
Danish YouTubers. It seemed that he felt no positive identification with the L2 speakers but, rather, 
82 Language Learning & Technology 
 
tolerated the English language, as it was vital for engagement in the activities. Similarly, Johanne was less 
enthusiastic about the English language and did not purposefully seek out English-language content. 
This type of motivation for using English seemed to be a lower cognitive type, where the children, as in the 
examples of ineffective learners by Gillette (1994), seemed to use English out of necessity only. Such 
engagement inevitably led to fewer affordances for language learning (cf. van Lier, 2000), which was also 
evident in their engagement with English. 
In general, Johanne, Katharina, and Niels would ignore unknown vocabulary. Niels stated that he would try 
to understand when it was necessary for engagement in the activity: 
Well, in PES I have to read some of it or it becomes too difficult. I can’t just be pressing buttons. 
When Katharina faced unknown vocabulary, she stated, “I go back and forth. I don’t like it when they’re 
just talking forever. Then I’ll just forward it to when there’s like some action going on.” Thus, it seemed 
that Katharina would ignore the meaning of the vocabulary rather than try to infer it. 
Many children mentioned that they asked friends’ and family members’ help in understanding unknown 
words. Niels would occasionally ask his family members for help with song lyrics: “It is actually quite 
annoying sometimes if it’s a good song… If your parents know, you can ask them, but often they don’t.” 
This example highlights the important fact that contextual factors were very important for expanding or 
limiting language learning opportunities and that motives and individual agency are not independent factors 
(Lantolf & Thorne, 2006; Norton, 2013; Pavlenko, 2002). As Nardi (1996) argues, context is not just “out 
there” (1996, p. 38). Rather, it is a combination of all of the factors in the activity system.3 
Interestingly, the findings also showed that, for some, engagement with English in school was driven by 
lower cognitive motives carrying little personal significance. Ferdinand drew a very sharp distinction 
between engagement with English in the wild and English in school: 
For example, these, all these games [outside school], there they are English games, in English, and it 
is like both where we learn some English and where it is fun for us instead of sitting and looking in like 
a book. For example, once we spent four English lessons on one page. And it was like really boring for 
all of us. We thought it was so boring! 
Some of the children—like Kirsten in Thorne’s (2003) study—seemed to benefit particularly from the 
social and playful, rather than the educational, nature of engagement with English in the wild. And, like 
Kirsten, they seemed to think that English outside school was generally more authentic (see also Henry & 
Cliffordson, 2015; Sundqvist & Sylvén, 2016). 
Limitations 
Given the fluctuating nature of motivation, longitudinal studies would be needed to obtain more 
comprehensive knowledge on children’s motives (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006; Nardi, 1996). Furthermore, 
incorporating more data types, such as observational studies, would also be advisable. However, the 
findings may offer insights into a highly relevant activity system and may provide a starting point from 
which further research ideas can be developed. 
Suggestions for Further Research 
Despite a growing interest in language learning in the wild, still only few studies have investigated young 
users’ (7–11 years old or younger) extramural language learning. More research in general, quantitative as 
well as qualitative, on this group of users is needed. Qualitative emic studies, with their potential to enrich 
our understanding of the digital L2 lives of young children from an insider perspective, would significantly 
contribute to the field (Ushioda, 2008). Such studies are particularly relevant because of their ability to 
provide detailed knowledge of the specific activities that children engage in as well as the nature of the 
engagement (i.e., specific motives and actions). This, in turn, is able to inform our theorizing on language 
learning in the wild. To a significantly large group of young children, the opportunities to engage with 
Signe Hannibal Jensen 83 
 
digital media mediated in English are abundant. Much more knowledge on their engagement with the 
potential affordances of these spaces is called for in order to describe and understand a societal phenomenon 
that is markedly different than that of generations not far removed in time. Likewise, limited access to the 
digital spaces, or limited engagement with their potential affordances, may help uncover socially structured 
inequalities and the implications thereof (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006; Norton, 2013. Furthermore, with the 
findings of the present study tentatively suggesting a gap in motivation between engagement with English 
in and outside school (for similar findings in older learners, see Henry, 2014), more research is needed on 
specifics of engagement with English in both activity systems. Such research would help uncover the causes 
of the different levels of motivation. For example, longitudinal ethnographic studies on young children’s 
engagement in different activity systems, such as studies comparing motives for, and actual engagement 
with English in and outside school by the same group of learners, would be highly important to further 
expand on and elaborate the findings of the present study. 
Conclusion and Pedagogical Implications 
The present study explored which motives children were driven by in their use of English and how the 
children engaged with the L2. The study found that, for the most part, the children were motivated by social 
and higher cognitive motives. Through these motives, the children engaged with language-learning 
affordances in a goal-directed manner. Through their motivation, some actively engaged with English by 
writing (chats, command blocks, comments on social media), reading (online information, chats, social 
media), and listening (songs, games, social media, YouTube videos, etc.). The study also found that some 
children were driven by lower cognitive motives in their engagement with English, lending fewer 
affordances for learning. They thus engaged with the language in a way that would merely enable them to 
get by. Interestingly, some children with higher cognitive motives for engagement with English in the wild 
had lower cognitive motives for engagement with English in school and found school-English to be less 
authentic. 
In sum, this study highlights the importance of investigating users’ specific engagement with language and 
not assuming that frequency of exposure is the sole variable accountable for language learning. As van Lier 
(2000) notes, users’ needs and wants are crucial in determining learner agency, investment, and, by 
extension, learning outcomes. This study also highlights the importance for teachers to recognize that 
children bring to school different motives and different experiences with English (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006; 
Sundqvist & Sylvén, 2016). First and foremost, they need to acknowledge their students as people rather 
than just learners (Ushioda, 2011). 
Acknowledgements 
This research was supported by the Danish Council for Independent Research (grant no. DFF 4001 00046). 
I would like to thank the participants in the study as well as the anonymous reviewers and the editors of 
this issue for their insightful comments and recommendations. 
Notes 
1. User, rather than the traditional term learner, is used as individuals engaging in activities in the wild 
most likely identify as users rather than learners of language (cf., Sockett, 2014). 
2. Engagement with English in the wild is also referred to as extramural English engagement (a term 
coined by Sundqvist (for details, see Sundqvist, 2009) and that is also employed in the present paper. 
3. Importantly, one reviewer raised the question of whether this type of engagement and the limited use 
of strategies result from a lack of abilities rather than lower cognitive motives. That is, perhaps these 
children lacked knowledge of appropriate strategies or how to use them. In turn, one may speculate that 
encounters with English may lead to frustrations rather than just having fun, reinforcing the negative 
84 Language Learning & Technology 
 
perception of English. 
References 
Bechar-Israeli, H. (1995). From <Bonehead> to <CloNehEAd>: Nicknames, play, and identity on internet 
relay chats. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 1(2), article 3. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1083-6101.1995.tb00325.x 
Cadierno, T., & Eskildsen, S. W. (2014). The younger, the better? A usage-based approach to learning 
and teaching of English in Danish primary schools. Copenhagen, Denmark: Danish Council for 
Independent Research. 
Coughlan, P., & Duff, P. A. (1994). Same task, different activities: Analysis of a SLA task from an 
activity theory perspective. In J. P. Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.), Vygotskian approaches to second 
language research (pp. 173–193). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
De Wilde, V., & Eyckmans, J. (2017). Game on! Young learners’ incidental language learning of English 
prior to instruction. Studies in Second Language Learning and Teaching, 7(4), 673–694. 
Djigunovic, I. M., & Basaric, V. (2007). A comparative study of attitudes and motivation of Croatian 
learners of English and German. Studia romanica et anglica Zagrabiensia, 52, 259–281. 
Dörnyei, Z. (2009a). Individual differences: Interplay of learner characteristics and learning environment. 
Language Learning, 59(1), 230–248. 
Dörnyei, Z. (2009b). The L2 motivational self system. In Z. Dörnyei & E. Ushioda (Eds.), Motivation, 
language identity, and the L2 self (pp. 9–42). Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Dörnyei, Z., & Ushioda, E. (2009). Motivation, language identities, and the L2 self: A theoretical 
overview. In Z. Dörnyei & E. Ushioda (Eds.), Motivation, language identity, and the L2 self (pp. 1–
9). Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
DreamModels.dk. (2017). Top 100 mest populære danske YouTube kanaler. Retrieved from 
http://www.dreammodels.dk/danske-youtube-kanaler/ 
Elley, W. B. (1989). Vocabulary acquisition from listening to stories. Reading Research Quarterly, 24, 
174–187. 
Gardner, R. C. (1988). Attitudes and motivation. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 9, 135–148. 
Gee, J. P. (2012). Foreword. In H. Reinders (Ed.), Digital games in language learning and teaching (pp. 
xii–xiv). Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Gibson, J. E. (2012). Interviews and focus groups with children: Methods that match children's 
developing competencies. Journal of Family Theory & Review, 4(2), 148–159. 
Gillette, B. (1994). The role of learner goals in L2 success. In J. P. Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.), Vygotskian 
approaches to second language research (pp. 195–213). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Hannibal Jensen, S. (2017) Gaming as an English language learning resource among young children in 
Denmark. CALICO Journal, 34(1), 1–19. 
Henry, A. (2014). Swedish students’ beliefs about learning English in and outside of school. In A. 
Lasagabaster, D. Aintzane, & J. M. Sierra (Eds.), Motivation and foreign language learning: From 
theory to practice (pp. 93–116). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Henry, A., & Cliffordson, C. (2015). The impact of out-of-school factors on motivation to learn English: 
Self-discrepancies, beliefs, and experiences of self-authenticity. Applied Linguistics, 5, 1–25. 
Signe Hannibal Jensen 85 
 
Kuppens, A. H. (2010). Incidental foreign language acquisition from media exposure. Learning, Media, 
and Technology, 35(1), 65–85. 
Lantolf, J. P., & Genung, P. (2002). “I’d rather switch than fight”: An activity-theoretic study of power, 
success, and failure in a foreign language classroom. In C. Kramsch (Ed.), Language acquisition and 
language socialization: Ecological perspectives (pp. 175–196). New York, NY: Continuum. 
Lantolf, J. P., & Pavlenko, A. (2001). (S)econd (L)anguage (A)ctivity theory: Understanding second 
language learners as people. In M. P. Breen (Ed.), Learner contributions to language learning: New 
directions in research (pp. 141–158). Abingdon, UK: Pearson. 
Lantolf, J. P., & Thorne, S. (2006). Sociocultural theory and the genesis of second language development. 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Lantolf, J. P., & Thorne, S. (2007). Sociocultural theory and second language learning. In B. Van Patten 
& J. Williams (Eds.), Theories in second language acquisition (pp. 201–224). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Lefever, S. C. (2010). English skills of young learners in Iceland: “I started talking English when I was 4 
years old. It just bang… just fall into me.” Paper presented at the Menntakvika Conference, 
Reykjavik, Iceland. 
Leontiev, A. N. (1978). Activity, consciousness, and personality. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
LeVelle, K., & Levis, J. (2014). Understanding the impact of social factors on L2 pronunciation: Insights 
from learners. In J. Levis & A. Moyer (Eds.), Social dynamics in second language accent (pp. 97–
118). Berlin, Germany: De Gruyter Mouton. 
Lindgren, E., & Muñoz, C. (2013). The influence of exposure, parents, and linguistic distance on young 
European learners' foreign language comprehension. International Journal of Multilingualism, 10(1), 
105–129. 
Lompscher, J. (1999). Motivation and activity. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 14(1), 11–
22. 
Mascheroni, G., & Ólafsson, K. (2014). Net children go mobile: Risks and opportunities. Milan, Italy: 
Educatt. 
McCafferty, S. G., Roebuck, R. F., & Wayland, R. P. (2001). Activity theory and the incidental learning 
of second-language vocabulary. Language Awareness, 10(4), 289–294. 
Nardi, B. (1996). Studying context: A comparison of activity theory, situated action models, and 
distributed cognition. In B. Nardi (Ed.), Context and consciousness: Activity theory and human–
computer interaction (pp. 35–52). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Norton, B. (2013). Identity and language learning: Extending the conversation. Bristol, UK: Multilingual 
Matters. 
Ortega, L. (2015). Usage-based SLA: A research habitus whose time has come. In T. Cadierno & S. W. 
Eskildsen (Eds.), Usage-based perspectives on second language learning (pp. 353–373). Berlin, 
Germany: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Pavlenko, A. (2002). Poststructuralist approaches to the study of social factors in second language 
learning and use. In V. Cook (Ed.), Portraits of the L2 user (pp. 277–302). Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters. 
86 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Piirainen-Marsh, A. (2011). Enacting interactional competence in gaming activities: Coproducing talk 
with virtual others. In J. K. Hall, J. Hellermann, & S. Pekarek Doehler (Eds.), L2 interactional 
competence and development (pp. 19–44). Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Piirainen-Marsh, A., & Tainio, L. (2009). Other‐repetition as a resource for participation in the activity of 
playing a video game. The Modern Language Journal, 93(2), 153–169. 
Sockett, G. (2014). The online informal learning of English. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Spradley, J. P. (1979). The ethnographic interview. Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press. 
Study in Denmark. (2017). Study in English. Retrieved from http://studyindenmark.dk/why-
denmark/excellence-in-education-1/more-than-500-programmes-taught-in-english 
Sundqvist, P. (2009). Extramural English matters: Out-of-school English and its impact on Swedish ninth 
graders’ oral proficiency and vocabulary (Doctoral dissertation). Karlstad University, Karlstad, 
Sweden. 
Sundqvist, P., & Sylvén, L. K. (2014). Language-related computer use: Focus on young L2 English 
learners in Sweden. ReCALL, 26(1), 3–20. 
Sundqvist, P., & Sylvén, L. K. (2016). Extramural English in teaching and learning. London, UK: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond: Mediating acquisition through collaborative 
dialogue. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 97–114). 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Sylvén, L. K., & Sundqvist, P. (2012). Gaming as extramural English L2 learning and L2 proficiency 
among young learners. ReCALL, 24(3), 302–321. 
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38–67. 
Turgut, Y., & İrgin, P. (2009). Young learners’ language learning via computer games. Procedia: Social 
and Behavioral Sciences, 1(1), 760–764. 
Unsworth, S., Persson, L., Prins, T., & De Bot, K. (2014). An investigation of factors affecting early 
foreign language learning in the Netherlands. Applied Linguistics, 38(5), 1–24. 
Ushioda, E. (2007). Motivation, autonomy, and sociocultural theory. In P. Benson (Ed.), Learner 
autonomy & teacher and learner perspectives (pp. 5–24). Dublin, Ireland: Authentik. 
Ushioda, E. (2008). Motivation and good language learners. In C. Griffiths (Ed.), Lessons from good 
language learners (pp. 19–34). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Ushioda, E. (2011). Motivating learners to speak as themselves. In G. Murray, G. Xuesong, & T. Lamb 
(Eds.), Identity, motivation, and autonomy in language learning (pp. 11–24). Bristol, UK: 
Multilingual Matters. 
van Lier, L. (2000). From input to affordance: Social-interactive learning from an ecological perspective. 
In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 245–259). Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Vosburg, D. (2017). The effects of group dynamics on language learning and use in an MMOG. CALICO 
Journal, 34(1), 58–74. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Harvard, 
MA: Cambridge University Press. 
Waters, J. K. (2007). On a quest for English. The Journal, 34(10), 27–28. 
