Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2019, Volume 23, Issue 1 
pp. 49–71 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2019 Boris Vazquez-Calvo, Leticia Tian Zhang, Mariona Pascual, & Daniel Cassany 
 
 
Fan translation of games, anime, and fanfiction 
Boris Vazquez-Calvo, Southern Denmark University and 
University of Santiago de Compostela 
Leticia Tian Zhang, Pompeu Fabra University 
Mariona Pascual, Autonomous University of Barcelona 
Daniel Cassany, Pompeu Fabra University 
Abstract 
Fan practices involving translation open up opportunities to explore language learning practices within 
the fandom (Sauro, 2017). We examine how three fans capitalize on fan translation and language learning. 
We consider the cases of Selo (an English–Spanish translator of games), Nino (a Japanese–Catalan 
fansubber of anime, and Alro (an English–Spanish translator of fanfics). A corpus was built consisting of 
297 minutes of interviews, 186 screenshots of language learning events from online sites, and 213 minutes 
of screencast videos of online activity. Drawing upon the conceptual framework of new literacy studies 
(Barton, 2007), we set four themes to present fans’ literacy practices and language learning: (a) fan 
translation, (b) understanding the original text, (c) writing and preparing the translation, and (d) tools, 
resources, and collaborative online practices. Results indicated that the three informants encountered an 
open space for agency, creativity, and identity building and reinforcement through fan translation. Their 
translations provided content and represented the generators of the semiotic fabric in their fandoms (Gee, 
2005). As fan translators, they learned language in multiple ways, such as peer-to-peer feedback, 
autodidactism, and creative uses of Google Translate. Future research may attempt to transfer knowledge 
from digital wilds into formal education. 
Keywords: ICT Literacies, Language Learning Strategies, Virtual Environments, Fan Translation 
Language(s) Learned in This Study: Catalan, English, Japanese, Spanish 
APA Citation: Vazquez-Calvo, B., Zhang, L. T., Pascual, M., & Cassany, D. (2019). Fan translation of 
games, anime, and fanfiction. Language Learning & Technology, 23(1), 49–71. 
https://doi.org/10125/44672 
Introduction 
Reading books or manga, watching TV series, or playing video games are widespread cultural and literacy 
practices (in a broad, multimodal sense of literacy). Harry Potter (book series), Sailor Moon (anime series), 
and Pokémon (video game) are some examples, perhaps more targeted at and consumed by those interested 
in fantasy, magic, and alternate worlds. Individuals with a strong allegiance to cultural products such as 
these often engage in practices that surpass mere cultural consumption. This is more apparent in the case 
of fanfiction. Fanfictioners write spin-off stories on their favorite book series and share them in online 
communities. Thousands of other fans read and comment on fanfiction stories. Exacerbated by the Internet, 
fanfiction writing has truly become a digital practice on a global scale. This type of fan engagement online 
occurs, to some extent, in any fan community related to any literacy practice. We refer to such online 
engagement as digital literacy practices. 
Digital literacy practices have received greater attention, with a particular attachment to the sociocultural 
and ethnographic views from new literacy studies (NLS). This article is concerned with fan literacy 
practices online and how young people capitalize on those fan practices to learn language in a more-or-less 
50 Language Learning & Technology 
 
conscious manner. We are interested in activities involving some sort of translation process, since this is an 
open field and a rich context to explore language learning practices and opportunities (Sauro, 2017). Fan 
translation is a literacy practice involving individuals who translate for fun, prompted by a concrete fan 
activity of their liking. We assume that when fans translate, they learn as a result of the inherent 
onomasiological process of translating and their numerous online interactions. Fan translation, particularly 
its language learning aspect, is a particularly underexplored field (Muñoz Sánchez, 2009; O’Hagan, 2009). 
This study is framed in Catalonia, where socioeconomic conditions generally guarantee technological 
access. In this context, young people frequently learn to use technologies informally through vernacular 
practices, in parallel to academic life and from very young ages. For instance, recent studies show that 
gaming is the fastest growing cultural industry in Catalonia (Generalitat de Catalunya, 2016). Fan literacy 
practices cover many contexts: for example, videogames (Gee, 2007), fanfiction (continuing or reimagining 
stories other people have written about), fandubbing (the translation and voice-over of scripts in audiovisual 
materials), fansubbing (the translation of subtitles made by fans; Zhang & Cassany, 2016), and scanlation 
(the scanning and translation of manga made by fans; Valero-Porras & Cassany, 2016). Each individual, or 
fan, materializes their fan universe in their own way, normally with some support or collaboration from a 
fan community or by communicating with other fans. Agency is a key factor, which is materialized in a set 
of skills characterized by multitasking and prosumption (a portmanteau term of production and 
consumption). In this process of self-discovery through personal passions and hobbies, interaction with a 
community nearly always plays a central role. Fans use and learn language by constructing identity, 
appropriating specific discursive genres, and giving context-bound meanings to signs in the fan universe. 
In this study, we examine specific events of language learning through fan translation practices, a rich 
context for sociocultural, digitally mediated communication. The research questions guiding this study are 
as follows: 
1. How do fans capitalize on their fan practices to learn language? 
2. How does translation serve fans in developing language and cultural knowledge as part of their 
language learning process? 
Theoretical Framework 
To analyze fan translation, we draw on the perspectives of participatory culture and NLS. 
We understand fan translation as being the translation of any kind of products (e.g., movies, TV series, 
books, manga, games) that is translated by fans for fans. It is one of the most relevant manifestations of 
participatory culture, which refers to a culture “with relatively low barriers to artistic expression and civic 
engagement, strong support for creating and sharing creations, and some type of informal mentorship 
whereby experienced participants pass along knowledge to novices” (Jenkins, Clinton, Purushtoma, 
Robinson, & Weigel, 2009, p. 3). 
Participatory culture is concerned with groups of people (i.e., fans) who are passionate about certain cultural 
activities and products (Jenkins, 2006). It has been amplified thanks to digital technologies (Jenkins et al., 
2009; Jenkins, Mizujko, & Boyd, 2015), with online fandoms (kingdoms of fans) providing potential 
learning opportunities—in some cases, these are considered affinity spaces (Gee, 2005) with. In contrast to 
a consumer culture consisting of a passive audience, a participatory culture exhibits fuzzy frontiers between 
consumption and production. Fans adopt new roles, construct a dialogue around their interests, and create, 
modify, interpret, curate, or distribute cultural products in multiple formats, such as is the case with fandoms 
centered around video games (Vazquez-Calvo, 2018). Fan activities shape fans’ identities and lifestyle and 
lead them to engage in various social practices (e.g., fan translation). 
Fan translation is essentially participatory reading and writing in a multimodal, sociocultural sense. The 
theoretical lens of NLS underlines that literacy practices are social, cultural, and context-bound and focus 
on both dominant (institutional, official) and vernacular (daily, informal) literacy practices (Barton, 2007). 
Current studies attend to how technologies and the Internet impact literacy practices and how written texts 
Boris Vazquez-Calvo, Leticia Tian Zhang, Mariona Pascual, and Daniel Cassany 51 
 
are consumed, produced, or distributed online, coining the term digital literacy practices (Barton & Lee, 
2013; Gillen, 2014; Lankshear & Knobel, 2011). Fan translation is a digital literacy practice, where reading 
and writing are bound by specific contexts (online affinity spaces), having highly-specialized topics (e.g., 
video games, literature, cinema, TV series, etc.) and highly-specialized target audiences (e.g., gamers, 
anime fans, Harry Potter fans, etc.). In those online spaces, fans set guides and ways of acting both within 
the community (i.e., net-etiquette) and in relation to broader concepts (e.g., copyright). Through literacy 
practices, they build cultural products (e.g., fan translations) and knowledge (e.g., language learning 
discussions). 
Previous Studies 
Fan practices have recently attracted attention within the field of computer-assisted language learning 
(CALL). Explorations on how language learners construct multilingual identities through digital 
translanguaging (e.g., Schreiber, 2015), interact on online spaces such as YouTube, foster intercultural 
awareness (e.g., Benson, 2015), and engage in collaborative writing practices on Wikipedia (e.g., King, 
2015) have been covered in a 2015 special issue of Language Learning & Technology. All such studies 
underscore “the need for language teachers and learners to understand and take into account digital 
literacies: the modes of reading, writing, and communication made possible by digital media” (Hafner, 
Chik, & Jones, 2015, p. 1). We continue this line of research by looking at translation as a fan-made practice 
relevant for language learning. 
In a meta-study analyzing the state of art of online fan practices and how these interact with CALL, Sauro 
(2017) identifies genres (fanfiction, fansubbing, scanlation), practices (debating, moderating, spoiling), and 
themes of interests (identity building and empowerment) covered by recent research in fan literacy 
practices. The author emphasizes that fansubbing and scanlation “are a rich area for exploration of language 
learning in the wild, but also represent a source of inspiration for the development of technology-mediated 
fan-inspired language teaching activities or fandom tasks” (Sauro, 2017, pp. 137–138). Besides these 
studies, within NLS, translation (and the language learning it implies) as an activity conducted by fans has 
received little attention. 
Within translation studies, we have identified studies looking into translation as a user-generated activity 
(O’Hagan, 2009) under two categories: (a) translation as a fan activity (fan translation of games, 
fansubbing, fanfiction) and (b) not-for-profit activities (translation of software into local languages). 
Regarding the fan translation of games (fan-made audiovisual translation of retro games from the 80s or 
90s which had not been translated at the time), a few studies highlight the hacking of videogames (i.e., 
altering the code of a game to introduce or modify text, images, and other items; Muñoz Sánchez, 2007, 
2009). These studies present the community and describe the technical process of hacking. However, they 
do not report contact between members of the community, the translating process (how the transfer between 
languages and cultures is done beyond the technical aspects), or the learning processes and social and 
cultural relationships within the community. 
Regarding fansubbing, fansubbers normally translating Japanese anime (Díaz-Cintas & Muñoz Sánchez, 
2006) often work in well-organized groups, collaborating through social media and instant messaging apps. 
One administrator supervises the translation, production, and distribution processes as staff members play 
specific roles such as translators, editors, timers, encoders, and so forth (Valero-Porras & Cassany, 2016). 
Communities of lesser-spoken languages (Catalan, for instance) are understudied. 
Fanfiction holds a longer tradition in research from discourse studies, new media literacies, and language 
learning, focusing on themes of transculturality and construction of identities (Black, 2006). Fanfiction 
brings together people from across the world who passionately enjoy reading fiction and who share their 
thoughts, feelings, and positions about it. Fanfictioners learn language implicitly, since they gain access to 
realia through reading and writing (Black, 2005, 2009) or achieve self-taught critical literacy (Edfeldt, 
Fjordevik, & Inose, 2012; Strmel, 2014). The activity of translating fanfiction has not yet received attention. 
52 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Altogether, recent studies underscore the influence fan-made translation has into professional contexts, 
where technology-savvy fansubbers use methods for cross-cultural communication and exchange. This 
challenges both how we think about subtitling and the process of audiovisual translation itself (Ortabasi, 
2007). However, fewer studies focus on the context of language teaching and learning, where learners’ 
vernacular practices are often overlooked or marginalized. With the internet now seen as a “worldwide 
literacy practice environment” and an “informal language learning environment” (Koutsogiannis & 
Mitsikopoulou, 2004), language learners go beyond access to original texts by engaging in diverse forms 
of multilingual digital literacy practices such as fan translation. We explore this phenomenon in the contexts 
of the fan translation of games, fansubbing, and the translation of fanfiction. 
Methodology, Participants, and Corpus 
This is a qualitative study employing virtual ethnography (Hine, 2015). We draw on data from three cases 
representing the fan translations of games, anime, and fanfiction. Each case focuses on the data provided 
by one representative of the fandom. We underpin our data on two main sources: (a) informants’ discourses 
and (b) the online observation of language practices in the contexts of their fandoms, how fans conduct 
such practices, and what learning they extract from them. 
Ethical considerations regarding confidentiality, anonymity, and the fair treatment of data has been given 
in accordance with the Association of Internet Researchers (Markham & Buchanan, 2012). Our research 
standards were approved by the Committee for Ethical Review of Projects at Pompeu Fabra University. 
Specific actions taken included the following: 
• applying a 2-factor authentication process as an extra layer of security in storing data in the 
university’s servers; 
• prioritizing information without personal data; 
• anonymizing personal data, regardless of the nature thereof (names, nicknames, aliases, 
photographs, etc.), so as to preserve informants’ real and virtual identities; 
• distorting multimodal objects in a manner that image search engines could not retrieve such data; 
and 
• disregarding third parties’ data that could appear during the online observation or the interviews, 
whenever such third parties had not consented otherwise. 
Participants 
First, we contacted informants online with an informal, private chats about their activity and with a 
presentation of the research project via email or private message in the fan communities. Three fans agreed 
to participate: 
• Selo was a fan translator of videogames. He was a 30-year-old male living in Cerdanyola del Vallès 
(Catalonia) at the time we interviewed him for the study. He spoke Catalan and Spanish natively, 
and he was a learner of English (B2).1 He translated from English into Spanish and kept up two 
blogs and four forum threads where he published his translations. We contacted him through 
ROMhacking.net, an international gaming community where gamers uploaded hacks and 
translations. 
• Nino was a fansubber of anime. He was a 20-year-old male living in Sabadell (Catalonia) at the 
time we interviewed him for the study. He spoke Catalan and Spanish natively, and he was a learner 
of English (B2) and Japanese (A2). He translated from Japanese into Catalan and had a personal 
website where he published one finished project (a subtitled anime) and where he had another in 
process. By the recommendation of another potential informant unable to participate, we contacted 
him via Animelliure.net, an online forum where fansubbers talked, discussed, and uploaded anime 
in Catalan. 
• Arlo was a fan translator of fanfiction. She was a 26-year-old female living in Molins de Rei 
Boris Vazquez-Calvo, Leticia Tian Zhang, Mariona Pascual, and Daniel Cassany 53 
 
(Catalonia) at the time we interviewed her for the study. She spoke Catalan and Spanish natively, 
and she was a learner of English (B1). She translated fanfiction from English into Spanish and she 
had four completed translations that received feedback regularly. At the time of her interview, she 
was translating four additional stories with weekly updates. We contacted her through 
FanFiction.net, a well-known worldwide site for fanfiction writers. 
Instruments and Corpus 
Interviews 
We conducted a semi-structured interview with each participant in Spanish or Catalan covering the 
informants’ sociolinguistic background, fan practices, literacy and technological habits, roles within the 
communities, perceptions regarding what they do online, and how and why they do what they do. When 
needed, we conducted secondary interviews to clarify doubts after our online observations. We selectively 
transcribed and translated these interviews. 
Observations 
We conducted non-participant observation of each participant’s activities online by keeping an annotated 
diary log with screenshots. The observation lasted for two months, devoting an average of one hour every 
three days, depending on updates. We observed fan practices (translating videogames, anime, or fanfiction) 
and related activities on online sites (ROMhacking.net, Animelliure.net, FanFiction.net, and other forums, 
blogs, or social media sites with fan-related activity the participants had provided). With screenshots during 
the observation, we could see both the products and the reception of the informants’ fan activity (i.e., 
translations published online and corresponding responses, comments, and interactions centered around the 
translations made by our informants and other fans in the fandom). 
Screencast Videos 
During the observation, informants agreed to provide screencast videos of their fan activity. These 
showcased the full translating process, from the moment that the informants decided to translate a text until 
it was published. 
Table 1. Corpus of Data 
Informant Fandom Languages 
Interviews  Observations  Videos 
N Minutes  Screenshots Words Transcribed  Minutes 
Selo Games Eng to Spa 1 60  55 720  79 
Nino Fansub Jpn to Cat 2 110  61 800  91 
Alro Fanfiction Eng to Spa 1 127  70 1,000  43 
Total   4 297  186 2,520  213 
The heterogenic corpus of data (see Table 1) allowed us to triangulate informants’ discourses, researchers’ 
observations, and recorded practices. We analyzed data following content analysis (Kohlbacher, 2006; 
Marying, 2000), to unearth recurrent trends and topics and establish possible relationships between them 
and our research questions. We adapted the constituent parts of a literacy practice (roles and functions, 
norms and behaviors, activities and practices, contexts and environments; see Barton, 2007; Barton & Lee, 
2013) to the nature of fan translation. The emerging categories were (a) roles and functions (reader, 
commenter, translator, editor, beta-reader, beta-tester), (b) norms and behaviors (giving criticism, 
responding to criticism, positioning regarding authorship of fan-made translations), (c) activities and 
practices (discussing language transfer items [e.g., spelling, morphology, syntax, pragmatics, sociocultural 
items], discussing translation strategies [e.g., foreignizing, domesticating], using dictionaries, using 
translation software), and (d) contexts and environments (personal blogs, local or national forums, 
54 Language Learning & Technology 
 
international sites, repositories). For the screencast videos, we used the same categories, although new ones 
emerged accounting for the process of translating: decoding, translating, transliterating, proofreading, 
testing, patching, publishing, advertising, curating, and drafting subsidiary documents (e.g., glossaries, 
ReadMe documents, copyright disclaimers). 
For the purposes of comparing the three cases, we reduced data under four themes relevant for language 
learning: (a) fan translation, (b) understanding the original text, (c) writing and preparing the translation, 
and (d) tools, resources, and collaborative online practices. We discuss each of these four themes in greater 
detail below. 
Findings 
Fan Translation 
Common Features 
Our fans translated for three different fandom communities, but the three cases shared common features: 
(a) direct translations, (b) amateur activity, (c) literacy practices, (d) collaborative activity, and (e) uses of 
digital resources. Each of these features is described below. 
(a) Since there was a need for cultural content and products in local languages, fans translated from foreign 
languages into their L1s: 
There was a boom of fan-made translations into Spanish in the early 2000s, but they are not stored 
anywhere. They were on the translators’ sites, which do not exist anymore. Romhacking.net is 
international and multilingual, but with few translations in Spanish. I publish there to centralize 
downloads. (Interview with Selo, December 17, 2016) 
(b) Fan translators received no money for their efforts and were not professional translators. However, the 
skills acquired in formal contexts could be transferred into fan translation and vice versa. Gains were 
measured in enjoyment, giving and receiving from the community, and learning: 
There is a legal vacuum regarding licenses. Theoretically, if not licensed and not commercialized in 
your country, you can translate anime, because you are giving people access to content, which 
otherwise could not be accessed, but of course this applies whenever you do not generate any money 
out of it. (Interview with Nino, July 14, 2017) 
(c) The fan translations were essentially socially and culturally situated reading and writing, where fans 
negotiated, for instance, what a good translation was: 
On Facebook there’s a group to talk and get involved, there are memes and laughs all along. For 
instance, you post “I’m looking for a good fanfic or translation”, and everybody goes in to reply and 
comment. (Interview with Alro, June 26, 2017) 
(d) The fan translations were a collaborative process, either for solo translators or groups of translators. Our 
three cases were solo translators, but the impact and reception of their translations online provided them 
with feedback: 
You write something for yourself. You upload it to see whether people think you are doing it OK… I’ve 
never received negative feedback, and I have received thousands of reviews. I’m feeling ecstatic. But if 
I ever had some negative feedback, I wouldn’t go sour… They feed you. The way they analyze your 
chapter is your pay. (Interview with Alro, June 26, 2017) 
(e) The fan translations involved extensive use of digital tools for reading, writing, and curating translations. 
For technical activities (e.g., graphic editing, extracting texts from games, subtitling), fans used highly-
specialized software. For language doubts, they frequently used Google Translate with multiple languages 
(e.g., English, Spanish, Catalan, Japanese) and for different purposes (reading comprehension, dictionary 
Boris Vazquez-Calvo, Leticia Tian Zhang, Mariona Pascual, and Daniel Cassany 55 
 
of synonyms, translation of a word or a sentence, conversion between Latin and Japanese alphabets, 
retranslation using English as an intermediate vehicular language; see Vazquez-Calvo & Cassany, 2017). 
When curating and publicizing translations, they use specialized social networks and communities, such as 
ROMhacking.net (for games), Animelliure.net (for subtitles), or FanFiction.net (for fanfics). 
Anything you don’t know, you can easily find on the internet. There are forums for help, the Aegisub 
page [subtitling program], and there are instructions. (Interview with Nino, July 14, 2017) 
Specificities of the Three Cases 
Each case externalized the translation activity differently in relation to fans’ (a) motivation to start 
translating, (b) experience and workstyle, and (c) language combination. Each of these features is described 
below. 
(a) Nino recently became a fan translator, while Selo and Alro had more experience: 
Selo had been a gamer his whole life. When he was a child, his limited English was not enough to 
understand scripted dialogues and texts of some games he wanted to play. His translation activity was thus 
motivated by the need of expanding the lifecycle of his gaming experience, replaying games he had already 
played when younger, or discovering games he did not know before. Once he had a better command of 
English, he could understand the texts and he believed that other gamers in the Spanish-speaking gaming 
community would appreciate that too. He argued that Spanish was underrepresented in the world of fan 
translation of games, namely ROMhacking.net, a fact corroborated by other fans in his forums: 
Last year I went online [to ROMhacking.net] to see if there were new translations for NES in English, 
Spanish, or Portuguese, and of these last two there were just a few; now it’s a pleasure to go there and 
see. There’s been more activity in this last half year than in the last ten years [smiley]. (Quote from a 
fan’s comment online giving value to Selo’s work in the community)2 
Nino watched anime dubbed in Catalan since he was a child. He was a fan of Japanese anime and had 
consumed many fansubs in Spanish. When he found out that there were fansubs in Catalan made by amateur 
translators, he “couldn’t believe it” (interview with Nino, July 14, 2017) and decided to join them. 
Alro expressed emotionally-attached and sociocultural motives to translate. She started translating Harry 
Potter fanfics from English to Spanish 10 years before the time of this study, when she was 16 years old, 
and she became one of the most celebrated Spanish translators on FanFiction.net. She began translating 
because she felt that Spanish conveyed emotions and intensity more passionately than English. After asking 
for permission from fanfic authors, she decided to post the translations. Following her debut, she continued 
translating other stories from English, so “the story [could] reach more people” (interview with Alro, June 
26, 2017). 
(b) The participants’ experiences as fan translation and the way they conducted their practices differed 
according to each case: 
Selo started translating games in early 2016, but by September 2017 he had already translated 204 games, 
his most successful translation topping 1,660 downloads. He became one of the most prolific Spanish-
speaking translators of games on ROMhacking.net, and his forum threads were being proposed for 
highlights and merits within the forums. He was a solo translator, because “not everyone in a group is 
equally committed and you must be very patient” (interview with Selo, December 17, 2016). However, he 
sought other fans’ approval in online forums. In the online forums, Selo and other gamers conducted prolific 
discussions on translation and language, discussed below. 
When translating, Selo followed the typical workflow of other fan translators. This included language 
(translating, proofreading) and technical tasks (decoding the text from the game, graphic editing, playing 
the game for testing, creating a patch for the new translation to be mounted into the game file). Selo 
designed and used his own software to decode the text and substitute it in a simpler way (see Figure 1). In 
order to translate a game with around 200 words, he would spend about 79 minutes. 
56 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 1. Selo translating with his software3 
Nino started as a solo fansubber in 2016 after having been a fansubber in a larger community. This let him 
select the anime he liked and a comfortable pace of work. For example, for a specific anime filled with 
puns and witticisms, he could spend two hours translating only 10 lines. In his words, “This is about 
dedicating many hours and love to it; I want it perfect” (interview with Nino, July 14, 2017). 
Nino was responsible for every task usually distributed among a fansub group, including linguistic 
production (translating, proofreading) and technical editing (typesetting, synchronizing, and encoding the 
final document). To alleviate such a workload, he used the timed script of Spanish subtitles for the same 
anime and added Catalan ones using the subtitle editor Aegisub (see Figure 2). This saved him time when 
synchronizing the subtitles. 
 
Figure 2. Nino translating with Aegisub 
Boris Vazquez-Calvo, Leticia Tian Zhang, Mariona Pascual, and Daniel Cassany 57 
 
Alro worked concurrently on multiple projects. As of September 2017, she was translating four fanfics. She 
translated almost daily, devoting one to four hours each day. Before translating any fanfic, she messaged 
the English fanfic author, who set the conditions (e.g., not publishing outside FanFiction.net, mentioning 
the fanfic’s original author in the summary of the fanfic or the beginning of each chapter, and adding links 
to the original fanfic). Contrary to Selo’s and Nino’s audiovisual translation, Alro was not constrained by 
the length of her sentences. Writing and translating fanfiction did not require advanced technical skills and 
FanFiction.net provided an easy interface where no subtitling or hacking skills were needed. Alro could 
thus focus on providing idiomatic and pragmatic solutions in Spanish. 
It took Alro about 40 minutes to translate 600 words. FanFiction.net offered a user-friendly interface to 
both process and upload the text. Before doing so, Alro would go through the process of (1) translating a 
sentence with Google Translate in order to understand all the words, (2) checking for contextual 
mismatches, and (3) adapting the translation to a more idiomatic Spanish. At the time of the study, she had 
two stories on the top 25 most-reviewed Spanish fanfics out of 54,300, and one translation that placed fifth 
among the most favorited translations. 
(c) Selo and Alro translated from English into Spanish. The games Selo translated were available in 
Japanese and English, but he did not know Japanese and had to rely on the English versions. He translated 
into Spanish so that a wider community of potential gamers could benefit. In the case of Alro, the original 
fanfics were in English, and she decided to translate them into Spanish. Both spoke Catalan as a mother 
tongue, but their language of daily communication was Spanish. 
Nino translated from Japanese into Catalan. Previous years of watching anime provided Nino with basic 
knowledge of Japanese. He was able to pick up some words, syntactic forms, and courtesy expressions. 
With the Internet, he learned how to read hiragana and recognize some katakana on his own—kanji 
characters remained difficult for him. He also learned romaji (romanization of Japanese, or the application 
of the Latin script to write Japanese). This helped Nino translate. As a fansubber, he practiced and improved 
his Japanese, but in a stress-free environment. 
Understanding the Original Text 
Selo, Nino, and Alro developed different practices to understand the original text. 
In order to prepare the text for translation, Selo had to decode it out of the game. He extracted it so that he 
could modify it as a .TXT file. If possible, he inserted new characters in Spanish (e.g., ñ, á, é, í, ó, ú, ¿, ¡). 
Afterward, he read and translated the text simultaneously. In the process of reading the original text through 
the screencast videos, we observed that Selo had some comprehension problems. He misinterpreted the 
sense of some prepositions and grammatical structures in English, because he applied two criteria over 
other types of doubts or linguistic units: (a) productivity (to produce as many translations as possible) and 
(b) consulting semantic doubts (i.e., the meanings of unknown verbs, nouns, and adjectives). To solve such 
doubts, Selo mostly relied on Google Translate (see Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. Selo using Google Translate to solve semantic doubts 
58 Language Learning & Technology 
 
After having read and translated the text, Selo played the game and re-read his own translation in context: 
he experienced the game with the screens and narrative adapted to the local language. This allowed for 
further verification if needed, as well as the double-checking of possible unintended graphic modifications 
needing further polishing. 
Nino made a great endeavor to comprehend the original text. Despite the Spanish or English versions being 
available as reference, he attempted to retrieve every word from Japanese to ensure a fair understanding. 
For each script line, he played the correspondent fragment several times, and transliterated every word into 
romaji (see Table 2). 
Table 2. Nino Transliterating Romaji 
Text Transcription 
Original Subtitle Solo tengo bragas y sujetadores con estampados. 
Verbatim Translation I only have panties and bras with patterns. 
Transcription Garamonoshikamotte inai. 
To understand the transliterated romaji, Nino used Google Translate and two Japanese–English dictionaries 
(Tangorin and Jisho). In the first example (see Figure 4), the romaji was automatically converted into 
hiragana and kanji by the translator. After confirming that 柄物 (garamono) means patterned cloth in the 
dictionaries, Nino could make sense of the whole sentence. In soundless scenes with only written Japanese 
(signs), he manually drew the kanji in the translator as in the last example in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4. Nino using Google Translate to understand romaji, hiragana, and kanji 
Boris Vazquez-Calvo, Leticia Tian Zhang, Mariona Pascual, and Daniel Cassany 59 
 
Similarly, Alro translated one sentence at a time with Google Translate. She opened two documents: the 
original work and the translation. With the version from Google Translate, she compared the source and 
the target texts. She corrected the sentences in Google Translate, with an emphasis on language choice and 
collocations. She double-checked specific expressions or new words with Reverso.net or Linguee.es. In 
Figure 5, she entertained doubts about a specific word, and she was not satisfied with the Google Translate 
suggestion: neat as limpio (clean). Limpio did not suit the context in which it was used, and she then opted 
for nítido (clear, defined): En la oscuridad, Hermione tenía el perfil nítido (In the darkness, Hermione had 
a neat profile). 
 
Figure 5. Alro using Google Translate and Reverso.net to understand meaning in context 
Reading texts in fan translations was quite a challenging process. It could encompass the transliteration 
between different writing systems (see Table 2 and Figure 4), the decoding of meanings of words and 
phrases (Figure 3), reading words in their cotext (the linguistic elements before and after a sentence or a 
term; see Figure 5), and reading texts in their multimodal contexts (the frames around communicative 
events that provide resources to interpret them; e.g., scripts of games, subtitles, images). In order to fulfill 
this comprehension task satisfactorily, the three fan translators relied on Google Translate to solve their 
problems. In Google Translate, they encountered a multifunctional, multi-language, and versatile resource 
with multiple affordances. 
Writing and Preparing the Translation 
The fan translators also adopted different translation and revision strategies. 
Selo’s translations were limited by the number of characters used in the original text. Consequently, he 
chose words very consciously (e.g., using synonyms or paraphrasing for concision; see Figure 6). 
60 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 6. Selo translating and paraphrasing to reduce the number of characters 
Selo reinserted the translated text chains into the same location they were in the English game file. He paid 
attention not to delete or move any character related to the internal coding of the game, mistaking it as 
translatable text. Afterward, Selo played the game and proofread for possible spelling and translation 
mistakes. 
He also paid attention to unintended graphic modifications. Later, he created a patch of the game with the 
translation to execute it. He drafted a ReadMe document where he gave instructions on how to embed the 
translation in the game. In the document, he left a copyright mark of the original game and a credit mark to 
his work (see Figure 7). Selo had a ReadMe template he filled out for every game. After completing this, 
the translation was ready for publication and download. 
 
Boris Vazquez-Calvo, Leticia Tian Zhang, Mariona Pascual, and Daniel Cassany 61 
 
Figure 7. Selo drafting a ReadMe document 
In Nino’s case, although Spanish and Catalan shared many words, he deemed the Spanish version unusable, 
since commercial translations were usually “way too adapted” and “the original meaning [was] lost” 
(interview with Nino, July 14, 2017). If the translations were made by fans, “the first thing you notice is 
their spelling mistakes,” not to mention that many of them were “translated directly from English” or 
“adapted too much” because it was easier. However, Nino maintained in romaji everything he considered 
“untranslatable” (or meaningless if translated) and provided explanations in a document he called 
Vocabulari i explicacions (similar to a glossary) on his fansub website (Figure 8). In Nino’s words, he 
explained terms or phrases regarding Japanese culture, together with grammatical constructions, wordplays, 
and anything that “helps the viewers comprehend profoundly the story” and “a bit more about the 
characters” (interview with Nino, July 14, 2017). For easy reference, every word also had a timestamp of 
when it appeared. 
 
Figure 8. Nino’s glossary 
Before uploading the subtitled anime, Nino revised the text as many times as possible, marking doubtful 
translation solutions with brackets and notes, which could be seen only by the translator and not by final 
viewers. In the example in Table 3, the final subtitles in Catalan differed from the Spanish one by adopting 
a similar negative grammatical construction as in Japanese, しか…ない (shika nai; no more than), and 
avoiding the affirmative sense given in Spanish. 
Table 3. Nino’s Self-Revision Process 
Text Transcription 
First Translation Només tinc calces i sostenidors amb estampats (I only have panties and bras 
with patterns) 
Nino’s Notes {treure “amb” i comprovar la concordança amb estampats?} (remove “amb” 
and confirm the concordance with patterns?) 
Second Translation No tinc calces ni sostenidors sense estampats (I have neither panties nor bras 
without patterns) 
When Alro was translating, she worked with a word processor and Google Translate. She copied one 
sentence at a time into the translator and searched for the correct, pragmatic interpretation. She compared 
the source and the target texts. She corrected the sentences in the interface of Google Translate, with an 
emphasis on language choice and collocations. Her second sources of reference were Reverso.net or 
62 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Linguee.es, where she verified specific expressions to achieve a discourse closer to the original Spanish 
translations. Thereafter, she textualized the translated sentences herself, providing pragmatic translations 
with the sense of the original texts (see Table 4). 
Table 4. Alro’s Textualization Process 
Text Transcription 
Original Text Draco took this as his que to attempt a tentative, verbal nudgey 
Google Translate 
Output 
Draco tomó esto como suyo para intentar un tentativo, verbal codazo (Draco 
took this as his to try a tentative, verbal elbowing) 
Alro’s Textualization Draco tomó esa acción para intentar un tentativo empujón verbal (Draco took 
that action to try a tentative verbal push) 
Finally, in the text processor interface from FanFiction.net, she revised the text, searching for typing errors. 
With the publication, she also added a disclaimer note. This included a statement to avoid copyright 
infringement, language reflecting her admiration to J.K. Rowling and to the original fanfictioner, 
instructions to locate the original fanfic in English, and the purpose of her own work: “I only translate the 
story so it can reach to more people” (Figure 9). 
 
Figure 9. Alro’s disclaimer note 
In order for a fan-made translation to be ready for publication, the translators had adapt text to the technical 
specificities of their mode, such as by following character limits and synchronizing scripts and subtitles 
with the right moment in each scene (particularly relevant in audiovisual translation of Selo’s games and 
Nino’s anime). Such adaptations entailed paraphrasing strategies in the target language and a using digital 
resources critically. The fan translators departed from the information provided by Google Translate and 
other resources, but it was crucial for them to read such information critically and adapt it to their needs, 
based on previous language knowledge (e.g., Nino’s self-revising process shown in Table 3 and Figure 4 
or Alro’s search for pragmatic meanings in Figure 5). Fan translators also had to ensure the right 
interpretation of culturally bound terms, especially in the case of distant cultures, such as Japanese and 
Catalan (e.g., Nino’s glossary of terms in Figure 8). They guaranteed that their translation met the internal 
ethical standards in their communities (e.g., Selo’s and Alro’s copyright disclaimers in Figure 7 and Figure 
9). Additionally, the fan translators ensured that potential readers and users could fully understand how to 
use and read their translations (e.g., Selo’s ReadMe document in Figure 7 and Nino’s glossary of terms in 
Figure 8). Finally, the three fan translators we observed gave a different consideration to the original text, 
leading to different translation strategies. Limited by technical constraints, Selo adopted a word-for-word 
translation strategy with some paraphrasing and meticulous language choice (see Figure 6). Embedded in 
a distant culture, Nino adopted a foreignizing translation strategy, with items in Japanese that were then 
further detailed in the glossary. Scrupulously maintaining all the flavor of Harry Potter’s worlds, Alro 
adopted more of a communicative translation strategy, searching for the adequate pragmatic meaning in 
order to evoke similar effects in the Spanish-speaking audience as those in the English-speaking one, as 
seen in Figure 5 and Table 4. 
Tools, Resources, and Collaborative Practices Online 
We found differences and similarities across cases regarding the use of online tools and resources. 
Boris Vazquez-Calvo, Leticia Tian Zhang, Mariona Pascual, and Daniel Cassany 63 
 
Selo relied on Google Translate for comprehension and translation purposes. He revised his translations by 
testing and playing the game, but since his objective was to enlarge the corpus of games available in Spanish 
with a rapid production of translations, he called for help online. In a first attempt, he did so in the ReadMe 
document (Figure 7): Known mistakes. None as far as I know. If you find any you can write at [email]. 
Selo compiled all the files (patches, translations, and ReadMe files) into a .zip file, ready for publishing. 
He first uploaded the final file on ROMhacking.net. On August 8, 2016, he decided to maximize his call 
for help. He started publicizing his translations on four separate forum threads. In so doing, he followed a 
systematic way of advertising the translation, which was indicative of a sophisticated digital literacy and a 
marketing goal to make translations attractive to fans. In this advertising process, he made an initial 
statement with the title of the game and some review on the quality and characteristics of the game (e.g., 
genre, experience, graphics, narrative, intertextuality in reference to literature or other games). He attached 
screenshots (main or start screen, in-play screen, screen with texts translated). He finally provided the link 
for download. Once the translations were uploaded, they were open to public scrutiny. In one comment on 
a forum, Selo stated that “translating [was] not as time consuming as ‘managing’ translations”. This was 
because he took time in replying to every comment, curating the content he created for the fandom. 
Out of the 55 screenshots of Selo, 31 were fans’ comments on his language and translation and Selo’s 
subsequent replies. In those 31 screenshots, fans adopted the role of beta testers: they tested the game and 
highlighted possible graphic and language problems prior to or after online publication (requesting a new 
version of the translation). The comments were either conceptual (n = 10) or practical language issues (n = 
21) regarding Selo’s linguistic transfer from English into Spanish. For instance, gamers suggested that Selo 
be less attached to the original text, but he justified that character limits hindered his creativity. Language 
discussions covered a variety of topics, such as spelling, grammar, lexicon, syntax, and pragmatics. Selo 
replied to every comment, accepted changes, or justified his solutions. He offered some background 
documentation (e.g., Wikipedia, dictionary entries). We present one example in detail (Figure 10). 
 
Figure 10. Fan’s comment revising language chunks 
With jokes and puns, the fan’s comment in Figure 10 stressed captivo, aniverso, and honrada as possible 
mistakes, and proposed a tense change. In Figure 11, Selo accepted the change of the tense as an 
improvement, so that he could avoid making a spelling mistake due to the lack of the character ó. Selo also 
explained that aniverse (a fictional world with anthropomorphic animals) and aniverso (Spanish) were 
terms of the game and manga series according to Wikipedia. This applied to Honrada, too, a proper name 
of a spaceship (the Righteous, in English). Selo also offered a dictionary entry regarding captivo from the 
Spanish dictionary, Diccionario de la lengua española. 
64 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 11. Selo’s response to a fan’s comment on language chunks 
The fan in Figure 11 learned that captitvo was actually a word in Spanish, though he argued that it might 
sound odd in the fantasy-based game. Indeed, captivo was archaic Spanish and not fit for a futuristic context 
with spaceships and aniverses. This way, Selo and the fans collectively learned the importance of language 
choice according to cotext, context, and the function of the original text (captive). They realized that there 
was a choice to make when dealing with terms created by the authors (aniverso–aniverse, Honrada–
Righteous). In this realization, they exhibited that fan translators were concerned not only with linguistic 
codeswitching, but also with sociocultural features and documentation skills. Furthermore, Selo and the 
other fans minimized the impact of character limit on misspellings by changing the tense in Spanish. 
Therefore, they demonstrated that they cared for proper spelling, even if their comments were drafted 
informally, with lax punctuation, spelling, and grammar: Al no tener acentos, quizás es mejor que sea: 
‘Bucky escapa de la armada sapo por un pelo…’ (Since we don’t get graphical accents, maybe it’s better 
to say: ‘Bucky escapes the army toad by an inch…’). 
Moving on to the case of Nino, he aimed to “bring more anime available in Catalan” (interview with Nino, 
July 14, 2017) and offset his limited knowledge of Japanese by utilizing online language resources skillfully 
and creatively. As illustrated earlier, he used Google Translate as a versatile device for changing between 
romaji, hiragana, and kanji, practicing strokes of kanji and back-translating (when Nino transliterated 
incorrectly, he put the Spanish in the translator to check the original Japanese). Keeping the Japanese flavor 
in his translation, he built a glossary for every episode after thorough Internet-based research (e.g., 
Wikipedia, blogs on learning Japanese). He repeated his revision process after publication to incorporate 
changes whenever he spotted any errors as a viewer. Unlike Selo, Nino did not rely on a specific fan 
community for feedback. Rather, he aspired to capture Catalan fans’ attention on language correctness. 
With accumulated experience in translating and the assistance of Softcatalà (a Catalan spelling and 
grammar checker), Nino became conscious and sensitive toward Catalan spelling, grammar, and lexicon. 
He realized that mistakes with diacritical marks (e.g., à, é, ç) and Castilianisms (i.e., unjustified uses of 
Spanish words) were common among Catalan speakers. Nino hoped that his subtitles could raise awareness 
in this sense: 
I do not want to sound arrogant or anything, mainly because I do not come from language studies, but 
I consider that my Catalan, especially thanks to the subtitling experience, not only has improved but is 
much better than the average level of [Catalan] people. (Interview with Nino, July 14, 2017) 
Similar to Selo, Alro gave importance to receiving feedback. In her disclaimer note, she motivated readers 
to give feedback. Turncoat was Alro’s most commented story, with 1,630 comments. It placed 20th (out of 
Boris Vazquez-Calvo, Leticia Tian Zhang, Mariona Pascual, and Daniel Cassany 65 
 
54,300 Spanish fanfics) in the most-reviewed Spanish fanfiction rankings. Most of the comments praised 
Alro’s work and referred to whether the fans liked the story plot, rather than to the quality of the translated 
text. Comments were geared toward socializing over fanfiction and reinforcing Alro’s identity as a fan 
translator, instead of language proofreading. Occasionally, there were comments on Alro’s spelling and 
mastery in translating, including her idiomatic style in Spanish, avoiding calques from English (e.g., the 
overuse of personal pronouns): 
Besides, I have to say that your work is really good, from spelling to the dealing of pronouns, which is 
one of the most common mistakes made by translators; the excessive use of them, ignoring that in 
Spanish verbs are conjugated differently and denote the subject, and all of this considering that your 
mother tongue is not Spanish. Seriously, congratulations. (Quote from a fan’s comment online praising 
Alro’s translation and language)4 
Notwithstanding the lack of more comments on language, Alro stated that she learned a great deal thanks 
to her role as a fan translator: 
I’m more confident now. I watch English TV-series and understand what they say. I remember having 
a hard time speaking in English, but now I’m confident I could engage in a conversation, although 
speaking English, that’s still very hard for me. (Interview with Alro, June 26, 2017) 
Selo, Nino, and Alro shared, to some extent, the idea that “no one knows everything, everyone knows 
something, all knowledge resides in humanity” (Levy, 1997, p. 217). The fans in this study both gave to 
and took from the community. For example, by publicizing his translations (Figure 10, Figure 11), Selo 
inadvertently created a real forum for language learning and co-construction of meaning. Being the 
moderator of the forums, he could ban users—although he chose not to. Even though he received fairly 
critical comments, he redirected the dialogue to receive constructive language feedback. He responded to 
such comments and offered documentation and language information. For such justifications online, he 
used official dictionaries instead of Google Translate, demonstrating that he was aware of the concept of 
the authority of particular resources online. While Selo kept vivid discussions on language and translation 
online, Nino showed an interesting allegiance and promotion of Catalan. With his subtitles, Nino hoped to 
set an example of good Catalan to potential viewers, whose Catalan might have been influenced by Spanish, 
the dominant language. Similarly, Alro’s fanfic translation represented an open space for her creativity, and 
the numerous comments, reads, and likes she received represented a reinforcement of her identity as a 
fanfictioner and fan translator. 
Implications, Limitations, and Suggestions for Future Research 
From the previous findings, we can extract some implications for language learning regarding our research 
objectives. 
Capitalizing on Fan Practices 
Young people conduct a wide spectrum of fan practices (e.g., games, fansubbing, fanfiction, etc.), and some 
of them require highly-sophisticated literacy. Fan literacy practices as vernacular and ordinary practices are 
not a sign of an incomplete or transitional literacy (Lyons, 2007, p. 29). The sophistication in fan practices 
is proven by a full workflow, presented in the three cases of this study, and expands the concept of literacy 
beyond coding and decoding texts. 
Digital literacy practices and fan translation, in particular, require technological, communicative, and 
sociocultural skills. In order for fans to render successful, adequate translations, they need to interact on 
three levels: they interact with the machines (e.g., coding, programming, editing, searching language items), 
with the texts (e.g., translating language and cultural items), and with others (e.g., curating their products, 
replying to fans’ comments). Moreover, we consider that fan practices contrast with formal writing and 
genres “less because of an inadequate mastery of correct writing by those who engage with it, but because 
of the nature of communication and social interaction in the given context” (Barton & Papen, 2010, p. 10). 
66 Language Learning & Technology 
 
This is why it is essential to comprehend the fandom communities where such practices unfold. This 
comprehension involves ascertaining roles, functions, norms, behaviors, and implications of the fan 
practices for the fans. 
Selo, Nino, and Arlo encountered an open space for agency, creativity, and identity building in their 
respective fandoms. They were part of a group that valued their work: a work driven by inner motivation 
and personal likes. Their fan translations kept the fandom going and filled the fandom with valuable content. 
In other words, they were the “generators” of the semiotic fabric in their affinity spaces (Gee, 2005, p. 218). 
In this sense, our study extends previous research on fan translation of games with a focus on technological 
skills (e.g., decoding, hacking; see Muñoz Sánchez, 2007, 2009) by looking into the socioculturally 
embedded practices around it. It also extends previous studies focusing on fansubbing that treat this activity 
as a static phenomenon centered on the textual features of amateur outputs or the stages and technologies 
involved in the production and distribution processes of fansubs (e.g., Li, 2015). Our study clarifies the 
dynamic process of fan translating and the learning it encompasses. 
Language Learning and Fan Translation 
In relation to the language learned through translating, results indicated three different yet complementary 
ways of manifesting informal language learning and a great deal of “silent learning” (Romero, 2004, p. 
218). 
Firstly, Selo sought ways for collaborative learning by asking people to proofread his translations. 
Inadvertently, by becoming beta-testers and playing the games before they were published, fans became 
self-directed co-learners of English and Spanish. In dialogue with Selo, they highlighted numerous 
translation problems relating to the economy of language, pragmatics and register, lexicon and creativity, 
and spelling. 
Secondly, Nino greatly favored autodidactism. With less interaction with readers or colleagues in the 
translating practice, he could overcome considerable difficulties brought by typologically distant languages 
of Japanese and Catalan. This was supported by a creative use of technologies, where Google Translate was 
used as a kanji drawing board and writing system convertor. Nevertheless, he had the readership in mind 
when building up his glossary of Japanese culture-bound terms. 
Lastly, with fewer technological skills needed, Alro epitomized the cultural mediator, adapting all the 
language to the specificities of Spanish. She understood that her fandom valued pragmatic adaptation and 
creativity, provided that fanfiction readers establish a bond with plots and characters. This was interesting 
because it gave us the key to support the notion that translation strategies, which result in language learning, 
changed in relation to whether the link holding the affinity space together was a practice or a product. When 
the practice was the link (e.g., playing games or watching anime in a local language), then there was greater 
concern to transfer the text accurately, with less creativity or free adaptation. This was also driven by the 
fact that audiovisual translation was framed by technical limitations that constrained creativity. When the 
product was the link (e.g., reading Harry Potter fanfiction) and no technical limitations were observed, there 
was a more creative adaptation. Further studies may explore the previous assumption in depth. 
The three cases showcase language learning events in different but relevant ways so that teachers may 
utilize fan practices in their classes according to pedagogical objectives (economy of language, transfer of 
cultural items, creativity). Fan translation as a pedagogical tool expands the repertoire and affordances of 
bridging activities, a pedagogical model of “guided exploration and analysis of student selected or created 
digital vernacular texts originating in Web 2.0” (Thorne & Reinhardt, 2008, p. 558). As a hands-on activity, 
fan translation allows for two lines of in-class work. Language teachers can either (a) recognize and explore 
vernacular practices to learn what they already know or (b) export and apply fan translation or some of its 
components. Practical examples include employing fan translation tasks so that students show the skills 
learned outside the school, profiting from the contexts of the different types of fan translation (audiovisual, 
game-based, or creativity-oriented contexts), teaching and analyzing fans’ translation strategies to 
comprehend and transfer meaning (word-for-word, phrase-for-phrase, meaning-based translation, multiple 
Boris Vazquez-Calvo, Leticia Tian Zhang, Mariona Pascual, and Daniel Cassany 67 
 
uses of automated translation, other documentation resources), or fostering a critical use of language 
resources (machine translation and dictionaries). 
Therefore, students as fan translators can not only explore and analyze, but also practice their translating, 
proofreading, commenting, and curating—all while retaining a high level of agency. The analysis and 
creation of translated scripts and stories in games, series, and fanfiction may prove as beneficial as previous 
research has demonstrated regarding the creation, analysis, and enactment of fan-made (spoken) dialogues 
of (written) stories (Marone & Neely, 2017). Fan translations can also provide additional language-based 
tools for language assessment (e.g., pragmatic accuracy, discourse adequacy, translation strategy, 
translation errors), given that curricular integration and assessment of fan practices remain a line of research 
(Godwin-Jones, 2015). Fan translations may also help debunk some teachers’ misconceptions on translation 
as a detrimental activity for language learning (Pym, Malmkjaer, & Gutiérrez-Colón Plana, 2013). Rather 
than a philological, word-for-word, code-switching activity, translation (including fan translation) is 
profoundly pragmatic, culturally embedded, and full of choices and agency on the part of the translator or 
learner. 
In the era of ubiquitous learning (Cope & Kalantzis, 2009), there is a call to deepen our knowledge on what 
learners of all ages do outside the classroom with consequences on personal, social, professional, and 
academic levels. A clear line of research can be how the literacy and language learning happening outside 
the classroom may be transferred into schools, potentially by exploring the dimensions of location, 
formality, pedagogy, locus of control (Benson, 2011), and trajectory (Chik, 2014) to offer a sound basis for 
routine pedagogical processes. 
However, there are also some limitations. In out-of-class contexts, we cannot determine in exact terms who 
learns what or up to what extent they learn what they learn. Selo, Nino, and Alro did learn language, but in 
a rather implicit way. We cannot conclude that they transferred such learning of language items outside 
their fan practices. We also cannot conclude that some learning occurred in all the readers, users, and 
consumers of the games, forums, subtitles, glossaries, and stories produced by our fans. In this sense, we 
suggest larger groups of informants, and potentially extended periods of observation, to corroborate whether 
and to what extent digital literacy practices, such as fan translations, impact fans’ lives on personal, social, 
academic, and professional levels. Other studies may also want to explore using mixed methods, where 
learning analytics can extrapolate and generalize results. Finally, this is a very new, underexplored field 
with great potential for future research. We think there is a need to redefine good practices on how to recruit 
participants and collect and treat data in Internet-based research within Applied Linguistics. 
Acknowledgements 
This research has been partly funded by the postdoctoral grant Videogames as an academic and vernacular 
literacy practice (ED481B-2017/007, Government of Galicia, Spain) and by the research projects ICUDEL 
(EDU2014-57677-C2-1-R, Ministry of Economy, Spain) and Fandom in Spain (3rd call, Queen Sophia 
Center for Youth and Adolescence, Spain). 
Notes 
1. The informants are familiar with the Common European Framework of Reference, that measures 
language competence in the EU on a 6-band scale: A1, A2 (basic user), B1, B2 (independent user), C1, 
C2 (proficient user). Here we report informants’ self-reported competence in the foreign languages they 
use for amateur translating. 
2. Although we have screenshots of additional fans’ original comments, we present a transcribed and 
translated version of text-based comments online from other fans other than Selo, Nino, and Alro. This 
is to simplify the presentation of findings. 
3. We have made all efforts possible to offer high-quality images, but these are not direct screenshots 
68 Language Learning & Technology 
 
from fans’ online activity. Therefore, some might be slightly blurry. In fact, we distorted screenshots 
before storing them, so that the image files in our databases could not be searchable in image search 
engines. This is because some might have contained third-party information or even sensitive data from 
our informants. That is why we chose to use screenshots of screenshots on word processors where we 
could easily add comments, indications, or translations. 
4. Although we have screenshots of additional fans’ original comments, we present a transcribed and 
translated version of text-based comments online from fans other than Selo, Nino, and Alro. This is to 
simplify the presentation of findings. 
References 
Barton, D. (2007). Literacy: An introduction to the ecology of written language (2nd ed.). Oxford, UK: 
Blackwell. 
Barton, D., & Lee, C. (2013). Language online: Investigating digital texts and practices. New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Barton, D., & Papen, U. (2010). The anthropology of writing: Understanding textually mediated worlds. 
New York, NY: Continuum. 
Benson, P. (2011). Language learning and teaching beyond the classroom: An introduction to the field. In 
P. Benson & H. Reinders (Eds.), Beyond the language classroom (pp. 7–17). London, UK: Palgrave 
MacMillan. 
Benson, P. (2015). Commenting to learn: Evidence of language and intercultural learning in comments on 
Youtube videos. Language Learning & Technology, 19(3), 88–105. 
Black, R. W. (2005). Access and affiliation: The literacy and composition practices of English-language 
learners in an online fanfiction community. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 49(2), 118–128. 
https://doi.org/10.1598/JAAL.49.2.4 
Black, R. W. (2006). Language, culture, and identity in online fanfiction. E-Learning and Digital Media, 
3(2), 170–184. https://doi.org/10.2304/elea.2006.3.2.170 
Black, R. W. (2009). Online fan fiction, global identities, and imagination. Research in the Teaching of 
English, 43(4), 397–425. https://doi.org/10.2307/27784341 
Chik, A. (2014). Digital gaming and language learning: Autonomy and community. Language Learning 
& Technology, 18(2), 85–100. 
Cope, B., & Kalantzis, M. (2009). Ubiquitous learning: An agenda for educational transformation. In B. 
Cope & M. Kalantzis (Eds.), Ubiquitous learning (pp. 3–14). Champaign, IL: University of Illinois 
Press. 
Díaz-Cintas, J., & Muñoz Sánchez, P. (2006). Fansubs: Audiovisual translation in an amateur 
environment. The Journal of Specialised Translation, 6, 37–52. 
Edfeldt, C., Fjordevik, A., & Inose, H. (2012). Fan culture as an informal learning environment. Paper 
presented at the Next Generation Learning Conference, Falun, Sweden. 
Gee, J. P. (2005). Semiotic social spaces and affinity spaces: from the Age of Mythology to today’s 
schools. In D. Barton & K. Tusting (Eds.), Beyond communities of practice (pp. 214–232). 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Gee, J. P. (2007). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy (2nd ed.). New York, 
NY: Palgrave MacMillan. 
Boris Vazquez-Calvo, Leticia Tian Zhang, Mariona Pascual, and Daniel Cassany 69 
 
Generalitat de Catalunya. (2016). Estadístiques culturals de Catalunya. Retrieved from 
http://dadesculturals.gencat.cat/web/.content/sscc/gt/arxius_gt/Estad-culturals-Catalunya-2016.pdf 
Gillen, J. (2014). Digital literacies. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2015). Contributing, creating, curating: Digital literacies for language learners. 
Language Learning & Technology, 19(3), 8–20. 
Hafner, C. A., Chik, A., & Jones, R. H. (2015). Digital literacies and language learning. Language 
Learning & Technology, 19(3), 1–7. 
Hine, C. (2015). Ethnography for the Internet: Embedded, embodied, and everyday. London, UK: 
Bloomsbury. 
Jenkins, H. (2006). Fans, bloggers, and gamers: Exploring participatory culture. New York, NY: New 
York University Press. 
Jenkins, H., Clinton, K., Purushtoma, R., Robinson, A., & Weigel, M. (2009). Confronting the challenges 
of participatory culture: Media education for the 21st century. Chicago, IL: The John D. and 
Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. 
Jenkins, H., Mizujko, I., & Boyd, D. (2015). Participatory culture in a networked era: A conversation on 
youth, learning, commerce, and politics. Cambridge, UK: John Wiley & Sons. 
King, B. W. (2015). Wikipedia writing as praxis: Computer-mediated socialization of second-language 
writers. Language Learning & Technology, 19(3), 106–123. 
Kohlbacher, F. (2006). The use of qualitative content analysis in case study research. Forum: Qualitative 
Social Research, 7(1), article 21. 
Koutsogiannis, D., & Mitsikopoulou, B. (2004). The internet as a glocal discourse environment. 
Language Learning & Technology, 8(3), 83–89. 
Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (2011). New literacies: Everyday practices and social learning (3rd ed.). 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 
Levy, P. (1997). Collective intelligence: Mankind’s emerging world in cyberspace. Cambridge, UK: 
Perseus. 
Li, D. (2015). Amateur translation and the development of a participatory culture in China? A 
netnographic study of The Last Fantasy fansubbing group (Doctoral dissertaion). University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK. 
Lyons, M. (2007). Ordinary writings, personal narratives: Writing practices in 19th and early 20th 
century Europe. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Markham, A., & Buchanan, E. (2012). Ethical decision-making and Internet research: Recommendations 
from the AoIR ethics working committee (version 2.0). Retrieved from 
http://aoir.org/reports/ethics2.pdf 
Marone, V., & Neely, A. D. (2017). Understanding orality through online fanfiction. Writing & 
Pedagogy, 9(1), 197–213. https://doi.org/10.1558/wap.27007 
Marying, P. (2000). Qualitative content analysis. Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 1(2), 1–10. 
Muñoz Sánchez, P. (2007). Romhacking: Localización de videojuegos clásicos en un contexto de 
aficionados. Tradumàtica, (5), article 3. Retrieved from 
http://www.raco.cat/index.php/Tradumatica/article/view/75766 
Muñoz Sánchez, P. (2009). Video game localisation for fans by fans: The case of romhacking. The 
Journal of Internationalization and Localization, 1, 168–185. https://doi.org/10.1075/jial.1.07mun 
70 Language Learning & Technology 
 
O’Hagan, M. (2009). Evolution of user-generated translation: Fansubs, translation hacking and 
crowdsourcing. The Journal of Internationalization and Localization, 1, 94–121. 
https://doi.org/10.1075/jial.1.04hag 
Ortabasi, M. (2007). Indexing the past: Visual language and translatability in Kon Satoshi’s Millennium 
Actress. Perspectives, 4(4), 278–291. 
Pym, A., Malmkjaer, K., & Gutiérrez-Colón Plana, M. D. M. (2013). Translation and language learning: 
The role of translation in the teaching of languages in the European Union. Luxembourg City, 
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union. https://doi.org/10.2782/13783 
Romero, M. E. (2004). Cultural literacy in the world of Pueblo children. In E. Gregory, S. Long, & D. 
Volk (Eds.), Many pathways to literacy: Young children learning with siblings, grandparents, peers, 
and communities (pp. 208–220). New York, NY: Routledge Falmer. 
Sauro, S. (2017). Online fan practices and CALL. CALICO Journal, 34(2), 131–146. 
https://doi.org/10.1558/cj.33077 
Schreiber, B. R. (2015). “I am what I am”: Multilingual identity and digital translanguaging. Language 
Learning & Technology, 19(3), 69–87. 
Strmel, M. (2014). Magical me: Self-insertion fanfiction as literary critique. Scripps Senior Theses, paper 
486. Retrieved from http://scholarship.claremont.edu/scripps_theses/486 
Thorne, S. L., & Reinhardt, J. (2008). “Bridging activities,” new media literacies, and advanced foreign 
language proficiency. CALICO Journal, 25(3), 558–572. 
Valero-Porras, M. J., & Cassany, D. (2016). “Translation by fans for fans”: Organization and practices in 
a Spanish-language community of scanlation. Textos Universitaris de Biblioteconomia i 
Documentació, 37, article 1. https://doi.org/10.1344/BiD2017.38.17 
Vazquez-Calvo, B. (2018). The online ecology of literacy and language practices of a gamer. Educational 
Technology & Society, 21(3), 199–212. Retrieved from https://www.j-ets.net/ETS/journals/ 
21_3/18.pdf 
Vazquez-Calvo, B., & Cassany, D. (2017). Aprender lengua con el traductor automático en la escuela 
secundaria: Un diálogo necesario. Calidoscópio, 15(1), 180–189. 
https://doi.org/10.4013/cld.2017.151.14 
Zhang, T. L., & Cassany, D. (2016). Fansubbing from Spanish to Chinese: Organization, roles and norms 
in collaborative writing. Textos Universitaris de Biblioteconomia i Documentació, 37, article 4. 
Retrieved from http://bid.ub.edu/en/37/tian.htm 
About the Authors 
Boris Vazquez-Calvo is a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Southern Denmark, Denmark, and 
the University of Santiago de Compostela, Spain, developing the project Gaming as literacy. 
E-mail: boris@sdu.dk and boris.vazquez.calvo@usc.es 
Leticia Tian Zhang is a predoctoral researcher at Pompeu Fabra University, Spain, developing a thesis on 
danmu, fansubbing, and fandubbing practices among Chinese and Japanese young speakers. 
E-mail: leticiatian.zhang@upf.edu 
Mariona Pascual is a predoctoral researcher the Autonomous University of Barcelona, Spain, developing a 
thesis on children at risk of developing writing difficulties. 
E-mail: mariona2p@gmail.com 
Boris Vazquez-Calvo, Leticia Tian Zhang, Mariona Pascual, and Daniel Cassany 71 
 
Daniel Cassany is a professor of discourse analysis at Pompeu Fabra University, Spain, currently leading 
the research projects ICUDEL and Fandom in Spain. 
E-mail: daniel.cassany@upf.edu 
