Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2019, Volume 23, Issue 1 
pp. 36–39 
BOOK REVIEW  
 
 
Copyright © 2019 Lucas Kohnke 
 
 
Review of New technologies and language learning 
Lucas Kohnke, Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
 
New technologies and language learning 
Li, L. 
2017 
ISBN: 978-1137517678 
US $ 37.99 
256 pp. 
Palgrave 
London, UK 
 
Li’s New Technologies and Language Learning is an essential reading for undergraduates and 
postgraduates as well as an excellent resource for academics involved with the use of new technologies for 
language learning. Technology has become nearly ubiquitous for language learning in many classrooms 
around the world, and it is continuing to spread rapidly as new technologies become increasingly available 
(Golonka, 2014) and more incorporated into the curriculum (Chun, Kern, & Smith, 2016). This research-
led textbook combines theoretical discussion with practical guidelines on technology in language education. 
New Technologies and Language Learning addresses the existing need for teachers (pre-service, in-
service), students (undergraduate, graduate), and researchers to gain insight into the multifaceted area of 
how new technologies can be utilized in language education. The book has a particular focus on linking 
theories to practice. It is the practical aspect of this book that sets it aside from recent publications on new 
theories and developments in the field (see Chappelle & Sauro, 2017; Farr & Murray, 2016). The book 
provides inspirational ideas to teachers who wish to integrate technologies in a variety of contexts. 
New Technologies and Language Learning is divided into three main parts with nine total chapters. Each 
chapter starts with clear aims, outlining the themes and sections to be discussed. Moreover, each chapter 
includes several tasks, such as critical questions that prompt readers to think reflectively and draw them 
into the discussion. Part 1 presents an overview of seminal work and recent research on technologies in 
language education and second language acquisition to provide a foundation for readers. Part 2 presents an 
overview of technology, language skills and knowledge, and English for specific purposes (ESP), providing 
ample real-life examples of the roles that technology plays in language learning along with empirical 
evidence. Part 3 addresses feedback, materials, and teachers and discusses new aspects that have arisen due 
to incorporating technology in teaching, such as assessment strategies and e-learning material evaluation. 
In all three parts, there are several case studies presented so readers can visualize how technology can be 
effectively used to support the language development process. 
Part 1 is divided into two chapters, and Li focuses these chapters on providing a comprehensive overview 
of seminal work in the field. A particular benefit of Part 1 is that it provides a global overview of technology 
in education and learning theories that support the integration of technologies in language learning (e.g., 
behaviorist, cognitivist, constructivist, and online collaborative learning theories). Part 1 further discusses 
how theory is enacted in practice. Li outlines how computer-assisted language learning (CALL) has 
Lucas Kohnke 37 
 
evolved, beginning with structural CALL and moving into communicative CALL, integrative CALL, and 
today’s collaborative technology-enhanced language learning spectrum. In her discussion, Li stresses that 
these various forms of technology cannot be categorized in a precise timeline, as every time a new stage 
emerges, the previous stage continues. Moreover, in the summary of Chapter 1, Li writes that teachers 
should not restrict themselves to a singular form of CALL. As technology is a flexible tool that presents 
numerous affordances, teachers need to keep in mind the pedagogical goals. The second chapter focuses on 
authentic input and conscious noticing, as well as the role of technology, motivation, and second language 
acquisition. This first part of the book provides a well thought-out overview of how technology can enhance 
linguistic and affective aspects of learning for novice and expert readers. 
Part 2 covers a wide range of technological tools and their roles in enhancing language learning. Chapter 3 
considers the use of technology in facilitating teaching and developing interactional skills. Li uses a variety 
of technologies such as Skype and Voki to illustrate how such tools can enhance fluency, accuracy, and 
interactional competence. A strength of the technological examples throughout the book is that educators 
can adopt the activities Li puts forward for use with other technological tools, as there is no single, correct 
way to use them. In Chapter 4, Li focuses on reading and writing, as these two skills are where learners and 
teachers traditionally spend most of their time. What makes this chapter especially worthwhile is the 
incorporation of real-world cases, as well as the discussion of the appropriate uses of technology and 
materials. In the first half of the chapter, Li discusses writing approaches and the use of technology for 
writing. In this chapter, social networks, blogs, wikis, and corpora are introduced. Then, the discussion 
focuses on reading processes and approaches and the use of technology for assisted reading. The chapter 
concludes with a brief discussion of online literacy and how it is an essential component for language 
acquisition. Li proposes a set of sub-skills that today’s students need, including the ability to synthesize 
information and access appropriate sources. Li also reminds readers that for technology to be successful, 
teachers must effectively implement the technological tools in their classrooms (see Cabanatan, 2003; Li, 
2014). 
Chapter 5 emphasizes linguistic knowledge, specifically lexis and grammar. This is perhaps the most widely 
researched area within CALL, and Li concludes the chapter with a discussion of possible future directions 
and challenges that are thought-provoking. In addition, Li gives the reader ideas of how to use online 
graphical dictionaries such as viswords and ninjawords as educational tools. The final chapter in Part 2, 
Chapter 6, discusses how technologies can support teaching ESP and includes five types of technological 
tools (i.e., corpora, web-based materials, computed-mediated communication programs, wikis, and 3D 
virtual worlds). Moreover, Li also proposes five principles for integrating technology in ESP classes. In 
previous studies (e.g., Warschauer, 2004), scholars have established that teachers use computers in an 
optimal way when students are encouraged to perform the greatest number of real tasks. Li follows this up 
by stating that as ESP is becoming an increasingly popular form of English in the global world, teachers 
need to take a flexible approach in their teaching. Part 2 allows the reader to explore many of the ideas 
presented in the chapter through the multiple tasks and tools introduced. 
Part 3 contains an excellent discussion on feedback, materials, and teacher attitudes. Chapter 7 takes both 
theoretical and practical perspectives of feedback into account. Li discusses issues and problems that may 
arise when using technologies to give feedback and assess students. She introduces how Microsoft Word, 
The Markin Programme, and screen casting tools can be used to give feedback and provides step-by-step 
instruction on how to use them. Toward the end of this section, Li highlights that teachers should consider 
the needs and abilities of our students before deciding to provide feedback via technology. Perhaps, a bridge 
between technology-assisted and face-to-face communication is optimal as technology-assisted and face-
to-face feedback complement each other (Liu & Sadler, 2003). In the second half of the chapter, Li 
emphasizes assessments and how to integrate authoring tools (e.g., Hot Potatoes and Quandary) and online 
exam software (e.g., Quizworks). She concludes the chapter with a brief discussion on alternative forms of 
assessment, namely e-portfolios, and how they might bridge the gap between formal instruction and 
informal learning. As discussed and highlighted throughout, technology is a flexible tool and teachers have 
numerous options for how to utilize it in their own contexts. 
38 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Chapter 8 is a thorough and relevant discussion on how e-learning material can be evaluated, and Li 
introduces several frameworks to readers (e.g., checklists, methodological frameworks, and SLA-based 
approaches). She also discusses how to contextualize and adapt tasks and materials using numerous 
methods, such as the technology-based and activity-based approaches. She asks readers to keep in mind the 
pedagogical aspect of learning and not use technology just for the sake of using it. From a practical point 
of view, this chapter is very valuable, as readers can directly consider and evaluate materials for their own 
classrooms. Chapter 9 is devoted to a comprehensive review of language teachers’ attitudes toward using 
technology. Li reviews the literature and discusses the factors that contribute to teachers’ integration of 
technology in their classrooms. She presents the technology acceptance model and the technology 
integration framework as possible tools. There is also an extensive discussion on the role of teachers in 
technology-enhanced language teaching, and Li introduces the eight different roles by Goodyear (2001), as 
well as the four different roles of a teacher by Berge (1995) and Liu, Bonk, Magjuka, Lee, and Su (2005). 
The discussion includes a critical self-reflection task, where Li asks readers to analyze characteristics of 
good language teachers, especially in a technology-enhanced pedagogical framework. 
Although this is a valuable resource to the field, one area Li could improve would be to include more 
examples of the latest technologies. I would have liked to see more discussion and evidence of virtual 
reality, augmented reality, and app smashing in teaching English, as these are becoming increasingly 
widespread in language learning. Another missed opportunity is the lack of a useful apps and websites 
section with links to the digital and online resources mentioned in the book. As the research on new 
technologies and language learning grows, future work can focus on integrating additional learning tools 
into the teaching process. There is also a need to expand the quantity of viable activities to provide even 
more options for utilizing technologies in language learning in a teacher’s own context. 
A strength of New Technologies and Language Learning is that each chapter contains several tasks and 
case studies for readers to reflect upon and to try out, closely examining how technology can be used. This 
helps readers to personalize the content. Moreover, each chapter contains a glossary of key terms, such as 
zone of proximal development, and ends with an annotated reader for follow-up. These additions make Li’s 
book widely accessible for anyone interested in new technologies and language learning, as the complexity 
of the discussions is never overwhelming. In each chapter, Li repeats that technology can be a helpful tool 
in language learning if integrated properly. 
Overall, New Technologies and Language Learning is a timely publication, and it synthesizes seminal work, 
theory, and practical application, creating a highly relevant and rewarding reading experience. Its 
pedagogical approach makes it especially useful as a textbook for teachers from the primary to adult sectors 
in their efforts to understand the importance of technology in language learning. The volume offers multiple 
levels of resources. 
References 
Berge, Z. L. (1995). Facilitating computer conferencing: Recommendations from the field. Educational 
Technology, 35(1), 22–30. 
Cabanatan, P. (2003). Integrating pedagogy and technology: The SEAMEO INNOTECH experience. 
Paper presented at the Experts Meeting on Teachers/Facilitators Training in Technology–Pedagogy 
Integration, Bangkok, Thailand. 
Chappelle, C. A., & Sauro, S. (2017). The handbook of technology and second language teaching and 
learning. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Chun, D., Kern, R., & Smith, B. (2016). Technology in language use, language teaching, and language 
learning. The Modern Language Journal, 100(S1), 64–80. 
Farr, F., & Murray, L. (2016). The Routledge handbook of language learning and technology. Oxford, 
UK: Routledge. 
Lucas Kohnke 39 
 
Golonka, E. M. (2014). Technologies for foreign language learning: A review of technology types and 
their effectiveness. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 27(1), 70–105. 
Goodyear, P. (2001). Effective networked learning in higher education: Notes and guidelines. Lancaster, 
UK: Joint Information Systems Committee. 
Li, L. (2014). Understanding language teachers’ practice with educational technology: A case from 
China. System, 46, 105–119. 
Liu, J., & Sadler, R. W. (2003). The effect and affect of peer review in electronic versus traditional modes 
on L2 writing. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2(3), 193–227. 
Liu, X., Bonk, C. J., Magjuka, R. J., Lee, S., & Su, B. (2005). Exploring four dimensions of online 
instructor roles: A program level case study. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 9(4), 29–
48. 
Warschauer, M. (2004). Technological change and the future of CALL. In S. Fotos & C. Brown (Eds.), 
New perspectives on CALL for second and foreign language classrooms (pp. 15–25). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
About the Author 
Lucas Kohnke is a Teaching Fellow at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interests 
include technology-supported teaching and learning and professional development using information 
communication technology. Lucas has published in TESOL Journal, RELC Journal, and Journal of 
Education for Teaching. 
E-mail: lucas.kohnke@polyu.edu.hk 
