Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2019, Volume 23, Issue 1 
pp. i–vi 
ANNOUNCEMENTS AND NEWS  
 
 
Copyright © 2019 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Announcements and news from our sponsors 
 
Announcements 
The Editors in Chief of LLT would like to thank everyone who helped make Language Learning & 
Technology a success in 2018. With the publication of our new website, our readership continues to grow. 
LLT readership statistics are available to the public and can be found here. We encourage those who might 
find it useful to visit the site. Please note that a date range must be entered at the top of the page before 
scrolling down to see statistics from past issues. We also acknowledge that the statistics available via this 
site only cover traffic to the new website (i.e., from June 2017 onward). Past statistics between 1997 and 
2017 are not available. 
We would also like to announce that LLT is moving up in Google’s worldwide rankings of academic 
journals in the field of educational technology. Our journal is now ranked in the top 10 of all educational 
technology journals in the world! Many thanks to all who have supported us throughout the years. 
2018 LLT Reviewer Acknowledgements 
The editorial staff would like to recognize the reviewers of submitted LLT manuscripts during 2018. This 
journal could not function without the academic service of these scholars, and we would like to thank them 
warmly for their contribution. 
Zsuzsanna Abrams, Katherine Ackerley, Yuka Akiyama, Thuraya Alabsi, David Allen, Laura Allen, Rachel 
Allen, Kelly Arispe, Asuman Aşık, Androulla Athanasiou, Oliver Ballance, Aaron Batty, Uwe Baumann, 
Mariche Bayonas, Phil Benson, Rocío Blasco García, Joel Bloch, Celina Bortolotto, Alex Boulton, Dan 
Brown, Alberto Bruzos Moro, Jack Burston, María Carrió-Pastor, Mei-Mei Chang, Chin-Chi Chao, Cheryl 
Wei-Yu Chen, Howard Chen, Yan Chen, Alice Chik, Bertha Chin, Jennifer Claro, Tom Cobb, Tatiana 
Codreanu, Karina Collentine, Kathy Conklin, Frederik Cornillie, Elena Cotos, Jeremy Cross, Jhon Cuesta 
Medina, D. Joseph Cunningham, Jonathan deHaan, Tracey Derwing, Melinda Dooly, Irina Elgort, Luana 
Ferreira Lopes Silva, Friederike Fichtner, Mark Freiermuth, Elisabeth Gee, Sean Grant, Jennica Grimshaw, 
Paul Gruba, Gabriel Guillen, Christoph Hafner, Debra Hardison, Dmetri Hayes, Alan Hirvela, Jocelyn 
Howard, Sarah Huffman, Daniel Isbell, Catherine Jeanneau, Claire Kennedy, Richard Kern, Greg Kessler, 
Kurt Kohn, Claudia Kost, Dennis Koyama, Iryna Kozlova, Jeff Kuhn, Malgorzata Kurek, Chun Lai, Yu-Ju 
Lan, Jinyoung Lee, Juhee Lee, Sy-Ying Lee, Aubrey Leveridge, John Levis, Michael Li, Mimi Li, Hui-
Chuan Liao, Jian Liao, Meei-Ling Liaw, Anthony Liddicoat, Huifen Lin, Shumin Lin, Hsien-Chin Liou, 
Sarah Liu, Barbara Loranc-Paszylk, Andreas Lund, Paul Lyddon, Ines Martin, Anne McCabe, Steven 
McCafferty, Owen McGrath, Giulia Messina Dahlberg, Mohammed Mohsen, Katia Monteiro, Long 
Nguyen, Adam Nunes, Minako O’Hagan, Breffni O’Rourke, Larisa Olesova, Marina Orsini-Jones, Ana 
Oskoz, Jill Pellettieri, Carmen Perez-Llantada, Arja Piirainen-Marsh, Luke Plonsky, Melina Porto, Sabrina 
Priego, Grace Qi, Vahid Rafieyan, Hayo Reinders, Jonathon Reinhardt, Joséphine Rémon, Michael Rost, 
Marianna Ryshina-Pankova, H. Müge Satar, Theresa Schenker, Kyle Scholz, Olcay Sert, Lynn Shafer 
Willner, Gillian Skyrme, Simon Smith, Susana Sotillo, Elana Spector-Cohen, JesAlana Stewart, Glenn 
Stockwell, Yanyan Sun, Michael Thomas, Ron Thomson, Denyse Toffoli, Ekaterina Tour, Yea-Ru Tsai, 
Katia Vanderbilt, Robert Vanderplank, Polina Vinogradova, Erik Voss, Nina Vyatkina, Ute Walker, Ian 
Walkinshaw, Liang Wang, Shudong Wang, Yanlin Wang, Yuping Wang, Paige Ware, Mark Warschauer, 
Yasuhisa Watanabe, Cynthia White, Rebecca White, Bradley Wiggins, Hongying Xu, Zhihong Xu, Se 
ii Language Learning & Technology 
 
Jeong Yang, Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang, Peng Yin, Sara Zahler, Qi Zhang, Binbin Zheng, Filio Zourou, 
Katerina Zourou, Rose van der Zwaard 
Copy Editor Acknowledgements for Volume 23, Issue 1 
The editorial staff would like to thank the copy editors that edited the manuscripts appearing in this issue. 
We appreciate their dedication and service while helping to prepare these manuscripts for publication. 
Tahnee Bucher Barbosa da Silva (The University of Arizona) 
Reginald Gentry, Jr. (University of Fukui) 
Kenneth Guay (Marquette University) 
Sponsors 
University of Texas at Austin Center for Open Educational Resources & Language Learning 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center 
University of Hawai‘i Center for Language and Technology 
The Center for Open Educational Resources & Language Learning 
(COERLL) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A leader in the development and dissemination of Open Educational Resources (OERs) such as textbooks, 
videos, and websites, the Center for Open Educational Resources & Language Learning (COERLL) works 
to create an open digital environment for sharing rooted in the use of open licenses, which allow foreign 
language learners and teachers to exchange products, practices, and findings through workshops and online 
communities. 
Trayectos 
COERLL is currently supporting Dr. Gabriela Zapata and a team of graduate and undergraduate students 
at Texas A&M University in the development of Trayectos, a 4-volume, open curriculum for beginning and 
intermediate second language learners of Spanish. Here’s what makes Trayectos different: 
• A learner-centered approach based on Learning by Design, a pedagogy inspired by the 
Multiliteracies movement 
• Fresh, multimodal content that connects the life worlds of learners with the life worlds of diverse 
Spanish speakers 
• Readings based on a variety of textual genres 
• Communicative activities binding language form to cultural meaning in real-life contexts 
• Critical thinking tasks that help learners explore the Spanish-speaking world, including Hispanic 
communities within the US 
• Language awareness activities that feature different varieties of Spanish, including those spoken in 
the US 
• Culminating activities that oblige learners to synthesize the linguistic and cultural content of each 
module into a personal, multimodal text 
• An open Creative Commons license that gives all users the right to adapt the textbook 
• How-to videos to guide you in the creation of a personalized version of the textbook 
News iii 
 
Games2Teach Collaboratory 
August 1–2, 2019, Austin, TX 
COERLL and the Center for Applied Second Language Studies at the University of Oregon will host a 
Games2Teach collaboratory, an interactive workshop where instructors play technology-mediated games, 
learn how game design principles promote language acquisition, and learn to implement games in the 
classroom. Registration opens soon. 
Language OER Network 
COERLL’s Language OER Network (LOERN) showcases the work of open educators in the field of 
language teaching. If you are a language educator who uses, creates, or promotes open educational resources 
and open educational practices, we would like to recognize your innovations by listing your name on the 
LOERN page and awarding you a digital badge. 
Learn more at Language OER Network website. 
COERLL News 
For updates about the above projects, sign up for COERLL news! You can also read about COERLL’s 
other projects at our Projects page.  
iv Language Learning & Technology 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center 
(NFLRC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) engages in research and 
materials development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among 
its many activities. 
NFLRC Funding Continued to 2022 
The University of Hawai‘i has once again been selected to serve as one of a small number of national 
language resource centers (LRCs) established to improve the learning and teaching of foreign languages—
and particularly less commonly taught languages—throughout the US. The university will receive an 
estimated total of $624,000 to cover operations of the NFLRC from 2018 to 2022. This brings the total 
amount awarded to the NFLRC to date to over $10 million. Julio C. Rodríguez (from the Center for 
Language & Technology) is the Director of the NFLRC, and Ruslan Suvorov (from the Center for Language 
& Technology) is the Associate Director. 
The U.S. Department of Education’s Title VI LRC program began in 1990 with the funding of three centers, 
including ours at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa. With each funding cycle, the number of centers has 
increased, and there are now 16 in all. The NFLRC remains the only LRC in the nation to have been funded 
in every cycle since the program’s inception and will celebrate its 30th anniversary in 2020. 
6th International Conference on Language Documentation & Conservation: Connecting 
Communities, Languages, & Technology 
February 28–March 3, 2019, Honolulu, HI 
The 6th International Conference on Language Documentation & Conservation (ICLDC), Connecting 
Communities, Languages, & Technology, will be held at the Hawaiʻi Imin International Conference Center 
on the campus of the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa. The 6th ICLDC is hosted by the Department of 
Linguistics and the National Foreign Language Resource Center at the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa and 
is generously supported with funding from the National Science Foundation. 
The conference program will feature three keynote talks, talk story sessions, workshops, papers, and 
posters. New for 2019 is the technology showcase, a networking opportunity that will bring together 
technology developers and language community members. An optional Hilo field study (on the island of 
Hawaiʻi) to visit Hawaiian language revitalization programs in action will take place immediately after the 
conference (March 4–5, 2019). 
Over the past two decades, endangered language documentation and conservation has (re)emerged as a 
distinct subfield of linguistics with its own methodology and theoretical underpinnings. This reemergence 
has occurred in parallel with a dramatic technological evolution that has put advanced computing tools in 
the hands of language documenters and those striving to reclaim and maintain endangered languages. 
Moreover, technology is also changing traditional user roles, blurring the lines between linguist, speaker, 
and activist by providing increased access to information. Digital tools have the power to greatly accelerate 
the language work, but the digital realm also brings new challenges for endangered languages, which 
sometimes struggle to thrive in a digitally-mediated world. 
At ICLDC 2019, we propose to initiate a dialogue that will lead to improved connections between 
communities, languages, and technologies. We specifically aim to bring together three groups which have 
not always worked closely together: linguists, language communities, and technology developers. 
Join the NFLRC Listserv 
To get announcements and reminders on NFLRC news, publications, professional development events, and 
more, please subscribe to the official announcements email list for the National Foreign Language Resource 
News v 
 
Center at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa. We may occasionally post announcements of other news and 
events of interest to our listserv subscribers, but in general, posts will be kept to a minimum. 
If you prefer social media, you could instead join our 4,200+ fans on Facebook or 1,000+ followers on 
Twitter. All key announcements will be posted there as well. 
  
vi Language Learning & Technology 
 
NFLRC Publications 
Korean for Professionals, Volume 3 
 
The Korean Language Flagship Center aims to produce professionals who 
can function in Korean in their chosen fields. After two years of intensive 
Korean language training customized to their fields, graduates of this program 
are expected to take their place among the next generation of global 
professionals as Korea specialists, commanding professional-level 
proficiency in Korean. Successful completion of the program and 
demonstration of the ability to use Korean at a professional level (ILR 3, 
ACTFL Superior) lead to the Master of Arts degree in Korean for 
Professionals. This monograph series is a compilation of the students’ 
research on critical and controversial issues in Korea or Korea–US relations. 
This volume is the third in the series. 
ScholarSpace 
 
NFLRC maintains a large searchable archive of free language research and 
teaching materials which currently contains over 350 items. These items 
include foreign language teaching materials (in print, audio, and video), 
language acquisition research papers, and collections of conference materials. 
 
Save the trees! Check out our other two online, open-access journals 
 
 
 
 
Language Documentation & Conservation (LD&C) is 
a refereed, open-access journal sponsored by the 
NFLRC and published by University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to 
language documentation and conservation, as well as 
book reviews, hardware and software reviews, and 
notes from the field. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed 
international journal of issues in foreign 
language reading and literacy, published twice 
yearly on the World Wide Web and sponsored 
by the NFLRC and the College of Languages, 
Linguistics, and Literature at the University of 
Hawai‘i at Mānoa. 
 
View all NFLRC Publications 
