Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
June 2019, Volume 23, Issue 2 
pp. 43–64 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2019 Jia Li & Jim Cummins 
 
 
Effect of using texting on vocabulary instruction for 
English learners 
Jia Li, University of Ontario Institute of Technology 
Jim Cummins, Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, University of Toronto 
Abstract 
This article reports on a study that examined the effectiveness of an intervention using text messages to 
enhance the academic vocabulary acquisition of English language learners (ELLs). With a random control 
trial design, we compared students’ learning gain of target vocabulary (direct effect) and its subsequent 
impact on academic vocabulary learning (transfer effect) with and without the intervention treatment. The 
study included 108 undergraduate ELLs in a large Canadian university in Ontario. The intervention was 
aligned with the lesson plans of two comparable content-based courses on English for academic purposes 
required for the ELLs and aimed at teaching frequently used academic words embedded within the assigned 
course readings. The results indicated that, with the intervention, students learned significantly more target 
words. However, there was no difference between the treatment and control groups on academic 
vocabulary post-test performance measuring the transfer effect. The pedagogical implication of the findings 
and suggestions for future research are discussed. 
Keywords: English Language Learners, Text Messages, Academic Vocabulary Acquisition, Intervention 
Study 
Language(s) Learned in This Study: English 
APA Citation: Li, J., & Cummins, J. (2019). Effect of using texting on vocabulary instruction for English 
learners. Language Learning & Technology, 23(2), 43–64. https://doi.org/10125/44682 
Introduction 
Teens and young adults have been at the forefront of the rapid adoption of text messages (Anderson & 
Rainie, 2012; Steeves, 2014). A Pew Research Center publication reported that Americans aged 18–24 
texted most frequently (Lenhart, 2010). In six nation-wide surveys of Norwegians, a peak in text message 
usage was found between the ages of 19 and 21 (Ling, 2010). Furthermore, a recent survey revealed that 
about 96% of college students in the US owned a cellphone and that text messaging was the most-widely 
used feature, with an average of 60 texts sent by young adults per day (Smith & Page, 2015). In the past 
several years, there has been a shifting landscape in texting with the quick adoption of mobile technologies 
among non-native English speakers. Texting has become enormously popular as an important means of 
written communication among school-aged and college students worldwide, many of whom come from 
different first language (L1) backgrounds (e.g., Kasesniemi, 2003; Spagnolli & Gamberini, 2007). 
Because of the unprecedented acceptance of texting within the youth population, including the avid use of 
text messages by non-native English speakers and English language learners (ELLs), researchers and 
educators have endeavored to integrate texting into language instruction and self-regulated learning 
interventions to help second language (L2) students learn different aspects of language (e.g., Cavus & 
Ibrahim, 2009; Hayati, Jalilifar, & Mashhadi, 2013; Kennedy & Levy, 2008). However, in a systematic 
review of the available research on intervention studies that used SMS or MMS messages to teach L2 
vocabulary, we found several methodological shortcomings. These included the short duration of 
interventions, isolated target words, a lack of statistically reliable measures of learning outcomes, and 
limited or no reports on the scientific basis of the words taught. To address these issues, the present study 
44 Language Learning & Technology 
 
examined the effectiveness of an intervention that we developed to teach ELLs’ frequently used academic 
vocabulary—target vocabulary—within a learning context using text messages. In particular, it compared 
ELLs’ learning outcomes with and without the intervention treatment in target academic vocabulary 
learning (direct effect) and its subsequent impact on general academic vocabulary learning (transfer effect). 
Literature Review 
A growing body of empirical research has examined the effect of texting on vocabulary learning for English 
as a foreign language (EFL) learners at the high-school and university levels. In a thorough literature search, 
we located 16 experimental or quasi-experimental studies published from 2005 to 2016 in peer-reviewed 
journals in English that examined the effect of SMS, MMS, or email messages via mobile phones on 
vocabulary or idiom learning. At a minimum, these studies included either (a) a pre-test and post-test for 
the treatment group or (b) a post-test for both the treatment and control groups. Coincidently, all of the 16 
studies were conducted in EFL settings such as Japan, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Cyprus, China, Iran, Thailand, 
and Turkey (see Appendix). Except for the lab experiments of Chen, Hsieh, and Kinshuk (2008), 15 of the 
16 studies were intervention studies, most with a duration of two to four weeks. With the exception of the 
study of Thornton and Houser (2005), who taught students vocabulary on mobile phones using short email 
messages that were comparable to text messages, 15 of the 16 studies directly examined the effect of SMS 
(n = 12) or MMS (n = 3) messages on EFL students’ learning of English vocabulary (n = 13) or idioms (n 
= 2). 
The Effect of Texting-Based Instruction on L2 Vocabulary Acquisition 
Previous intervention studies indicated an overall positive trend of vocabulary gains using texting to support 
EFL students’ vocabulary learning. Of the 15 intervention studies, 14 reported significant learning gains 
after the intervention using SMS, MMS or short email messages via mobile phone to support vocabulary 
or idiom learning. The only exception was a 7-week study conducted by Derakhshan and Kaivanpanah 
(2011) with Iranian freshman that reported no significant differences in students’ vocabulary gains between 
the treatment and control groups. Of the 14 studies reporting learning gains, 13 showed significant results—
direct effects—supporting texting- over paper- or web-based instruction. The only exception was the study 
of Lin and Yu (2016) that compared the direct effect of messages with different text, audio, and visual 
content. There were two studies without control groups that showed significant gains in post-tests compared 
with their pre-tests (Cavus & Ibrahim, 2009; Song, 2008) and 11 studies that showed significant gains when 
comparing the post-test or delayed post-test scores of treatment and control groups. In these studies, the 
control groups often learned target words or idioms through paper materials or web-based learning activities 
(see Appendix). We were unable to locate any study examining transfer effects. 
In their previous work, our colleagues in EFL settings have taken the initiative and have provided much 
insight into this increasingly important area of texting-based instruction on L2 vocabulary acquisition. Their 
results, however, fail to reach a consensus on the effect of texting on L2 students’ vocabulary acquisition 
that is applicable to diverse L2 learners. In addition to the exclusive EFL contexts noted above, only eight 
existing intervention studies clearly indicated participants’ proficiency levels, ranging from elementary to 
intermediate (see Appendix). The other studies made no explicit report on their participants’ proficiency 
levels. There is an urgent need for studies to explore innovative instruction and learning support to help 
youth ELLs in English-speaking countries, as a large number of domestic and international learners of 
English with varied levels of language skills are avid text-users and encounter tremendous challenges in 
meeting the requirements of academic English, including academic vocabulary knowledge (e.g., Douglas, 
2010). 
Most of the existing research is plagued by serious methodological shortcomings. The majority involves a 
small and convenient sample size. Of the 15 intervention studies, only four clearly indicated the use of 
randomly assigned samples (Derakhshan & Kaivanpanah, 2011; Motallebzadeh & Ganjali, 2011; 
Motallebzadeh, Beh-Afarin, & Rad, 2011; Suwantarathip & Orawiwatnakul, 2015). The rest of the studies 
Jia Li and Jim Cummins 45 
 
either reported using convenient samples or did not report on the procedure for participant selection or 
group assignment. Of the 15 studies, 10 had a sample size under 50, including both treatment and control 
groups combined (see Appendix). Small sample sizes often decreased statistical power (i.e., the probability 
to correctly detect an intervention effect) and had an influence on the reliability of the results (Kline, 2004). 
Although all studies reported p values informing whether treatment effects existed, only one study (Hayati 
et al., 2013) reported Cohen’s d measuring the magnitude of the standardized treatment effect (Wilkinson, 
1999). Moreover, these studies lacked reliable measures to establish baseline comparability between 
treatment and control groups in terms of variations in students’ language proficiency and other demographic 
characteristics (e.g., L1, age, gender, and duration of English instruction received). None of the 13 
intervention studies which included a control group reported the demographic comparability between the 
control and treatment groups. Only four of the 10 studies which administered comparability measures on 
students’ language proficiency levels reported internal consistency reliability tests (Motallebzadeh & 
Ganjali, 2011; Motallebzadeh et al., 2011; Saran, Seferoğlu, & Çağıltay, 2012; Suwantarathip & 
Orawiwatnakul, 2015). Additionally, statistically rigorous measures to assess L2 learners’ learning 
outcomes because of the texting-based intervention were also lacking. All of the 16 studies we reviewed 
employed self-developed, mostly, multiple choice questions, and only six studies reported internal 
consistency reliability indices for the tested items in the self-developed measures. Additionally, no studies 
we reviewed reported inter-rater reliability tests for data coding consistency (see Appendix). 
Furthermore, previous results on the long-term effect of using texting-based instruction on word retention 
appeared to be inconsistent. Only six of the 13 intervention studies with control groups administered both 
post-test and delayed post-tests. The delayed post-tests took place two to five weeks after the post-tests. 
One study reported significantly greater vocabulary gains on both post-tests and delayed post-tests, 
supporting MMS intervention over paper- and web-based instructional materials (Saran et al., 2012). Three 
reported significantly greater gains in delayed post-tests rather than post-tests, supporting either SMS 
intervention over self-paced learning using paper materials (Alemi, Sarab, & Lari, 2012; Zhang, Song, & 
Burston, 2011) or enriched content presentation in text messages (Lin & Yu, 2016). One reported 
significantly greater gains in post-tests and not delayed post-tests, again supporting SMS intervention over 
paper materials (Lu, 2008). Finally, one reported no differences in vocabulary gains between the control 
and treatment groups in either post-test or delayed post-test scores (Derakhshan & Kaivanpanah, 2011). 
Better results with delayed post-tests over post-tests might partly have been due to the short duration of the 
interventions, low texting frequencies, or a combination of both. 
Lastly, we were unable to locate studies that investigated the transfer effect of vocabulary texting instruction 
on students’ learning of non-target words or other aspects of English knowledge (e.g., reading 
comprehension skills). Previous studies measured only students’ learning gains in target words or idioms. 
The study with Iranian EFL adult learners by Motallebzadeh and Ganjali (2011) indicated significantly 
greater gains on the total score of target words and reading comprehension, supporting the SMS intervention. 
However, separate scores on target words and reading were not reported, and there was no information on 
whether the reading comprehension questions directly tested the usage of target words embedded in the 
reading or another aspect of reading comprehension, such as a possible transfer effect. Vocabulary 
instruction needs to help students master a limited number of carefully selected “high leverage cross content” 
words (Lawrence, Crosson, Paré-Blagoev, & Snow, 2015, p. 5), so that they can become autonomous 
learners capable of learning new words on their own—a transfer effect. As Biemiller points out, there is a 
“need for planned introduction and explanation of vocabulary plus various tools to help children become 
more independent in dealing with new vocabulary” (2001, p. 27). This is equally applicable to learners of 
any age. It is critical to understand how much instruction and what type of instruction text messages can 
deliver to help L2 learners independently learn vocabulary beyond just target words. 
Major Intervention Design Features and Texting Content 
A few key design features emerged from the intervention studies examining the effect of vocabulary 
learning using text messages. The majority of the interventions used the push model, a one-way 
46 Language Learning & Technology 
 
communication “where teachers [controlled] the frequency and the timing” (Stockwell, 2010, p. 96) as well 
as the content of messages sent to learners. With three exceptions, the EFL learners sent their instructor 
messages with sentence construction, fill-in-the-blank, and writing exercises using target words and 
exchanged target word sentences with their peers (Derakhshan & Kaivanpanah, 2011; Suwantarathip & 
Orawiwatnakul, 2015; Tabatabaei & Goojani, 2012). Though students in some studies said they preferred 
two-way text messaging, interacting with their teachers and peers to create a more engaging and 
personalized learning experience (Cavus & Ibrahim, 2009), the push mode proved effective in providing 
students with a structured, practical, and convenient learning routine. This consistently enabled a small, 
viable amount of vocabulary knowledge input and led to significant learning gains, as was reported in the 
L2 reviewed intervention studies using the one-way communication push model. The push model can send 
well-designed “multicasting messages to a group of mobile users with a common profile, thereby improving 
the effectiveness and usefulness of the content delivered” (Motiwalla, 2007, p. 585). Moreover, it is easier 
to implement than two-way interactive texting among a large number of learners. It can also better ensure 
the implementation fidelity of the interventions. 
Some of these studies’ intervention designs explicitly emphasized repeated exposures to target words, 
which conformed to a key instruction principle proven to be effective for L2 learners’ vocabulary 
acquisition (Hulstijn, 2001; Nation, 2001; Schmitt, 2008). For instance, Thornton and Houser (2005) sent 
Japanese university students three mini-lesson messages daily in multiple exposures: introducing a word, 
reviewing the word, and incorporating the word into a story. Cavus and Ibrahim (2009) divided 48 messages 
into three clusters of 16 messages and sent them to students three times over nine days. 
Frequent incremental vocabulary instruction (Barcroft, 2012) at spaced intervals (Braun & Rubin, 1998) is 
another important cornerstone feature for some of the intervention designs. Of the 15 intervention studies, 
six sent student messages twice or more per day (see Appendix), often during the day time, when students 
were more receptive to text-based instruction. The highest texting frequency for spaced vocabulary 
instruction was performed by Cavus and Ibrahim (2009) who sent their participants one email message via 
mobile phone, at a pre-determined optimal interval, every half hour between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. In the 
study by Zhang et al. (2011), university students received two messages per day, one at 12:00 p.m. and the 
other at 5:30 p.m. Overall, these studies demonstrated the promise of texting to provide students with 
repeated vocabulary exposures in structured and spaced intervals. This was more effective in supporting L2 
learning than “massed practice” (Seabrook, Brown, & Solity, 2005, p. 107); however, most of the studies 
were missing information regarding the texting time and frequency. 
As to the content of text messages, the existing research seemed to be in agreement, focusing on teaching 
students word meanings by providing word definitions in English or the L1 and sample sentences—
“discrete chunks readable on the tiny screens of mobile phones” (Thornton & Houser, 2005, p. 221). This 
was not only feasible, but also effective, given that 13 of the 14 intervention studies with significant learning 
gains included definitions or sample sentences in their text messages. It is also worth noting that some 
studies, to varying degrees, emphasized teaching target words in context (e.g., Song, 2008; Suwantarathip 
& Orawiwatnakul, 2015; Thornton & Houser, 2005). Song (2008) introduced students to new words 
through personal experiences in the UK on four topics (nightlife, food, weather, or travel). Each topic 
covered four days’ learning content, focusing on four to six target words or expressions per day. A website 
that aimed to increase students’ exposure to target vocabulary also provided students with content resources, 
such as an online dictionary and vocabulary and cultural tips. Meanwhile, target words or expressions with 
brief explanations in Chinese and English were sent to students through SMS. However, most interventions 
in these studies taught words in a decontextualized and isolated manner, only providing sample sentences 
and definitions in the L1 or English. This, in turn, diminished students’ repeated exposure to target words 
in context as well as their opportunities for further incidental learning of target and other words in authentic 
contexts. It is reasonable to assume that if an intervention incorporates students’ other language learning 
activities, directly supports classroom instruction, and teaches students words that meet their immediate 
needs (e.g., assigned course readings), the intervention may effectively motivate students as well as bridge 
their attentive vocabulary learning through explicit instruction in various contexts. 
Jia Li and Jim Cummins 47 
 
Finally, among the studies we reviewed, the intervention with the longest treatment duration (16 weeks) 
had the lowest texting frequency (two messages per week; Alemi et al., 2012). The intervention with the 
shortest duration (nine days) had the highest texting frequency (16 messages per day with one message 
every 30 minutes; Cavus & Ibrahim, 2009). Other intervention studies had either a relatively short duration 
or low frequency of text messages, so they lacked an optimal combination of duration and frequency. 
Examples include two messages per week for four weeks (Lin & Yu, 2016), two messages per day for two 
weeks (Lu, 2008), and four messages per day for 20 days (Hayati et al., 2013). According to research on 
learning English as an L1, a single exposure to an unknown word results in a 10% to 15% chance of learning 
its meaning (see Nagy, Herman, & Anderson, 1985; Swanborn & Glopper, 1999). For L2 learners, more 
exposure is required to acquire a word (Nation, 2001). Thus, limited treatment duration and texting 
frequency may be insufficient for students to achieve long-term retention of target words—something that 
was not measured in most of the existing studies. The transfer effect (i.e., vocabulary learning gain beyond 
target words or in reading comprehension) has not been investigated. 
Research Questions 
These studies have indicated the great potential of texting in facilitating EFL learners’ vocabulary and idiom 
learning in a self-regulated format that can occur anytime, anywhere. However, beside the issues raised 
above regarding the research methods and intervention designs, previous EFL research has focused 
exclusively on learners with low to intermediate English proficiency levels. In the present study, we tried 
to overcome these limitations and examined the effect of an intervention using texting on university ELLs’ 
learning of contextualized academic vocabulary. These ELL students had an advanced-low language 
proficiency level (American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages, 2012). The study answers the 
following two research questions: 
1. What is the (direct) effect of the intervention using text messages on students’ learning of target 
academic vocabulary? 
2. What is the (transfer) effect of the intervention using text messages on students’ learning of general 
(non-target) academic vocabulary? 
Methods 
Upon receiving ethics approval from two universities (one by the lead researcher’s affiliated university and 
the other by the institution where the study was conducted), the students registered in six content-based 
classes of English for academic purposes (EAP) and their instructors at a large Canadian university in 
Ontario were invited to participate in the study. The students were provided with an informational invitation 
letter about the project and a consent form with their instructors present. It was explicitly indicated that 
student participation was voluntary and that they could withdraw from the study at any time and without 
any impact on their grades. 
Participants 
Participants included 108 (49% female) undergraduate students (ages 18–25) from the EAP classes. The 
L1s spoken by the participants were Mandarin (51%), Cantonese (14%), Russian (7%), Arabic (7%), Farsi 
(7%), Korean (5%), Turkish (5%), Spanish (2%), and Lithuanian (1%). The duration of their residence in 
Canada varied from two months to 13 years (M = 2.56 years, SD = 2.90). The years of English instruction 
students had received previously ranged from two to 15 years (M = 9.27 years, SD = 3.57). The academic 
majors of participants included economics, finance, business, accounting, computer science, biology, 
communication studies, psychology, actuarial science, English, law and society, and sociology. Based on 
the university admission requirement for English language competence, the participants met the 
requirement at the lower end (i.e., 80+ for the iBT, 6+ for the IELTS) and often demonstrated difficulties 
in reading comprehension of academic texts due to their limited academic vocabulary knowledge. It was a 
challenge to engage the class in meaningful discussions unless difficult academic words were explained in 
simpler English or in their L1s (e.g., Chinese, which a Chinese-English bilingual instructor was able to do). 
48 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Consequently, the students’ inability to support their arguments with well-integrated references and 
paraphrases created barriers to effective academic essay writing. Overall, their performance in the EAP 
program tended “to be uneven” (American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages, 2012, p. 6) 
across topics and language skills. 
The Intervention Design 
The intervention, Word Matters, aimed to teach university undergraduate English language learners “high 
leverage” (Lawrence et al., 2015, p. 5) academic words in their assigned readings using text messages. It 
was expected that this would increase their academic vocabulary knowledge, helping them approach the 
reading comprehension threshold required for an academic text (Nation, 2001)—familiarity with an 
estimated 95% of the vocabulary (Laufer & Ravenhorst-Kalovsk, 2010)—and, in turn, assisting their 
learning of other academic words encountered in academic texts. 
We used a randomized experimental design with pre-test and post-test data. The six classes, in which 
participants were registered in two comparable EAP courses and taught by three instructors, were randomly 
assigned to the treatment (n = 48, 44.4%) and control groups (n = 60, 55.5%), with three intact classes in 
each group. The intervention lasted for nine weeks. 
As part of the curriculum of the courses, students in both treatment and control groups were required to 
read the same assigned readings and engage in class discussions of the readings with teachers’ instruction. 
Students in the control group were asked to use online dictionaries and dictionary apps with their own 
devices to check the meanings of target words and sample sentences. This design aligned with the control 
conditions in the studies previously discussed using dictionaries (e.g., Alemi et al., 2012) or web-based 
materials (e.g., Saran et al., 2012; Thornton & Houser, 2005) and self-paced learning (e.g., Zhang et al., 
2011). The control condition, which could be facilitated easily in class, combined instructors’ explanations 
of words during class discussion with students learning the words by reading hard copies of articles or a 
novel. This condition was similar to the learning activities that often took place in the intact setting. 
The participants in the treatment group received an orientation email at the beginning of the project 
explaining the purpose of the intervention and the detailed information they would be receiving via text 
messages. The intervention included sending students information about three words carefully selected 
from the required reading materials each day through text messages: one at 10:00 a.m., one at 4:00 p.m., 
and one at 8:00 p.m. Each text message included a target word, the title of the assigned reading where the 
word appeared, the page reference of the target word in the reading, the part of speech, the word’s definition, 
and a sample sentence (see Figure 1). Every evening at 8:30 p.m., students also received an email message 
summarizing the three words sent during the day and containing a small quiz on the words learned a week 
before (see Excerpt 1). At the end of each week and month, the students received a downloadable summary 
of the words they had been sent for their own future reference. During the nine week intervention, a total 
of 189 target words were sent to students through text messages, with three words sent daily, or 21 words 
a week. Prior to the intervention, a trial text message and email message were sent to the students in the 
treatment group who were required to confirm their receipt of the messages by texting and email. Students 
reported that on average they read three text messages four days a week in the post-intervention survey, 
which results are reported in a separate article focusing on students’ perceptions and experience of the 
intervention (Li, Cummins, & Deng, 2018). 
Jia Li and Jim Cummins 49 
 
 
Figure 1. Sample text messages 
Excerpt 1. A Sample Daily Email 
Hello everyone, 
How are you doing today? It’s super cold in Boston these days and I believe it must be even colder in 
Canada. 
Keep warm, friends! 
Let’s see what we have for today: 
*principle* (from Crow Lake, p. 23) 
n. A rule that teaches you what is right and wrong and that influences your actions. 
It’s against my principles to cheat. 
*glean* (from Crow Lake, p. 23) 
v. To collect bit by bit. 
At present we’re gleaning information from all sources. 
*devotion* (from Crow Lake, p. 23) 
n. A feeling of strong love or loyalty. 
She has cared for the poor with selfless devotion. 
50 Language Learning & Technology 
 
~~~~~quiz~~~~~~word game~~~~~~quiz~~~~~~word game~~~~~~quiz~~~~~~word game~~~~~ 
Do you still remember these words? 
Complete the following sentences with the words you learned last week. Write your answers on a piece 
of paper and check tomorrow’s email for the answers! 
1. She claims that she can ____________ future events. 
2. If war broke out, it would be _____________ for the whole world. 
3. I would like to offer a historical ______________. 
Answer for yesterday’s quiz: 1. abandon; 2. marvelous; 3. entangle 
Hope you enjoy learning these words today! 
All the best, 
Mei 
Data Collection Procedure 
All the participants in both the treatment and control groups were informed about the research procedures, 
including learning conditions, number of tests, test times, and length. One week before and after the 
intervention, both the treatment and control groups received a pre-test and post-test. To ensure accurate 
comparable difficulty levels between the pre- and post-measures, the same vocabulary tests were 
administered. These included a 60-item target vocabulary test developed by the research team based on a 
selection of academic words from assigned readings that were texted to students during the intervention, 
and a 30-item (non-target) general academic vocabulary test adapted from the vocabulary levels test 
(academic level) by Schmitt, Schmitt, and Clapham (2001). All non-target words had appeared in assigned 
readings. The participants were administered a pre-intervention survey that focused on their demographics 
and technology use. A post-intervention survey and interviews were also conducted to collect information 
on students’ learning behaviors during the intervention and their feedback on the intervention; those results 
were reported in a separate article (Li et al., 2018). The pre- and post-vocabulary tests and the pre-
intervention survey were administered to the treatment and control groups in the classroom by the lead 
researcher, a research assistant, or course instructors. Students were given 30–40 minutes to complete the 
pre-tests or post-tests. It took about 15–20 minutes for students to complete the surveys. 
Instrument Development 
Pre-Intervention Survey 
In order to develop a feasible and effective intervention, we first developed a survey to identify technology 
applications that students often used and that were aligned with student interests or preferences. The survey 
consisted of two parts: Part 1 asked for demographic information (i.e., major, L1, years in Canada, country 
of origin, years of English instruction) and Part 2 asked participants to report the frequency of their 
technology use (i.e., email, text messaging, Facebook, Twitter, and other social media). The research team 
developed the survey in consultation with seven ELL students registered in the courses in the previous and 
current school terms and three of their instructors. Three rounds of revisions were made in accordance with 
their suggestions and comments. 
The survey results helped the team design a user-friendly intervention. Participants reported their frequency 
of using technology on a 5-point Likert scale (i.e., 1 = never, 2 = once a month, 3 = once a week, 4 = once 
a day, and 5 = more than once a day; see Figure 2). They reported that the average frequency of using text 
messages was approaching more than once a day. They used text messages (M = 4.84, SD = 0.43) more 
often than email (M = 4.37, SD = 0.69), followed by Facebook (M = 3.37, SD = 1.68), WeChat (M = 3.00, 
SD = 1.89), and Twitter (M = 1.49, SD = 1.02). 
Jia Li and Jim Cummins 51 
 
 
Figure 2. Frequency of technology use by participants before intervention  
Target Academic Vocabulary Selection 
Prior to the study, the lead researcher and author had taught the EAP courses mentioned above for two years 
and observed the challenges that ELL students with an advanced-low competence level encountered when 
processing assigned readings.1 The challenges were often due to students’ difficulties in comprehending 
the meanings of academic and low-frequency words (Coxhead, 2000; Nation 2001). These words also 
appeared in their assigned reading book, Crow Lake (Lawson, 2003), corresponding to a ninth-grade 
reading level for native-English speakers. Our observation was later confirmed by the results of student 
pre-vocabulary tests. 
The research team used Cobb’s (2016) VocabProfilers to identify academic and low-frequency words and 
determine the number of occurrences in the assigned readings. In order to optimize students’ vocabulary 
learning and support their reading comprehension, the intervention focused on academic words and difficult 
(low-frequency) words that met three selection criteria: (a) they were critical for the comprehension of the 
assigned readings (e.g., inhabitant, disguise, segregate), (b) there were multiple occurrences of the words 
in the assigned readings, and (c) they were likely to be encountered frequently by students in a variety of 
academic domains (e.g., predict, perspective, demonstrate), as recommended by research experts in the 
area of vocabulary, language, and literacy development (e.g., Baumann & Graves, 2010; Nation, 2001; 
Snow & Uccelli, 2009; Stahl & Nagy, 2006). 
A total of 200 vocabulary items were selected from the required readings on Canadian culture, language, 
and social issues for the courses in which participants were enrolled. These included the book Crow Lake 
(84 target words), a book chapter titled “Aboriginal People” (44 target words; Steckley, 1997), a journal 
article titled “Managing Homeless Youth in Toronto” (46 target words; Gaetz, Tarasuk, Dachner, & 
Kirkpatrick, 2006), and a newspaper article titled “Why Can’t We Talk” (26 target words; Erasmus, 2002). 
Of these words, 117 were on the academic word list (AWL; Coxhead, 2000), and 81 were low-frequency 
words (e.g., devastate, fidget, marvelous). Of the 200 total words, 189 were used as target words for the 9-
week intervention. Definitions of the vocabulary and example sentences were adapted from the contexts in 
which they occurred in the readings or dictionaries. The research team carefully selected and modified the 
definitions and wrote example sentences, ensuring their relevance to the students’ academic and daily lives. 
Target Academic Vocabulary Test 
The research team developed a 60-item target vocabulary test with multiple-choice questions through 
random selection from a target pool of 189 words. The test was administered to students both as a pre-test 
52 Language Learning & Technology 
 
and as a post-test. Due to a timing conflict with students’ final exams, we were unable to administer delayed 
post-tests. To examine the reliability of the scale, we applied Cronbach’s alpha to test the internal 
consistency of the scale and an intra-class correlation test to examine the inter-rater reliability of the two 
raters. The internal reliability index for the 60 items was .94, indicating excellent internal consistency of 
the scale in measuring the students’ target vocabulary performance. We made three attempts to achieve 
high quality coding for all the vocabulary tests. In the end, the inter-rater reliability was .99 with 15% of 
randomly selected test scores, indicating an exceptionally high rater agreement. 
General Academic Vocabulary Test 
To assess student participants’ general academic vocabulary knowledge, a 30-item academic vocabulary 
test was adapted from the vocabulary levels test by Schmitt et al. (2001). The original Cronbach’s alpha 
reliability index of the vocabulary levels test was .96. The internal consistency reliability for the present 
study using Cronbach’s alpha was .91 for the scale with 30 items, indicating excellent internal consistency. 
The inter-rater reliability was .99 using intra-class correlation with 15% of randomly selected test scores, 
indicating an exceptionally high rater agreement. 
Data Analysis Procedure 
The analysis involved three steps using the SPSS statistical package, Version 21. Step 1 was to test the 
comparability of the control and treatment groups’ existing target academic and general academic 
vocabulary knowledge prior to the intervention (i.e., condition, instructor, and course). One-way analyses 
of variance (ANOVAs) were performed on the target academic and general academic vocabulary pre-test 
scores to assess any statistically significant group differences. Comparability was established as the results 
revealed no significant group differences for students’ target academic (F(1, 92) = 0.02, p = .90) or general 
academic (F(1, 78) = 0.08, p = .77) vocabulary knowledge. The results of further analyses found no significant 
differences in target academic vocabulary for condition (F(1, 90) = 0.23, p = .63), instructor (F(2, 90) = 0.75, 
p = .47), or course (F(5, 90) = 1.32, p = .26). Similarly, there were no significant differences in general 
academic vocabulary for condition (F(1, 78) = 0.08, p = .77), instructor (F(2, 90) = 0.37, p = .69), or course 
(F(5, 78) = 0.17, p = .97). These findings showed the comparability for pre-test results between control and 
treatment groups, between different instructors, and between different courses. So, the one-way ANOVA 
was used for post-test data, and the pre-test scores were not used as a covariate. 
To test the comparability of student background characteristics yielded from the pre-survey between 
treatment and control groups, we used Chi-square tests for percentage data and univariate ANOVA tests to 
compare variable means. The Chi-square tests revealed that the control and treatment groups did not differ 
significantly in terms of age (p = .34), gender (p = .37), L1 (p = .87), or home country (p = .65) distributions. 
ANOVA tests revealed that the control and treatment groups did not differ significantly regarding years in 
Canada (p = .64) or years of English instruction (p = .61) or regarding frequency of using text messages 
(p = .93), email (p = .30), WeChat (p = .08), Facebook (p = .25), Twitter (p = .06), or other social media 
(p = .55). Therefore, none of these variables was included as a covariate in ANOVA tests for Research 
Questions 1 and 2. Next, two separate one-way ANOVA were conducted for the pre-tests and post-tests on 
target academic and general academic vocabulary scores to examine the intervention effect on students’ 
learning of target academic and general academic words with and without the intervention. Effect sizes 
were calculated using Cohen’s d. 
Results 
To answer Research Question 1, the ANOVA revealed that the treatment group performed significantly 
better in their post-tests (M = 44.41, SD = 11.77) than in their pre-tests on target academic words 
(M = 36.76, SD = 14.64, F(1, 80) = 6.47, p = .01, partial η2 = .08). The effect size calculation using Cohen’s 
d revealed a medium intervention effect (d = .58). Participants in the control group, however, performed 
essentially the same in their post-tests (M = 39.85, SD = 12.39) and pre-tests of target academic words 
(M = 37.14, SD = 14.39, F(1, 107) = 1.10, p = .30, partial η2 = .01; see Table 1 and Figure 3). In the post-test 
Jia Li and Jim Cummins 53 
 
of target academic words, the treatment group performed significantly better than the control group (F(1, 97) 
= 4.40, p = .04, partial η2 = .05). 
Table 1. Means, Standard Deviations, and ANOVAs for Target Academic Words 
 
Pre-Test 
 
Post-Test    
d Partial η2 Group M SD N 
 
M SD N df F p 
Treatment 36.76 14.64 42 
 
44.41 11.77 37 78 6.47 .01 .58 .08 
Control 37.14 14.39 50 
 
39.85 12.39 58 107 1.10 .30 .20 .01 
Note. Though there were 48 students in the treatment group and 60 in the control group, not all of them took both tests. 
For instance, there were 50 participants in the pre-test and 58 in the post-test for the control group. 
 
Figure 3. Student performance on target academic vocabulary in pre-tests and post-tests 
To answer Research Question 2, the ANOVA for general academic vocabulary test scores suggested that 
there was not any significant difference for the treatment group between the pre-test (M = 25.16, SD = 4.27) 
and post-test scores (M = 24.88, SD = 5.32, F(1, 67) = 0.05, p = .82). Similarly, there was no significant 
difference in the control group between the pre-test (M = 24.80, SD = 5.72) and the post-test (M = 23.04, 
SD = 6.55, F(1, 95) = 1.94, p = .17; see Table 2 and Figure 4). The findings suggested that no intervention 
effect was present for general academic vocabulary, which was not instructed in the intervention. In fact, 
the treatment group’s general academic vocabulary mean score in the post-test was slightly lower than in 
the pre-test, with a mean difference (MD) of -0.27 (pre-test SD = 4.27, post-test SD = 5.31). Similarly, the 
control group’s general academic vocabulary mean score in the post-test also was lower than in the pre-test, 
with a MD of -1.76, (pre-test SD = 5.73, post-test SD = 6.55). However, the lower scores were likely caused 
by random errors within reasonable fluctuation, and these decreases were not statistically significant or 
meaningful. 
Table 2. Means, Standard Deviations, and ANOVAs for General Academic Words 
 
Pre-Test 
 
Post-Test    
d Partial η2 Group M SD N 
 
M SD N df F p 
Treatment 25.16 4.27 32 
 
24.89 5.31 35 66 .05 .82 -.06 .00 
Control 24.80 5.73 46 
 
23.04 6.55 49 94 1.94 .17 -.29 .02 
Note. Though there were 48 students in the treatment group and 60 in the control group, not all of them took both tests. 
For instance, there were 46 participants in the pre-test and 49 in the post-test for the control group. 
54 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 4. Student performance on general academic vocabulary in pre-tests and post-tests 
Discussion 
Effect of the Push Mode and Texting Content 
The present results are consistent with previous studies which show significant learning gains of target 
words and thus support the use of texting over web-based vocabulary instruction, self-paced learning, and 
the independent use of dictionaries. In addition, the results reinforce active engagement and positive 
perceptions of the intervention (see Appendix). Except for the study by Chen et al. (2008), all the studies 
we reviewed were intervention studies focusing on measuring the learning gains of target words or idioms. 
Nine of these studies showed that with texting-instruction students learned significantly more words when 
compared to their performance before the intervention treatments and to their peers’ performance in control 
groups (see Appendix). The web- and paper-based control conditions in many of the previous studies shared 
the characteristics of the self-paced and independent learning (e.g., Alemi et al., 2012; Hayati et al., 2013; 
Saran et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2011). 
Additionally, two quasi-experimental studies (Cavus & Ibrahim, 2009; Song, 2008) without control groups 
showed significant vocabulary gains by students after experiencing interventions. As was the case in the 
present study, eight of the 11 studies mentioned above sent text messages containing vocabulary or idiom 
instruction to learners. Therefore, the push model is clearly effective in supporting students’ target 
vocabulary or idiom learning (see Appendix). Our 2-month intervention study showed a significant 
difference in the learning gain of target words between the treatment and control groups (MD = 4.94). This 
was comparable to some results of previous studies that had durations between two weeks and two months 
(e.g., Lu, 2008: MD = 2.8; Suwantarathip & Orawiwatnakul, 2015: MD = 3.83; Zhang et al., 2011: MD = 
12.5). It is worth mentioning that the present study taught more words than the three studies noted above. 
Some students in the present study, however, did express a preference for text messages in a two-way 
interaction. This echoes survey results by Cavus and Ibrahim (2009), who found that students believed that 
two-way texting instruction would have been more effective than the one-way approach. However, unless 
an adaptive, intelligent text messaging system can be developed, the push mode is more easily implemented 
due to the labor intensity required for interactive texting. 
The present study, focusing on carefully crafted word definitions and sample sentences using simple 
language accessible to students, was in line with some previous studies (e.g., Hayati et al., 2013; Lu, 2008), 
supporting the principle of comprehensible input (Krashen, 1989, 2003). That is, vocabulary teaching 
content should be clear and comprehensible and avoid complicated explanations with unknown or less-
known synonyms or definitions (Nation, 2001; Nation & Newton, 1996). During the interviews, most 
students in the present study expressed their appreciation for the simplicity and clarity of word definitions 
and sample sentences. When asked for suggestions for future interventions, one student said, “I’d suggest 
to do the similar thing … actually, sending text messages with simple definitions.” Hayati et al. (2013) 
reported on Iranian EFL students’ appreciation of concise and helpful content of English idioms in text 
Jia Li and Jim Cummins 55 
 
messages. Similarly, Lu’s (2008) high school students appreciated the clear content presentation and 
manageability of text messages and said, “The lessons are short and easily to read” (p. 521). On the contrary, 
Chinese university students in the study by Zhang et al. (2011) complained that long messages (five target 
words per message) were overwhelming, particularly when they were automatically segmented into mini-
messages sometimes sent in the wrong sequence by the system. Overall, the present study is consistent with 
previous research results and further informs our understanding of the promise of push mode texting to 
facilitate ELLs’ vocabulary learning. It also provides insight for the key principles in developing text 
message content conducive to maximizing student vocabulary learning. 
Transfer Effect, Intervention Duration, and Reading Comprehension 
Our study did not find any significant transfer effect of the intervention. There was no significant difference 
between the control and intervention groups in the learning of academic vocabulary not taught in the 
intervention. The study by Motallebzadeh and Ganjali (2011) reported a significant gain on the total score 
of 10 target vocabulary and 20 reading comprehension questions embedded with target words that might 
have been perceived as a possible transfer effect. However, separate scores on vocabulary or reading 
questions were not reported, and no information was available on the reading measure. We were unable to 
locate any studies that reported on the intervention effect beyond the target words and idioms. Despite 
empirical evidence to the contrary, the qualitative data and observations of the present study, appeared to 
be supportive of the transfer effect. In the post-intervention survey, students reported that the intervention 
was helpful for them to learn not only target words, but vocabulary in general (M = 3.41, SD = 0.85). This 
disparity between empirical fact and student opinion may be due to the short term of the present intervention 
that fails to make any statistically significant transfer effect on acquisition of non-target words. Students 
further reported that the transfer effect of the intervention on their comprehension of assigned readings was 
somewhat helpful (M = 3.03, SD = 0.82). This was consistent with feedback collected from the students 
who participated in interviews. Most were satisfied with the content of the text messages, which they 
believed was highly relevant to and helpful for their reading comprehension, as one student described in 
detail: 
When you have the page numbers (in the novel) for the words, it is very convenient for me to learn 
them, I mean, you know, the reading becomes more zhibai (直白, straightforward). Because the novel, 
Crow Lake, for some parts, is kind of yinhui (隐晦, obscure, hard to understand), when the words are 
sent to us in this format, I feel it makes it easier for me to understand the reading. 
According to Nation (2001), when learning new words incidentally through reading, L2 learners need to 
know at least 95% of the words in a text, exclusive of proper nouns, to ensure comprehension and accurate 
guessing. It is plausible that the 2-month duration of the present intervention was still too short to provide 
students with sufficient repeated exposure to achieve long-term retention of target academic words. Also, 
the 189 target words taught were probably not adequate to reach the 95% word threshold in students’ 
assigned readings that would enable them to learn other academic vocabulary autonomously through the 
readings. Text messaging’s current technical capacity of 160 alphanumeric characters cannot provide more 
space for content that would enable students to learn words incidentally through reading paragraph-length 
messages. Therefore, longer durations with pre-determined optimal intervals and frequencies of texting that 
facilitate repeated, spaced word exposures and that are compatible with the needs and texting preferences 
of specific demographics of L2 learners are likely the key to enabling a transfer effect. 
Conclusions 
The unique contribution of the present study lies in its rigorous experimental design that substantiated the 
positive results reported in similar previous studies. This design includes a longer duration of the 
intervention treatment, a larger number of target words, and a randomly assigned, adequate sample size in 
both treatment and control groups with comparable language proficiency levels. In addition, it measured 
both the direct and transfer effect of the intervention and students’ learning gains through a self-
56 Language Learning & Technology 
 
development target academic vocabulary test and a general academic vocabulary levels test (Schmitt et al., 
2001), the results of which were validated by internal consistent reliability tests. Many of these aspects 
were lacking in the previous studies. 
There are some limitations in the present study. First, no measurement of the long-term word retention 
using delayed post-tests was made due to the time conflict with students’ final exams. Future research using 
rigorous measures is needed to investigate the long-term effects of texting instruction, not only on students’ 
learning of target academic words, but also on their learning of academic and low-frequency words in 
general. Though the present intervention, which lasted for two months and taught 189 target words, had a 
longer duration with more target word items than most studies in the area, we believe that the duration was 
not long enough to cover an adequate number of unknown words that would have enabled students to learn 
new academic words independently—the transfer effect we expected to occur. In addition, and to our 
knowledge, no other studies have reported on the transfer effect of texting-based intervention. Longitudinal 
intervention studies that systematically teach academic words would provide more insight into the 
pedagogical capacity of texting-based instruction to have a transfer effect on students’ overall vocabulary 
acquisition and to develop reading comprehension skills. Furthermore, future studies on enriched MMS 
messages are needed, as Chen et al. (2008) and Lin and Yu (2016) found that students who received 
messages presenting word information in enriched multimedia outperformed those who received messages 
presenting word information in text-only, sound-only, or picture-only modes. 
To sum up, the distinctive features of text messages, such as mobility, easy access, instant communication, 
and bit-sized modules, have great potential to help students learn vocabulary. The features in themselves, 
however, do not automatically ensure optimal or motivated academic vocabulary learning among students. 
In order to effectively enhance students’ learning, the design—particularly the content—of text messages 
must be carefully developed (Levy & Kennedy, 2005) in line with the needs of specific demographic groups 
of language learners to encourage their frequent reading of text messages that warrant their repeated, spaced 
exposures of target words. 
Acknowledgements 
This study was funded by a Standard Research Grant of the Social Sciences and Humanities Research 
Council of Canada. We would like to thank all student participants and the research assistants Linying Ji, 
Yan Wang, Qizhen Deng, and Amale Aldarwish. Special thanks also go to the anonymous reviewers for 
providing us with detailed suggestions and comments during the revisions of the manuscript. 
Notes 
1. At the time of this study, the curricula for the EAP courses was unchanged from when the lead 
researcher had begun teaching them. 
References 
Alemi, M., Sarab, M. R. A., & Lari, Z. (2012). Successful learning of academic word list via MALL: 
Mobile assisted language learning. International Education Studies, 5, 99–109. 
American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages. (2012). The ACTFL proficiency Guidelines. 
Retrieved from https://www.actfl.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/public/ 
ACTFLProficiencyGuidelines2012_FINAL.pdf 
Anderson, J., & Rainie, L. (2012). Main findings: Teens, technology, and human potential in 2020. 
Washington, DC: Pew Research Center. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/2012/02/29/ 
main-findings-teens-technology-and-human-potential-in-2020/ 
Jia Li and Jim Cummins 57 
 
Barcroft, J. (2012). Input-based incremental vocabulary instruction. Alexandria, VA: TESOL 
International. 
Basal, A., Yilmaz, S., Tanriverdi, A., & Sari, L. (2016). Effectiveness of mobile applications in 
vocabulary teaching. Contemporary Educational Technology, 7, 47–59. 
Bauman, J. (1995). About the general service list. Retrieved from http://jbauman.com/aboutgsl.html 
Baumann, J. F., & Graves, M. F. (2010). What is academic vocabulary? Journal of Adolescent & Adult 
Literacy, 54, 4–12. 
Biemiller, A. (2001). Teaching vocabulary: Early, direct, and sequential. American Educator, 25, 24–28. 
Biemiller, A. (2009). Words worth teaching. Columbus, OH: McGraw-Hill. 
Birjandi, P., Anabisarab, M., & Samimi, D. (2007). English for pre-university students: Learning to read. 
Tehran, Iran: Ministry of Education. 
Braun, K., & Rubin, D. (1998). The spacing effect depends on an encoding deficit, retrieval, and time in 
working memory: Evidence from once-presented words. Memory, 6(1), 37–65. 
Cavus, N., & Ibrahim, D. (2009). m-Learning: An experiment in using SMS to support learning new 
English language words. British Journal of Educational Technology, 40(1), 78–91. 
Chen, N. S., Hsieh, S. W., & Kinshuk (2008). Effects of short-term memory and content representation 
type on mobile language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 12(3), 93–113. 
Cobb, T. (2016). VocabProfilers. Retrieved from http://www.lextutor.ca/vp/comp/ 
Coxhead, A. (2000). A new academic word list. TESOL Quarterly, 34(2), 213–238. 
Derakhshan, A., & Kaivanpanah, S. (2011). The impact of text-messaging on EFL freshmen’s vocabulary 
learning. The EUROCALL Review, 19, 47–56. 
Dixson, R. J. (2004). Essential idioms in English: Phrasal verbs and collocations. London, UK: 
Longman. 
Douglas, S. R. (2010). Non-native English speaking students at university: Lexical richness and academic 
success (Unpublished dissertation). University of Calgary, Calgary, AB. 
Erasmus, G. (2002). Why can’t we talk? The Globe and Mail, F6–7. 
Fowler, W. S., & Coe, N. (1976). Nelson English language test (NELT). London, UK: Nelson. 
Gaetz, S., Tarasuk, V., Dachner, N., & Kirkpatrick, S. (2006). “Managing” homeless youth in Toronto: 
Managing food access and nutritional well-being. Canadian Review of Social Policy, 58, 43–61. 
Hayati, A., Jalilifar, A., & Mashhadi, A. (2013). Using short message service (SMS) to teach English 
idioms to EFL students. British Journal of Educational Technology, 44(1), 66–81. 
Hulstijn, J. H. (2001). Intentional and incidental second-language vocabulary learning: A reappraisal of 
elaboration, rehearsal, and automaticity. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language 
instruction (pp. 258–286). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Kasesniemi, E. (2003). Mobile messages: Young people and a new communication culture. Tampere, 
Finland: Tampere University Press. 
Kennedy, C., & Levy, M. (2008). L’italiano al telefonino: Using SMS to support beginners’ language 
learning. ReCALL, 20(3), 315–330. 
Kline, R. B. (2004). Beyond significance testing: Reforming data analysis methods in behavioral 
research. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
58 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Krashen, S. (1989). We acquire vocabulary and spelling by reading: Additional evidence for the input 
hypothesis. The Modern Language Journal, 73, 440–464. 
Krashen, S. (2003). Explorations in language acquisition and use: The Taipei lectures. Portsmouth, NH: 
Heinemann. 
Laufer, B., & Nation, I. S. P. (1999). A vocabulary-size test of controlled productive ability. Language 
Testing, 16(1), 33–51. 
Laufer, B., & Ravenhorst-Kalovski, G. C. (2010). Lexical threshold revisited: Lexical text coverage, 
learners’ vocabulary size, and reading comprehension. Reading in a Foreign Language, 22(1), 15–30. 
Lawrence, J. F., Crosson, A. C., Paré-Blagoev, E. J., & Snow, C. E. (2015). Word generation randomized 
trial discussion mediates the impact of program treatment on academic word learning. American 
Educational Research Journal, 52, 750–786. 
Lawson, M. (2003). Crow lake. Toronto, ON: Random House of Canada. 
Lenhart, A. (2010). Cell phones and American adults. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center. Retrieved 
from http://www.pewinternet.org/2010/09/02/cell-phones-and-american-adults/ 
Levy, M., & Kennedy, C. (2005). Learning Italian via mobile SMS. In A. Kukulska-Hulme & J. Traxler 
(Eds.), Mobile learning: A handbook for educators and trainers (pp. 76–83). New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Li, J., Cummins, J., & Deng, Q. Z. (2018). The effectiveness of texting to enhance academic vocabulary 
learning: English language learners’ perspective. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 30(8), 816–
843. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2017.1366923 
Lin, C. C., & Yu, Y. C. (2016). Effects of presentation modes on mobile-assisted vocabulary learning and 
cognitive load. Interactive Learning Environments, 25(4), 528–542. 
Ling, R. (2010). Texting as a life phrase medium. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 15, 
277–292. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1083-6101.2010.01520.x 
Lu, M. (2008). Effectiveness of vocabulary learning via mobile phone. Journal of Computer Assisted 
Learning, 24, 515–525. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2729.2008.00289.x 
Motallebzadeh, K., & Ganjali, R. (2011). SMS: Tool for L2 vocabulary retention and reading 
comprehension ability. Journal of Language Teaching and Research, 2, 1111–1115. 
Motallebzadeh, K., Beh-Afarin, R., & Rad, S. D. (2011). The effect of short message service on the 
retention of collocations among Iranian lower intermediate EFL learners. Theory and Practice in 
Language Studies, 1, 1514–1520. 
Motiwalla, L. F. (2007). Mobile learning: A framework and evaluation. Computers & Education, 49, 
581–596. 
Nagy, W., Herman, P., & Anderson, R. (1985). Learning words from context. Reading Research 
Quarterly, 20(2), 233–253. 
Nation, I. S. P. (2001). Learning vocabulary in another language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Nation, I. S. P., & Newton, J. (1996). Teaching vocabulary. In J. Coady & T. Huckin (Eds.), Second 
language vocabulary acquisition (pp. 238–254). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Porter, D. (2008). Check your vocabulary for academic English: All you need to pass your exams. 
Oxford, UK: Macmillan Education. 
Jia Li and Jim Cummins 59 
 
Read, J. (1998). Validating a test to measure depth of vocabulary knowledge. In A. Kunnan (Ed.), 
Validation in language assessment (pp. 41–60). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Saran, M., Seferoğlu, G., & Çağıltay, K. (2012). Mobile language learning: Contribution of multimedia 
messages via mobile phones in consolidating vocabulary. The Asia-Pacific Educational Researcher, 
21(1), 181–190. 
Schmitt, N. (2008). Instructed second language vocabulary learning. Language Teaching Research, 12, 
329–363. 
Schmitt, N., Schmitt, D., & Clapham, C. (2001). Developing and exploring the behavior of two new 
versions of the vocabulary levels test. Language Testing, 18, 55–88. 
Seabrook, R., Brown, G. D. A., & Solity, J. E. (2005). Distributed and massed practice: From laboratory 
to classroom. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19, 107–122. 
Smith, A., & Page, D. (2015). U.S. smartphone use in 2015. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center. 
Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/04/01/us-smartphone-use-in-2015/ 
Snow, C. E., & Uccelli, P. (2009). The challenge of academic language. In D. R. Olson & N. Torrance 
(Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of literacy (pp. 112–133). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Song, Y. (2008). SMS enhanced vocabulary learning for mobile audiences. International Journal of 
Mobile Learning and Organisation, 2(1), 81–98. 
Spagnolli, A., & Gamberini, L. (2007). Interacting via SMS: Practices of social closeness and 
reciprocation. British Journal of Social Psychology, 46(2), 343–364. 
Stahl, S. A., & Nagy, W. E. (2006). Teaching word meanings. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Steckley, J. (1997). Aboriginal people. In P. U. Angelini (Ed.), Our society: Human diversity in Canada 
(pp. 131–158). Toronto, ON: Nelson. 
Steeves, V. (2014). Young Canadian in a wired world, Phase III: Life online. Ottawa, ON: MediaSmarts. 
Retrieved from http://mediasmarts.ca/sites/mediasmarts/files/pdfs/publication-report/full/ 
YCWWIII_Life_Online_FullReport.pdf 
Stockwell, G. (2010). Using mobile phones for vocabulary activities: Examining the effect of the 
platform. Language Learning & Technology, 14(2), 95–110. 
Suwantarathip, O., & Orawiwatnakul, W. (2015). Using mobile-assisted exercises to support students’ 
vocabulary skill development. TOJET, 14(1), 163–171. 
Swanborn, M., & De Glopper, K. (1999). Incidental word learning while reading: A meta-analysis. 
Review of Educational Research, 69(3), 261–285. 
Tabatabaei, O., & Goojani, A. H. (2012). The impact of text-messaging on vocabulary learning of Iranian 
EFL learners. Cross-Cultural Communication, 8, 47–55. 
Thornton, P., & Houser, C. (2005). Using mobile phones in English education in Japan. Journal of 
Computer Assisted Learning, 21, 217–228. 
Watson, D. (1991). Practicing idioms. Hong Kong: Thomas Nelson and Sons. 
Wilkinson, L. (1999). Statistical methods in psychology journals: Guidelines and explanations. American 
Psychologist, 54(8), 594–604. 
Zhang, H., Song, W., & Burston, J. (2011). Reexamining the effectiveness of vocabulary learning via 
mobile phones. TOJET, 10(3), 203–214.
60 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Appendix. Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Studies on English Vocabulary Interventions Using Texting 
Study Participants1 Proficiency 
Target 
Words 
Treatment 
Duration 
Intervention Model and 
Treatment2 Control 
Baseline 
Comparability Test 
Measures and Item 
Reliability Index3 Results 
Alemi et al. 
(2012) 
45 freshmen 
from Iran 
(treatment n = 
28) 
Upper-
intermediate 
320 AWL 
words  
16 weeks • Push model, receiving 
two SMS messages per 
week 
• Each message included 
10 target words, 
definitions in Persian and 
English, and example 
sentences. 
Independently 
looking up 10 
words using a 
dictionary twice 
per week 
N/A Self-developed 
post-tests and 
delayed post-tests 
(40 AWL target 
words) with ICRT, 
Cronbach’s alpha 
= .89 (pilot test) 
Significantly greater 
vocabulary gains 
only on delayed 
post-test, supporting 
SMS intervention 
Basal, Yilmaz, 
Tanriverdi, and 
Sari (2016) 
50 freshmen 
from Turkey 
(treatment n = 
25) 
Convenient 
sample 
Upper-
intermediate 
40 idioms 
from 
MCASE4  
4 weeks • Push model, receiving 10 
MMS messages per week 
• Each included an idiom, 
definition, visual support, 
and at least three sample 
sentences. 
Handouts 
including idiom 
meanings, usage 
examples, fill-in-
the-blank exercises 
Self-developed pre-
test on 40 target 
idioms 
Self-developed pre-
test and post-test 
(40 target idioms) 
Significantly greater 
vocabulary gains, 
supporting MMS 
intervention 
Cavus and 
Ibrahim (2009) 
45 freshmen 
from Cyprus  
N/A N/A 9 days • Push model, receiving 16 
SMS messages per day, 
one every half an hour, 
with three clusters of 16 
messages repeated three 
days per week 
• Each included words and 
definitions in Turkish. 
N/A N/A Self-developed pre-
tests and post-tests 
(number of target 
words unknown) 
Significantly greater 
vocabulary gains 
after SMS 
intervention 
Chen et al. 
(2008) 
156 university 
students from 
Taiwan 
N/A 24 words 
from the 
most 
common 
2284-word 
list (Bauman, 
1995)5 
50 minutes • Push model with four 
treatments 
• Student received 
messages including (a) 
words with their spelling, 
phonetics, and Chinese 
translation via SMS; (b) 
Treatment A plus a 
sample sentence via SMS; 
(c) Treatment A plus a 
picture denoting word 
meaning via MMS; or (d) 
Treatments A, B, and C 
combined via MMS. 
See treatments Self-developed 
screen test on 50 
target words 
(Bauman, 1995)5 
Self-developed 
post-tests (24 target 
words in two 
formats: recognition 
and recall) 
Significantly greater 
vocabulary gains for 
students with lower 
verbal and higher 
visual ability, 
supporting MMS 
intervention with 
pictorial annotation 
Jia Li and Jim Cummins 61 
 
Derakhshan and 
Kaivanpanah 
(2011) 
43 freshmen 
from Iran 
(treatment n = 
21) 
Random 
assignment 
N/A About 200 
words from 
Porter (2000) 
6 weeks • Sending instructor SMS 
messages including a 
sentence using the target 
word and then receiving 
feedback 
• Texting 3 partners to 
exchange one sentence 
• 15–20 words per class 
meeting, two meetings 
per week 
Equivalent 
learning activities 
done in person and 
on paper 
Three vocabulary 
screening tests5 with 
ICRT reported on 
three original tests 
• Self-developed 
post-test and 
delayed post-test 
(40 target words) 
No significant 
differences in 
vocabulary gains on 
both post-test and 
delayed post-test 
Hayati et al. 
(2013) 
45 EFL 
learners from 
Iran 
Ages 19–24 
Convenient 
sample 
Intermediate 
(based on 
MTELP)6 
80 idioms 
from Watson 
(2009) 
20 days • Push model, receiving 
four SMS messages per 
day 
• Each included an idiom, 
definitions, and sample 
sentences in English. 
Idioms and short 
passages with 
exercises in 
printed pamphlet 
One SD below and 
above mean on 
standardized MTELP 
Self-developed 
multiple-choice pre-
test and post-test 
(50 target idioms) 
Significantly greater 
vocabulary gains, 
supporting SMS 
intervention 
Lin and Yu 
(2016) 
32 8th graders 
from Taiwan 
Elementary 36 words 
(9 for each 
treatment 
mode) 
4 weeks • Push model, receiving 
two MMS messages per 
week with four treatments 
• Student received 
messages including (a) 
text only (i.e., word, part 
of speech, Chinese 
translation, and example 
sentence), (b) text plus 
picture, (c) text plus 
sound, or (d) text plus 
picture and sound. 
See treatments N/A Self-developed 
post-test and 
delayed post-test 
(18 target words) 
Significantly greater 
vocabulary gains 
only on delayed 
post-tests, 
supporting 
combined MMS 
mode  
Lu (2008) 30 Grade 10 
vocational 
students from 
Taiwan  
Intermediate 28 target 
words 
(14 for each 
treatment) 
2 weeks • Push model, receiving 
two SMS messages per 
day 
• Each included two target 
words, Chinese 
translations, and part of 
speech. 
Paper materials on 
same content of 14 
other words 
N/A Self-developed pre-
test, post-test, and 
delayed post-tests 
(28 target words) 
Significantly greater 
vocabulary gains 
only on post-test, 
supporting SMS 
intervention 
Motallebzadeh, 
and Ganjali 
(2011) 
40 adult 
female EFL 
learners from 
Iran 
(treatment n = 
21) 
Random 
assignment 
Lower-
intermediate 
50 words 5 weeks • Push model, receiving 
three SMS messages per 
week 
• Each included three to 
four words, definitions, 
and sample sentences. 
Board and paper  Nelson English 
Language Test 
(NELT; Fowler & 
Coe, 1976); ICRT, 
Cronbach’s alpha 
= .82 
Self-developed pre-
test and post-test 
(10 target words, 20 
reading) with ICRT, 
KR-21 = .82 (pilot 
vocabulary test) 
and .71 (pilot 
reading test) 
Significantly greater 
gains on the total 
score, supporting 
SMS intervention; 
no report on 
separate vocabulary 
or reading scores 
62 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Motallebzadeh et 
al. (2011) 
40 EFL 
learners from 
Iran 
(treatment n = 
21) 
Random 
assignment 
Lower-
intermediate 
70 
collocations 
from Dixson 
(2004) 
5 weeks • Push model, receiving 
two SMS messages per 
week 
• Each included seven 
collocations, descriptions, 
and sample sentences. 
Receiving paper 
materials with the 
same content two 
times per week  
Self-developed pre-
tests on 40 target 
words and the NELT 
with ICRT, 
Cronbach’s alpha 
= .82 
Self-developed 
multiple-choice pre-
test and post-test 
(40 target words) 
with ICRT, 
Cronbach’s alpha 
= .54 (post-test) 
Significantly greater 
vocabulary gains, 
supporting SMS 
intervention 
Saran et al. 
(2012) 
103 university 
students from 
Turkey 
Elementary 
and pre-
intermediate 
80 words 
supporting 
regular 
classroom 
activities 
4 weeks • Push model, receiving 
MMS messages 
• Each included words, 
pronunciations, 
definitions, sample 
sentences, related visuals, 
and information on word 
formation. 
Paper- and web-
based instruction 
Self-developed pre-
test on 80 target 
words with ICRT, 
Cronbach’s alpha 
= .84–.85 
Self-developed pre-
test, post-test, and 
delayed post-tests 
(80 target words for 
each English 
proficiency level, 
respectively) with 
ICRT, Cronbach’s 
alpha =.80–85 
Significantly greater 
vocabulary gains on 
both post-test and 
delayed post-tests, 
supporting MMS 
intervention 
(however, only for 
the pre-intermediate 
group) 
Song (2008) 10 adult EFL 
learners from 
Hong Kong 
N/A Words about 
nightlife, 
food, 
weather, and 
travel 
16 days • Push model, receiving 
four to six SMS messages 
per day 
• Each included words and 
short explanations in 
English and Chinese. 
• A website included longer 
explanations and other 
resources. 
N/A N/A Self-developed 
multiple choice pre-
test and post-tests 
Significant 
vocabulary gains 
after SMS 
intervention 
Suwantarathip 
and 
Orawiwatnakul 
(2015) 
80 university 
students from 
Thailand 
(treatment n = 
40) 
Random 
assignment 
N/A 100 target 
words in a 
textbook 
6 weeks • Receiving SMS messages 
including fill-in-the- 
blank exercises and 
paragraph writing 
exercises after class 
• Students sent the teacher 
complete assignments via 
SMS during the week. 
They received the 
teachers’ instant feedback 
via SMS. 
Paper-based 
equivalent 
exercises in class 
and teacher 
feedback 
Self-developed pre-
tests on 50 target 
words with ICRT, 
KR-20 = .79 (pilot 
test) 
Self-developed 
multiple choice pre-
test and post-test 
(50 target words) 
with ICRT, KR-20 
= .79 (pilot test) 
Significantly greater 
vocabulary gains, 
supporting SMS 
intervention 
Tabatabaei and 
Goojani (2012) 
60 male high 
school 
students from 
Iran 
N/A About 65 
words from 
Birjandi, 
Anabisarab, 
and Samimi 
(2007) 
2 months • Sending five to six SMS 
messages per 1.5-hour 
session 
• Each included a sentence 
using a target word. 
• The instructor replied 
with feedback. 
Writing sentences 
using target words 
on paper 
Self-developed 
multiple-choice pre-
test on 40 target 
words with ICRT, 
KR-21 =.79 (pilot 
test) 
Self-developed 
multiple choice pre-
test and post-tests 
(40 word items) 
with ICRT, KR-21 
=.79 (pilot test) 
Significantly greater 
vocabulary gains, 
supporting SMS 
intervention 
Jia Li and Jim Cummins 63 
 
Thornton and 
Houser (2005) 
44 female 3rd- 
and 4th-year 
college 
students from 
Japan 
N/A 20 words 2 weeks • Push model, receiving 
three mini-lesson emails 
via mobile phone per day, 
five target words per 
week 
• Each introduced and 
reviewed words in 
multiple contexts and 
incorporated the words in 
stories. 
Paper- or web-
based activities 
N/A N/A Significantly greater 
vocabulary gains, 
supporting 
treatment 
Zhang et al. 
(2011) 
78 
sophomores 
from China 
Convenient 
sample 
N/A 130 words 
from the 
TOEFL 
vocabulary 
test 
3 weeks • Push model, receiving 
two SMS message per 
day 
• Each included five words, 
part of speech, phonetics, 
Chinese translation, and 
sample sentences. 
Self-paced 
learning with 
paper materials 
Self-developed pre-
test on 130 target 
words 
Self-developed pre-
test, post-test, and 
delayed post-test 
(130 target words) 
Significantly greater 
vocabulary gains 
only on post-tests, 
supporting SMS 
intervention 
1If reported, either convenient sample or randomly assignment is indicated in the table; otherwise the study didn’t report on participant selection and assignment 
procedure. 
2Texting frequency is indicated in the table unless it was not reported in the study. 
3If reported, internal consistency reliability test (ICRT) either from self-developed or standardized tests is indicated in the table; otherwise ICRT was not reported 
in the study. 
4MCASE = Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English 
5Associates Test (Read, 1998), Levels Test (Laufer & Nation, 1999), and Academic Vocabulary Levels Test (Schmitt et al., 2001). 
6MTELP = The Michigan Test of English Language Proficiency. 
 
64 Language Learning & Technology 
 
About the Authors 
Jia Li is an Associate Professor at the Faculty of Education at the University of Ontario Institute of 
Technology. She currently holds a John A. Sproul Research Fellowship at the University of California, 
Berkeley. She was a Canada–U.S. Fulbright Scholar at the Harvard Graduate School of Education from 
2011 to 2012. Her research focuses on data-driven innovative language and literacy instruction using 
emerging technologies for linguistically diverse students. 
E-mail: jia.li@uoit.ca 
Jim Cummins is a Professor Emeritus at the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education of the University of 
Toronto. He held a Canada Research Chair (Tier 1) and was a recipient of the International Reading 
Association’s Albert J. Harris award. He also received an honorary doctorate in Humane Letters from the 
Bank Street College of Education in New York City. His research focuses on literacy and multiliteracies, 
technology and academic language learning, and English as a second language. 
E-mail: james.cummins@utoronto.ca 
