Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2019, Volume 23, Issue 1 
pp. 26–35 
LANGUAGE TEACHING AND TECHNOLOGY FORUM  
 
 
Copyright © 2019 David Kent 
 
 
Technique efficacy when using a student response 
system in the reading classroom 
David Kent, Woosong University 
Abstract 
Although studies using student response systems (SRSs) within the English as a foreign language (EFL) 
classroom are relatively rare, there is increasing evidence from a range of disciplines to highlight the 
potential behind application of these systems for student learning. Consequently, this study contributes to 
filling this gap by demonstrating the efficacy of SRS-integration in the EFL reading classroom for formative 
assessment when supported by teacher-interaction and peer-interaction utilization techniques. Relying on 
a quasi-experimental design, results suggest that a Plickers SRS-integrated classroom can provide a 
digitally interactive learning environment and active learning opportunities, particularly when coupled 
with a peer-interaction technique. It also enhances Korean EFL learner engagement with content while 
supporting the development of reading comprehension skills. Further, findings indicate that learners are 
receptive to ongoing SRS utilization as an alternative to traditional methods, viewing it as useful for 
highlighting their knowledge gaps, focusing their attention, and stimulating their engagement. 
Keywords: Active Learning, Formative Assessment, Reading Comprehension 
Language(s) Learned in This Study: English 
APA Citation: Kent, D. (2019). Technique efficacy when using a student response system in the reading 
classroom. Language Learning & Technology, 23(1), 26–35. https://doi.org/10125/44668 
Introduction 
In the English as a foreign language (EFL) classroom, active learning, as part of summative and formative 
assessments, can help engage students in the learning process and assist them in developing mastery of 
skills (Ketabi & Ketabi, 2014; Micheletto, 2011; Premkumar, 2016). Student engagement is important if 
effective and efficient learning is to be achieved, but this is not always easy to implement (Love, 2012). It 
can also be made more difficult in contexts where classroom contact hours are limited (Sundqvist & Sylvén, 
2016; Yim, 2016) and students have a fear of being wrong or are too shy to respond to questions asked of 
them (Voelkel & Bennet, 2014; Wong, 2016). Such contexts lead to difficulties for students in terms of 
being able to attain adequate language practice and to receive prompt feedback from instructors. However, 
classroom use of student response systems (SRSs) has been reported to improve aspects of participation 
and involvement while leading to increases in student achievement (Kalinowski & Jones, 2005). They also 
allow instructors to provide effective, efficient, and immediate feedback while using student responses to 
modify instruction (Crossgrove & Curran 2008), which can lead to improvement in both student 
understanding and teaching quality (Gok, 2011). So too, SRSs have been used to stimulate active learning 
(Ayu, Taylor, & Mantoro, 2009) and increase student engagement with content (Heaslip, Donovan, & 
Cullen, 2014) by using teacher-interaction and peer-interaction pedagogical techniques (Hung, 2017). 
Teacher-interaction and peer-interaction techniques can arguably be used effectively in EFL contexts, as 
Hung (2017) demonstrates. However, the efficacy of these techniques when using a SRS in a reading 
comprehension classroom to elicit second language (L2) production from students, highlight responses, and 
provide effective learner feedback has not been investigated, particularly when using active learning 
techniques and a structured questioning process. In such a context, SRS-integration alongside teacher- and 
peer-interaction techniques may encourage levels of teacher–student and student–student engagement that 
David Kent 27 
 
can establish what Kalinowski and Jones (2005) rationalize as being important for many students: a learning 
environment that helps them break out of their boundaries by employing group dynamics that bring students 
together as part of a socially collaborative learning community. In such an environment, student 
receptiveness to SRS integration may (a) see learners increasingly realize what they know as a group; (b) 
help them stay focused in class; (c) engage them, so they become more involved with content under study; 
and also (d) see them become increasingly comfortable with the implementation of SRS technology for 
learning. This study aims to explore these aspects. 
SRSs in EFL 
SRSs have long played a variety of roles in tertiary classrooms, from taking attendance to practicing 
quizzes, and have been used as a means of enhancing engagement with content by supporting interactivity 
through teacher- or peer-led small-group discussions (Espey & Brindle, 2010). Yet, studies focusing on the 
use of SRS-integrated instruction are still relatively sparse in the context of teaching English to speakers of 
other languages (TESOL). Among these studies, increases in learner satisfaction (Hung, 2017), vocabulary 
development (Yu, 2014), as well as participation (Cordoso, 2011) and motivation (Yu & Yu, 2016) are 
evident, along with measured improvements in communicative competence (Agbatogun, 2014). Yoon 
(2017) also affirms that SRS use leads to increased opinion sharing, participation, and teacher interaction 
in the Korean classroom. In addition, questioning methods provided by SRS-integration, where students 
identify relationships between new information using prior knowledge to help them reach their final 
conclusions, have been seen to work well, particularly for increasing comprehension, enhancing 
engagement, and leading to improved learning outcomes in support of reading skills in the Korean context 
(Lee & Oh, 2014). 
SRS Integration 
The most significant implementation of SRSs at the tertiary level is via assessment, especially formative 
assessment (Espey & Brindle, 2010). Formative assessment is both integral and essential to the instructional 
process (Ketabi & Ketabi, 2014), and it can provide immediate feedback to assist in guiding students with 
their learning. Yet to appropriately foster any aspects of communication or learning in an SRS-integrated 
EFL classroom, as well as student knowledge, attention, engagement, and interaction, it is important to 
consider what kind of approach to use, what kind of SRS to employ, and what kind of classroom interaction 
techniques to rely upon. 
Approach 
Kim, Al-Mubaid, Yue, and Rizk (2011) highlight that SRS-integration that relies on active learning 
approaches leads to the most beneficial learning gains. In this regard, principles of active learning (e.g., 
collaboration, group work, and peer- or teacher-guided discussion and feedback) which rely on 
constructivist methods and communicative language teaching (CLT) approaches have long been at the heart 
of TESOL classrooms. Further, as Monk (2014) stresses, any TESOL classes implementing CLT will 
already be employing principles of classroom engagement, motivation, and interaction. Additionally, SRS 
use can, through an integrationist approach, bring with it an increased sense of community, supporting 
learning from self-evaluation, peer comparison, and group-based responses (Curtrim Schmid, 2007). It can 
also enhance student participation in the classroom, which in turn leads to increasing levels of interactivity 
with both the teacher and with peers (Curtrim Schmid, 2008). Lastly, it can provide a means of enhancing 
language input (Cordoso, 2011) and foster generative learning (Lee & Oh, 2014) when using a pedagogical 
model that provides scaffolding for active knowledge construction. 
Which SRS System to Employ 
Although many varieties of SRSs exist, Plickers is unique, in that it uses quick response (QR) paper-
based clickers and is deployable without the need for any student reliance on technology. This leads to 
minimal in-class disruption, as there is no special equipment to collect, disseminate, or maintain (Taylor, 
2016). Students do not need to comprehend or use new technical systems or download any new 
28 Language Learning & Technology 
 
applications (Lam, Wong, Mohan, Xu, & Lam, 2011). This also means that, in a minimum use setting 
where technology may be lacking, an instructor-held smartphone and a paper-based handout per student is 
all that is required for this particular SRS to be deployed. In contexts where class hours are limited, the 
technology is fast and easy to setup—equally employable with a small- or large-sized classes—and can be 
structured to ensure that the focus remains on content over technological implementation (Lam et al., 
2011). This also ensures a means of providing increased instructor autonomy over the technology use and, 
in turn, the learner content being delivered through it (Kent, 2015). QR codes have also been used in EFL 
settings like Korea to great effect (Kent & Jones, 2012a), improving motivation and allowing for the easy 
integration of various technologies into the classroom alongside the practice of language content (Kent & 
Jones, 2012b). 
Classroom Interaction Techniques 
Arguably, traditional SRS-integration pedagogically supports a teacher-interaction technique where the 
adjustment of instruction or feedback to meet the needs of students, based on their responses, is led by the 
instructor. The teacher-interaction technique sees the teacher assess students’ prior knowledge based on an 
aggregate of responses, and then adjusts feedback (and instruction) to meet student needs (Novak, Patterson, 
Gavrin, & Christian, 1999). This technique also reflects a conventional classroom initiation–response–
(teacher)feedback model, where teacher–student engagement and teacher-led discussion are primary. Yet 
this model, particularly from CLT and constructivist learning perspectives, can be criticized, as it promotes 
a teacher-centered classroom that can potentially limit opportunities for students to engage in interaction 
and knowledge construction. On the other hand, the peer-interaction technique, as highlighted by Mazur 
(1997), can potentially provide students with the opportunity to discuss peer responses to questions with 
classmates before providing a rationale for the correct response. This leads to increased student–student 
engagement and discussion and an initiation–response–(student)feedback model. The peer-interaction 
technique has been seen to make classrooms more interactive and, in turn, improve student learning, 
generating increased opportunities for L2 output and interaction. Peer-focused learning has also been seen 
to promote reading achievement (Ghaith, 2003) and reading motivation for EFL learners taking classes 
supported by peer-assisted learning with technology (Lan, Sung, & Chang, 2007). Learners participating in 
peer-focused learning also perceive it to enhance their knowledge of literacy, along with critical thinking 
and problem-solving skills (Hurst, Wallace, & Nixon, 2013). Yet peer-focused learning is often not used 
outside of oral conversational tasks (Philp, Adams, & Iwashita, 2014), and it is rarely implemented 
alongside the use of an SRS system in language classrooms. 
Purpose of the Study 
To date, no studies have examined the effectiveness of Plickers SRS-integration in the EFL setting of Korea. 
There are also no studies attempting to determine learner receptiveness to the Plickers system in such 
classes. Additionally, there are no studies that compare the effectiveness of promoting active learning 
through teacher-interaction and peer-interaction techniques while undertaking formative assessment 
activities supported by SRS-integration in the EFL reading classroom context of Korea. This study aims to 
fill these gaps. 
Underscoring the aims of this research is the notion that student language learning and development is 
enhanced through classroom interaction. SRS was deployed as a means to promote learner engagement and 
to assess active learning results in a Korean university, junior-level, EFL reading classroom while 
undertaking textbook-based formative assessment activities. A digitally interactive learning environment 
was therefore established to gather student responses through an active learning method, relying on either 
a teacher- or peer-interaction utilization techniques, with the following questions arising: 
1. Does stimulating active learning via peer-interaction (over that of teacher-interaction) while using 
a SRS lead to a greater gain in the development of reading comprehension skills? 
2. What is the learner receptiveness to SRS-integration in a for-credit, college EFL reading class? 
David Kent 29 
 
Methodology 
Participants 
This study adopted a quasi-experimental research design involving two experimental groups, each 
consisting of a cohort of 12 participants enrolled in the same English language reading course and coming 
from a purposive sample (Fraenkel, Wallen, & Hyun, 2012). All were juniors (third-year students) minoring 
in English in Korea with a mean age of 23.58. In terms of first language (L1) and L2, all participants held 
a homogeneous background with 12.5 years of L2 study behind them. Additionally, no difference was found 
between the two groups’ English proficiency levels as per self-reported Test of English for International 
Communication (TOEIC) scores, falling between 605 and 780. Prior to intervention, none of the 
participants had previously used the Plickers SRS. 
Target Technology 
Plickers is a free SRS that uses QR codes printed on paper for use as a paper clicker. In this case, each side 
of the QR code corresponds to one of four options depending on how the card is oriented (A, B, C, or D) 
(Johnson, Adams Becker, Estrada, & Freeman, 2015). Responses are scanned by an instructor-held 
smartphone or tablet and can be displayed to learners in real-time if Wi-Fi and a computer with a projector 
are available. Feedback, and discussion on each item can then be conducted easily on-the-fly. 
Intervention 
To maintain comparable conditions, the same instructor was responsible for teaching both groups, adopting 
identical materials, developing lesson plans, using elicitation techniques, and implementing technology in 
the classroom. The purpose of this study was to compare two groups’ learning outcomes due to two different 
classroom interactions employed while using the Plickers SRS. This would then help determine how 
successful each interaction was in influencing reading comprehension skills (Research Question 1) and 
assess learner receptiveness to use of the technological elicitation technique (Research Question 2). 
The target technology was implemented with two groups to elicit student answers based on classroom 
interactions, with steps developed akin to those used by Hung (2017) and outlined in Table 1. The two 
techniques (i.e., peer-interaction and teacher-interaction) were also adapted for the class context and 
material being studied. For the peer-interaction technique, peer discussion and choice of answers prior to 
voting using the SRS was removed. This was undertaken for two reasons: first, so that interaction would 
align with the question cycle for technology-enhanced formative assessment by Beatty and Gerace (2009) 
and second, because it was otherwise felt that a trend-type response could potentially emerge and skew the 
data collected for formative assessment of the class by the teacher. Further, the teacher-interaction 
technique was extended to follow the peer-interaction technique more closely. This was done so that the 
conditions could be as similar as possible between the two interactions while also emphasizing the role of 
active learning from structured questions in both conditions. 
In total, the course provided 48 hours of instruction over a 16-week semester, meeting once per week for 
three hours. Each lesson consisted of three continuous 50-minute blocks, with the use of treatment confined 
to the first block of each lesson. Units covered in the timeframe of the study consisted of Chapters 9–12 of 
the course textbook (Smith & Mare, 2015). The book provided the reading content for each group, 
consisting of an average of four paragraphs per chapter, and 21 multiple choice questions in total for each 
reading (seven per paragraph). The reading content used with intervention was made available to students 
in print form in addition to being digitally displayed in the classroom alongside the questions presented by 
the Plickers SRS web-based platform. For the dependent variable, the textbook and digital display of 
learning material was relied upon to present and check content being taught to students. Reading 
comprehension was assessed through student responses to the multiple-choice type questions coming from 
the class textbook. All responses were recorded utilizing the Plickers SRS in a digitally interactive manner. 
The independent variables were classroom interaction (peer- or teacher-led) ant the techniques utilized with 
the two groups to verify the appropriateness of student responses to the multiple-choice questions. Two 
30 Language Learning & Technology 
 
instruments were developed for data collection: a reading test and a learner receptiveness survey. The 
reading test was developed for both groups and provided at onset as a pre-test. The same test was later 
utilized as a post-test. Meanwhile, the post-intervention survey was delivered after the treatment to 
determine learner receptiveness to the Plickers SRS. 
Table 1. Interaction Technique Steps 
 Description 
Step Peer-Interaction Group Teacher-Interaction Group 
1 Students read a paragraph from the assigned text aloud, one sentence each going around the 
room. 
2 The teacher poses a question from the textbook, at the completion of each paragraph. 
3 Students respond to the question individually using their assigned Plickers card. 
4 The teacher reveals the anonymous responses of the class as a whole. 
5 The teacher comments on the performance of the whole class, highlighting the number of 
responses for correct and incorrect answers. 
6 (a) Students are then asked to discuss the 
question and anonymous peer responses 
with their partners, and 
(b) determine a justification for the rationale 
behind the correct answer, meanwhile 
(c) the teacher provides supplementary 
guidance to pairs and individuals as they 
work. 
(a) Students are then asked to discuss the 
question and anonymous peer responses 
with the teacher as a class group, and 
(b) determine a justification for the rationale 
behind the correct answer, meanwhile 
(c) the teacher provides supplementary 
guidance to the class as a whole. 
7 The teacher, with the class as a final summary, affirms the appropriate justification for the 
correct answer to the question, highlighting the rationale behind the choice. 
8 The group returns to Step 2, cycling through the steps again until all assigned questions for the 
reading passage are complete—after which the group then returns to Step 1 if there are any 
further paragraphs to read. 
Instruments 
Reading Test 
All participants were required to undertake a reading test twice, once before and once after Plickers-based 
instruction, in order to measure the development of their L2 reading abilities throughout the course of 
research. These reading tests were conducted during regularly scheduled class times with the same 
questions utilized in each pre- and post-test. The reading test passages and questions were different to the 
ones covered by the classroom curriculum, but they shared similar difficulty levels and formatting. They 
were created using the exam maker software specifically provided by the publisher to create tests (with 
answer keys) for the content covered by the course textbook. Data from these tests were used to determine 
the effect on reading skills of the intervention and to answer Research Question 1. 
Post-Treatment Learner Receptiveness Survey 
The learner receptiveness survey was based on surveys developed by Crossgrove and Curran (2008) and 
Mendez-Coca and Slisko (2013; see the Appendix). It was administered in the L1 to both groups one week 
after the final use of the Plickers SRS. Back-translation was undertaken to ensure language accuracy. The 
survey consisted of an 8-item demographic section and a 4-item SRS receptiveness section where ratings 
were recorded using a 5-point Likert scale (1 = Strongly Disagree; 5 = Strongly Agree). The first three items 
David Kent 31 
 
of the receptiveness section focused on student use of the SRS and constructs regarding how it related to 
their knowledge, attention, and involvement with the instructional content. The last item focused on 
frequency of use of the SRS itself. Data from this survey was used to determine learner receptiveness to 
use of the Plickers SRS in order to answer Research Question 2. 
Procedure 
This research was conducted mid-course over a period of seven weeks of a 16-week semester. In Week 1 
of the study, to assess baseline reading skills, all participants took the reading test as a pre-test. Instructional 
intervention then took place in Weeks 2–5 of the study, during which both groups completed four lessons 
along with associated in-class assessment of reading comprehension activities using the Plickers SRS to 
gather responses. During Week 6 of the study, all participants took the same reading test as a post-test to 
determine any improvements made. Finally, the post-intervention learner receptiveness survey regarding 
use of the digitally interactive method of eliciting responses was delivered during Week 7 of the study. To 
analyze the data, independent samples t-tests were used. In addition to comparing p values, Cohen’s d was 
calculated to examine whether the p values had any practical importance. 
Results 
Effect on Reading Skills 
Descriptive statistics and group comparison results for the participants’ reading test performance are 
detailed in Table 2. While both groups did not differ greatly on the pre-test, the independent samples t-test 
results indicated a significant difference in the post-test scores between the groups (t = 2.411, p = .028) 
with a small effect size (Cohen’s d = 0.16). This suggests that engaging EFL learners in the development 
of their reading skills in a classroom utilizing a peer-interaction technique to promote active learning does 
exert a statistically significant effect. However, when compared to enhancement of L2 reading 
comprehension using a teacher-interaction technique, the effectiveness is actually marginal. This result 
could have been due to the small sample size. However, other studies utilizing small sample sizes along 
with peer-interaction techniques and SRS technology (e.g., Hung, 2017) did demonstrate both statistically 
significant differences as well as large effect sizes. So, there is conceivable potential for use of the SRS 
with a peer-interaction technique in the reading classroom. Perhaps the experiment could be scaled up to 
see if the same results occur. A future study on the use of the peer-interaction technique using SRS 
technology could conduct a comparative analysis between an in-class and a flipped-classroom model. Such 
a study could see what findings emerge in EFL reading classroom contexts of Korea, particularly in light 
of the positive results from the learner receptiveness survey. 
Table 2. Results of Reading Performance for Both Groups 
Reading Test 
Peer Interaction (n = 12)  Teacher Interaction (n = 12) 
t p M SD  M SD 
Pre-Test 90.55 60.16  88.33 57.46 0.708 .486 
Post-Test 95.63 18.56  89.45 60.16 2.411 .028* 
Learner Receptiveness to the Plickers SRS 
Participant responses to the post-intervention survey are summarized in Table 3. Descriptive statistics and 
the results of independent samples t-tests illustrated high satisfaction with use of the Plickers SRS overall. 
Essentially, these results suggested that implementation of the Plickers SRS, in combination with either a 
peer- or teacher-interaction technique, could stimulate active learning. The students believed that using a 
SRS was a satisfactory alternative to traditional instruction. All students also perceived deployment of the 
Plickers SRS as a useful means of highlighting knowledge gaps and focusing attention on specific content 
under study. It was viewed as particularly engaging by those students utilizing a peer-interaction technique. 
32 Language Learning & Technology 
 
The peer-interaction group level of SRS satisfaction regarding involvement, or engagement with learning 
content, was significantly higher than that of the teacher-interaction group (t = 2.152, p = .046). There was 
also a very large effect size (Cohen’s d = 1.16). 
Table 3. Learner Receptiveness Responses for Both Groups 
Survey Item 
Peer Interaction (n = 12)  Teacher Interaction (n = 12) 
t p M SD  M SD 
Knowledge 4.50 0.27  4.50 0.27 0.000 1.000 
Attention 4.83 0.15  4.50 0.27 1.773 .090 
Involvement 4.50 0.27  3.83 0.88 2.152 .046* 
Use 4.50 0.27  4.50 0.27 0.000 1.000 
Conclusion 
The integration of various SRSs in the classroom has been shown to boost active learning in a variety of 
non-EFL contexts (e.g., Ayu et al., 2009; Espey & Brindle, 2010), with this study contributing to the 
literature by demonstrating that similar potential exists in the EFL context. The findings highlight the 
potential behind the use of a peer-interaction technique to enhance the language acquisition skills of Korean 
EFL students at the university level for reading comprehension, particularly in terms of fostering student 
engagement with material when using an SRS. This study also builds upon the scarcity of literature focusing 
on the use of SRSs with EFL students, thereby serving to contribute to the emerging discussion in the field. 
It also simultaneously meets the recent call by Yoon (2017) to undertake experiments in Korean contexts 
and SRS studies using pre-, during-, and post-classroom activities. In addition, the study comes to 
demonstrate that the Plickers SRS can be successfully integrated within an EFL reading classroom when 
conducting formative assessment activities. It is also capable of providing a digitally interactive learning 
opportunity for all students that is welcomed, helping focus attention on content under study, stimulating 
engagement, and highlighting knowledge gaps. 
References 
Agbatogun, A. (2014). Developing learners’ second language communicative competence through active 
learning: Clickers or communicative approach? Educational Technology & Society, 17(2), 257–269. 
Ayu, M., Taylor, K., & Mantoro, T. (2009). Active learning: Engaging students in the classroom using 
mobile phones. Paper presented at the IEEE Symposium on Industrial Electronics and Applications, 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 
Beatty, I. D., & Gerace, W. J. (2009) Technology-enhanced formative assessment: A research-based 
pedagogy for teaching science with classroom response technology. Journal of Science Education 
and Technology, 18, 146–162. 
Cordoso, W. (2011). Learning a foreign language with a learner responsive system: The students’ 
perspective. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 24(5), 393–417. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2011.567354 
Crossgrove, K., & Curran, K. (2008). Using clickers in nonmajors- and majors-level biology courses: 
Student opinion, learning, and long-term retention of course material. CBA: Life Sciences Education, 
7, 146–154. 
David Kent 33 
 
Curtrim Schmid, E. (2007). Enhancing performance knowledge and self-esteem in classroom language 
learning: The potential of the ACTIVote system component of interactive whiteboard technology. 
System, 35, 119–133. 
Curtrim Schmid, E. (2008). Potential pedagogical benefits and drawbacks of multimedia use in the 
English language classroom equipped with interactive whiteboard technology. Computers & 
Education, 51(4), 1553–1568. 
Espey, L., & Brindle, S. (2010). Click, click, WOW! Engaging students with student response systems. In 
D. Gibson & B. Dodge (Eds.), Proceedings of Society for Information Technology & Teacher 
Education International Conference (pp. 2708–2714). Chesapeake, VA: Association for the 
Advancement of Computing in Education. 
Fraenkel, J., Wallen, N., & Hyun. H. (2012). How to design and evaluate research in education. New 
York, NY: McGraw Hill. 
Ghaith, G. (2003). Effects of the learning together model of cooperative learning on English as a foreign 
language reading achievement, academic self-esteem, and feelings of school alienation. Bilingual 
Research Journal, 27(3), 451–474. https://doi.org/10.1080/15235882.2003.10162603 
Gok, T. (2011) An evaluation of student response systems from the viewpoint of instructors and students. 
TOJET: The Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, 10(4), 67–83. Retrieved from 
http://www.tojet.net/articles/v10i4/1048.pdf 
Heaslip, G., Donovan, P., & Cullen, J. (2014). Student response systems and learner engagement in large 
classes. Active Learning in Higher Education, 15(1), 11–24. 
Hung, H. T. (2017). The integration of a student response system in flipped classrooms. Language 
Learning & Technology, 21(1), 16–27. 
Hurst, B., Wallace, R., & Nixon, S. (2013). The impact of social interaction on student learning. Reading 
Horizons, 52(4), 375–398. 
Johnson, L., Adams Becker, S., Estrada, V., & Freeman, A. (2015). NMC Horizon Report: 2015 Higher 
Education Edition. Austin, TX: The New Media Consortium. 
Kalinowski, K., & Jones, G. (2005). Student response systems in education: Past, present, and future. In 
P. Kommers & G. Richards (Eds.), Proceedings of EdMedia: World Conference on Educational 
Media and Technology (pp. 2454–2459). Chesapeake, VA: Association for the Advancement of 
Computing in Education. 
Kent, D. (2015). Mobile ELT: East and South of the Red Sea. Arab World English Journal, 2, 6–21. 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2843974 
Kent, D., & Jones, M. (2012a). Smarter use of smartphones: Extending the use of QR codes in the 
classroom. The English Connection, 16(2), 24–25. 
Kent, D., & Jones, M. (2012b). Using smartphones to create and deliver learner-generated video content 
for tasks. STEM Journal, 13(3), 105–133. 
Ketabi, S., & Ketabi, S. (2014). Classroom and formative assessment in second/foreign language teaching 
and learning. Theory and Practice in Language Studies, 4(2), 435–440. 
Kim, D., Al-Mubaid, H., Yue, K., & Rizk, N. (2011). From expectation to actual perception after 
experience: A longitudinal study of the perceptions of student response systems. Paper presented at 
the 17th Americas Conference on Information Systems, Detroit, MI. 
34 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Lam, S., Wong, K., Mohan, J., Xu, D., & Lam, P. (2011). Classroom communication on mobile phones: 
First experiences with web-based clicker system. Paper presented at the Australasian Society for 
Computers in Learning in Tertiary Education Conference, Hobart, Tasmania. Retrieved from 
http://www.ascilite.org/conferences/hobart11/downloads/papers/Lam-full.pdf 
Lan, Y., Sung, Y., & Chang, K. (2007). A mobile-device-supported peer-assisted learning system for 
collaborative early EFL reading. Language Learning & Technology, 11(3), 130–151. 
Lee, C., & Oh, E. (2014). Exploring the effects of a learner response system on EFL reading. Multimedia 
Assisted Language Learning, 17(2), 130–151. 
Love, M. (2012). Changing habits through a pedagogy of engagement: Student-fronted discussions and 
appropriat(iv)e responses in TESOL seminars. In K. W. Sung & R. Pederson (Eds.), Critical ELT 
practices in Asia: Key issues, practices, and possibilities (pp. 85–110). Rotterdam, Netherlands: 
Sense. 
Mazur, E. (1997). Peer instruction: A user’s manual. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Mendez-Coca, D., & Slisko, J. (2013). Software ‘Socrative’ and smartphones as tools for implementation 
of basic process of active physics learning in classroom: An initial feasibility study with prospective 
teachers. European Journal of Physics Education, 4(2), 17–24. 
Micheletto, M. J. (2011). Conducting a classroom mini-experiment using an audience response system: 
Demonstrating the isolation effect. Journal of College Teaching and Learning, 8(8), 1–13. 
Monk, C. (2014). Benefits of using online student response systems in Japanese EFL classrooms. JALT 
CALL Journal, 10(2), 127–137. 
Novak, G., Patterson, E. T., Gavrin, A. D., & Christian, W. (1999). Just-in-time teaching: Blending active 
learning with web technology. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall 
Philp, J., Adams, R., & Iwashita, N. (2014). Peer interaction and second language learning. London, 
UK: Routledge. 
Premkumar, K. (2016) Use of student response systems for summative assessments. Creative Education, 
7, 1851–1860. https://doi.org/10.4236/ce.2016.713187 
Smith, L., & Mare, N. (2015). Reading for Today 1: Themes (4th ed.) Boston, MA: National Geographic 
Learning. 
Sundqvist, P., & Sylvén, L. K. (2016). Extramural English in teaching and learning: From theory and 
research to practice. London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Taylor, M. (2016). Raise your cards! A look at Plickers in an adult learning environment. Paper 
presented at the Summer Institute on Distance Learning and Instructional Technology Conference, 
Overland Park, KS. 
Voelkel, S., & Bennet, D. (2014). New uses of familiar technology: Introducing mobile phone polling in 
large classes. Innovations in Education and Teaching International, 51(1), 46–58. 
Wong, A. (2016). Classroom response systems and student performance improvement: Local versus 
international students. Journal of Teaching in International Business, 27(4), 197–208. 
Yim, S. Y. (2016). EFL young learners: Their imagined communities and language learning. ELT 
Journal, 70(1), 57–65. 
Yoon, S. Y. (2017). Using learner response systems for EFL classrooms: Students’ perspectives and 
experience. Multimedia Assisted Language Learning, 20(2), 36–58. 
David Kent 35 
 
Yu, Z. (2014). The impact of clickers use on vocabulary knowledge and satisfaction in an EL class in 
China. International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Education, 10(3), 
article 4. 
Yu, Z., & Yu, L. (2016). Correlations between learners’ initial EFL proficiency and variables of clicker-
aided flipped EFL class. Education and Information Technologies, 22(4), 1587–1603. 
Appendix. SRS Survey 
This survey is about your use of the SRS recently used in class. 
The following questions ask for (1) some information about you, and (2) your experience with the SRS. 
1. Please fill in-the blanks for the seven statements below (1a–1g), and circle Yes or No for the eighth 
question (1h). 
1a. Age __________________________________________ 
1b. Class __________________________________________ 
1c. Gender __________________________________________ 
1d. Major __________________________________________ 
1e. Minor __________________________________________ 
1f. My most recent TOEIC score is ____________________ 
1g. I have been studying English for ____________________ years   
1h. Have you previously taken a course that used Plickers? Yes No 
2. When thinking about the course you have just taken, and the use of the SRS in the course, look 
over the four statements below (2a–2d) and circle your level of agreement with the statements from 
1 = Strongly Disagree to 5 = Strongly Agree. 
2a. Using the SRS helped me realize what I knew. 1 2 3 4 5 
2b. Using the SRS helped me pay attention in class. 1 2 3 4 5 
2c. Using the SRS made me feel more involved with the material. 1 2 3 4 5 
2d. The SRS should be used during every lesson of the course. 1 2 3 4 5 
About the Author 
David Kent is an Assistant Professor in the Endicott College of International Studies at Woosong University 
in the Republic of Korea. He provides teacher education through the Graduate School of TESOL–MALL, 
where he heads the program. His principal research focus revolves around digital language learning. 
E-mail: dbkent@wsu.ac.kr 
