Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2019, Volume 23, Issue 1 
pp. 44–48 
BOOK REVIEW  
 
 
Copyright © 2019 Jeffrey Maloney 
 
 
Review of Language teacher education and 
technology: Approaches and practices 
Jeffrey Maloney, Northeastern State University 
 
Language teacher education and technology: Approaches and 
practices 
Son, J.-B., & Windeatt, S. (Eds.) 
2017 
ISBN: 978-1350020405 
US $ 135.00 
200 pp. 
Bloomsbury 
New York, NY 
 
Language teacher education for technology use has been positioned as an area of serious concern for many 
researchers in the field of computer-assisted language learning (CALL), with some arguing that teachers 
play a role that is “pivotal” (Hubbard, 2008, p. 176) or that they are the “lynchpin” (Guichon & Hauck, 
2011, p. 188). In other words, teachers are central to student exposure to and success with CALL 
technologies both in instructed and out-of-class contexts. In this vein, Language teacher education and 
technology: Approaches and practices is focused on providing better access to materials for training future 
CALL practitioners. The authors hammer on the point that often teacher training is not sufficient—many 
times due to the lack of expertise of teacher trainers. Language teacher education for teaching with 
technology has been addressed by multiple publications and research articles (e.g., Hlas, Conroy, & 
Hildebrandt, 2017; Hubbard & Levy, 2006), but few, if any, have called on CALL researchers and 
professionals to provide insight into how their approaches inform their teaching in practice. In the preface 
to the book, the authors cite the need for effective teacher training, because, as they put it, “courses for 
training teachers in the use of technology can be seen as having arrived at a crossroads” (p. xii). 
Technological innovations both in and out of education have had major import on how and where we learn. 
Language learning is no exception. As mentioned, some attention has been called to the necessity of teacher 
training, and this volume is a welcome contribution. The book is focused on presenting the courses of 
teachers, researchers, and administrators from around the world. When reviewing an edited volume, it is 
sometimes difficult to make overall conclusions without accounting for the many parts, thus I will provide 
an overview of the book itself with brief discussions of the individual chapters’ contributions. This is 
followed by a discussion of the book’s overall contribution. 
This volume brings together contributions from scholars who have regularly contributed to scholarship on 
the topic. The book presents each contribution by having the authors outline what they have done in 
practice. In this way, readers gain a better glimpse into how different programs address the training needs 
that have so frequently been discussed in CALL literature. Within the 11-chapter volume, the contributing 
authors outline the CALL training courses at their institution and discuss their courses with reference to 
varied topics within CALL inquiry. Each chapter contains a discussion on the features of the course 
presented and some of the common issues encountered. Each chapter ends with a reflection and directions 
Jeffrey Maloney 45 
 
for the future. 
Many of the courses described by the contributors have multiple foci—typically practical applications (i.e., 
skill building or training), research, and theory. A few of the courses (discussed individually later) offer 
modules on combining the four skills of language teaching with CALL technologies or provide learning in 
situ. Such variation and the inclusion of different approaches to similar courses gives a good sense of 
adaptability, depending on the context, and can serve to better inform a wider variety of needs. Each chapter 
follows the same pattern, so that readers wanting to come back to a particular chapter or to find how a 
particular course is organized can do so fairly easily. The courses presented in the volume come from 
various master’s programs. This means that instructors or administrators from such programs would 
presumably be well-served by the contents of this book. Further, the courses discussed in the volume were 
constructed for either applied linguistics or TESOL programs. The co-editors, Son and Windeatt, are the 
authors of the first chapter, outlining the purpose of the book and its intended audience and touching on 
major areas of discussion that the courses (one per chapter) present later. 
In Chapter 2, Levy and Moore present the outline for the University of Queensland’s Language and 
Technology course. The course makes up a part of the master’s program in applied linguistics and is taken 
in the latter half of studies. The authors indicate that the needs of their students are addressed with a “three-
pronged attack” (p. 19) by showcasing current theory, current technologies, and student needs. The course 
schedule begins with a historical overview, proceeding with foci on CALL theories and principles in the 
classroom. It continues with sections focused on specific kinds of tools and ends with a section on the 
future. The authors also discuss how the course has evolved and has been informed by changes in research 
findings as well as advances in the application of second language acquisition (SLA) theory to CALL. As 
reported, the authors state their approach to CALL in reference to face-to-face SLA is not under the 
assumption of equivalence, but that technology-mediated communication is fundamentally different from 
face-to-face SLA until proven otherwise. Thus, the authors move into arguing that CALL is a “design-
discipline” (p. 29), necessitating creativity on the part of the instructor in order to accomplish language 
teaching and learning goals. 
Gruba’s chapter, Chapter 3, focuses on the University of Melbourne’s technology and language learning 
course. This course occupies a core slot within the master’s in applied linguistics program. Based on the 
teaching context, Gruba reports dividing the course into three sections: key trends, skills and technologies, 
and research and evaluation. One hallmark of the course is the two graded requirements: one for students 
to participate actively in online discussion boards, and the other being an academic paper, following a 
template for submission to an academic conference. Gruba highlights that the course approaches CALL 
from the perspective that it is a “principled integration of technologies into a multilayered educational 
ecosystem” (p. 37), enabling discussion and strategizing for decision-making in areas with limited access 
to technology. A second perspective is that the course provides arena for consideration of the overall goal 
of modern language teaching. The third theme is an examination of the status of normalization of 
technologies. Key to the third theme is an emphasis on learning management systems (LMSs) and blended-
learning. Overall, Gruba states that his subject has three key features guiding the course. These are an 
emphasis on developing critical thinking, training with a LMS, and focus on theory and research. Thus, the 
course presented selects as its focus a learning-by-doing approach centered on promoting blended-
learning—something Gruba sees as key to success for someone who wishes to teach in higher education. 
Son is the author of Chapter 4, a solo chapter on an elective course within two of the M.Ed. programs (i.e., 
applied linguistics or TESOL) at the University of Southern Queensland in Australia. This course is also 
offered in an online format for two semesters of the year. The course is structured with three sections, which 
Son identifies as introductions to the background of CALL, CALL research, and language teachers in CALL 
environments. Of note is the fact that this course has no required text. Similar to the other courses, this 
course provides an overview of the history of CALL research along with an overview of current trends. 
One of the major features of this course is its focus on the role of the teacher in CALL environments. The 
course requires students to participate in an online discussion board. Son also provides an appendix 
46 Language Learning & Technology 
 
containing a rubric for grading said discussion board postings. 
Motteram prefaces the fifth chapter by indicating that it is the result of some 30 years of iterating and 
adapting the course module to best address the needs for a CALL course. The language learning and 
technology course presented is a required course for students of the M.A. in TESOL and digital technologies 
at the University of Manchester. Within the program, the course can be taken face-to-face and as a distance 
learning option. These options are both what the author considers to be blended, relying on the Blackboard 
LMS for the face-to-face and online course sections. 
In the sixth chapter, Moran casts his course discussion as having an end goal of cultivating reflective and 
competent CALL practitioners. The module, titled Introduction to CALL, is a course within the M.S. in 
TESOL program at Stirling University. The course outlined in the chapter is developed for students in the 
program who have at least two years of teaching experience. Moran explains that the course has two main 
parts: the first is a refresher of SLA theory and how it can be applied in CALL and the second is a practical 
section focused on introducing students to design and pedagogical concerns when using different 
technologies for language teaching and learning. Of note is the emphasis that Moran places on how the 
course at Stirling has been designed to situate CALL practice within mainstream SLA theory. 
Windeatt’s solo-authored seventh chapter outlines a course within either the M.A. in applied linguistics or 
TESOL program at Newcastle University. He presents the CALL course module that has been developed 
over 25 years. While the course is available to students with no teaching experience, Windeatt mentions 
how the majority of students have at least a few years under their belts. The chapter moves on to discuss 
how the course has iterated over the years, reflecting changes in types of technology, but also increased 
student literacy in information technology. The course is now a stand-alone option between two courses on 
CALL, and it is focused on content creation and the evaluation of technologies for use in the language 
classroom. Also included in the chapter are selected results of student evaluations of the course and a 
discussion of conclusions to be drawn from them. 
Kessler’s Chapter 8 outlines one of the courses offered in a M.A. in applied linguistics at Ohio University. 
The course, titled Computers in Language Teaching I, is required, with five other options available for 
students to take as electives. He reports that most students taking the course have little to no experience 
considering technology and the impact it has on society as well as the language classroom. Many of the 
students are capable users of technology in their individual lives, and so Kessler has opted to frame the 
course to emphasize the ubiquity of technology and to adapt it to language learning and teaching. Students 
are introduced to the history of CALL research and the role of computers in instruction. They then complete 
a course development project using the principles and tools covered during the course. Of particular 
emphasis is the open-source focus, along with a constructivist view of learning. 
Bauer-Ramazani’s Chapter 9 presents the CALL online course at St. Michael’s College, within the M.A. 
in TESOL program. It is also available to those outside of the program. Within the M.A., it is an elective 
course that has been delivered online-only since 2000. Bauer-Ramazani reports that the students taking the 
course vary widely in experience, from pre-service to in-service teachers. The learning outcomes include a 
focus on the four electronic literacies developed by Warschauer (2002), and the course description 
emphasizes CALL skills for a flipped classroom. The author also draws on the technological, pedagogical, 
and content-knowledge framework (Mishra & Koehler, 2006) to inform and structure the course content, 
and interaction is emphasized through online discussion forums. Many of the discussions are opportunities 
to reflect and engage with other learners about the assigned readings and projects. The author also includes 
a presentation of an adapted pedagogical framework for teacher training in CALL. 
In Chapter 10, Hubbard offers a discussion of a long-running, now freely available, course from Stanford. 
The course, which Hubbard dubs a “mini-course” (p. 151, 152) is designed as a complement to an English 
as a second language or foreign language methodology course, but it is also freely available to practitioners 
outside of Stanford. The course begins with an introduction to CALL and CALL history. It then moves into 
discussions on finding and evaluating CALL resources with a focus on Hubbard’s own framework for 
Jeffrey Maloney 47 
 
evaluation (Hubbard, 2011). The next section covers computer-mediated communication, with the fourth 
focused on the four language skills and CALL. The rest of the sections cover CALL environments, CALL 
theory, and teacher and learner training, with a final section containing student projects. 
Murray is the author of the eleventh and final chapter, a discussion on the question of whether CALL 
courses should be offered. Murray discusses the role of teacher education and the consistent and constant 
change of the technological landscape. She also offers outlines of how CALL teacher education should 
address concerns of the changing nature of technology, how to effectively evaluate and implement 
materials, and how to develop digital literacies; she also discusses the limitations and affordances of CALL 
practice. In addition, she expounds on CALL’s position in an educational framework and finishes by 
recognizing the need for more research on how (or whether) CALL coursework and training are carried 
into the classroom. 
Across the chapters in the volume, there are obvious similarities in focus and arrangement of course 
materials. The differences, however, provide an instructive and valuable insight into how CALL 
professionals from around the world approach teacher education for CALL. There are differences in 
educational theories and views of CALL’s relationship with mainstream SLA theory and practice. I would 
recommend this book to instructors or faculty interested in enriching, extending, or developing a CALL 
course. Others looking to include a module on the topic within an already-established course would also 
find the book helpful and enlightening. The structure and focus lend the book a strong ability to serve as a 
reference while constructing or modifying a course. One could feasibly spend time only examining the 
layouts of courses or even examining the discussions of major problems confronted and how or whether 
they have been resolved. 
Moving forward, more contributions such as the chapters in this volume can serve to strengthen overall 
understanding and promote a common core of best practices for CALL teacher education. It may be fruitful 
to engage with questions of how a larger variety of programs confront and engage with training future 
language teachers for CALL in programs other than strictly within applied linguistics or TESOL. Engaging 
with how to provide training for language educators across different language programs and different 
contexts is something that could have certainly strengthened this volume. This notwithstanding, there is 
plenty that can be informative for individuals outside the field. Also missing, echoing Murray’s call in the 
final chapter, is research demonstrating the effectiveness of the individual CALL courses presented. This 
is understandable given the volume’s focus, but more discussion on the impact that the courses have had 
on students after the program would have been especially instructive. 
This volume contributes to the discussion of CALL teacher education by providing valuable insight into 
how CALL professionals and educators have structured their teacher training courses and addressing the 
challenges that they have encountered while doing so. Taken together, the variety of contributions to the 
volume and breadth that is covered across each of the courses outlined offers readers a valuable resource 
and can promote common knowledge of how to deal with current changes and challenges. 
References 
Guichon, N., & Hauck, M. (2011). Editorial: Teacher education research in CALL and CMC: More in 
demand than ever. ReCALL, 23, 187–199. 
Hlas, A., Conroy, K., & Hildebrandt, S. A. (2017). Student teachers and CALL: Personal and pedagogical 
uses and beliefs. CALICO Journal, 34(3), 336–354. 
Hubbard, P. (2008). CALL and the future of language teacher education. CALICO Journal, 25(2), 175–
188. 
Hubbard, P. (2011). Evaluation of courseware and websites. In N. Arnold & L. Ducate (Eds.), Present 
and future promises of CALL: From theory and research to new directions in language teaching (pp. 
407–440). San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
48 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Hubbard, P., & Levy, M. (Eds.). (2006). Teacher education in CALL. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John 
Benjamins. 
Mishra, P., & Koehler, M. J. (2006). Technological pedagogical content knowledge: A framework for 
teacher knowledge. Teachers College Record, 108(6), 1017–1054. 
Warschauer, M. (2002). A developmental perspective on technology in language education. TESOL 
Quarterly, 36(3), 453–475. 
About the Author 
Jeffrey Maloney is assistant professor of English and the director of the ESL Academy at Northeastern State 
University. His current research interests include language teacher education, teacher training for CALL, 
and language learner and heritage speaker identity. 
E-mail: maloneyj@nsuok.edu 
