Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2019, Volume 23, Issue 1 
pp. 145–146 
CALL FOR PAPERS  
 
 
Copyright © 2019 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Call for papers for a special issue on  
Big Data in Language Education and Research 
About This Special Issue 
Guest Editors: Hayo Reinders and Yu-Ju Lan 
The staggering increase in both types and amount of data in recent years is starting to impact many aspects 
of our lives, from politics to insurance and from self-driving cars to the monitoring of our health. It is also 
changing the way we carry out research. As Halfpenny and Procter (2015) predict, “It is possible that it will 
promote the use of new computational social science methods in place of more traditional quantitative and 
qualitative research methods” (p. 18). In language education research, the availability of large sets of data 
(from corpora to social media posts, and from attendance data to the ways and frequency with which 
learners interact with online resources) presents intriguing opportunities. If we can track large groups of 
learners over long periods of time, could we identify common patterns, facilitative and inhibitory variables, 
and possibly even predict future performance? Could we identify possible problems more easily and 
intervene more quickly? Could we observe what our learners do beyond the classroom—even after their 
course finishes? And could we then provide ongoing support for genuine life-long learning (Thomas, 
Reinders, & Gelan, 2017)? 
These questions may seem broad, even far-fetched, but they are starting to become relevant even in regular 
classrooms where teachers now have access to learners’ data beyond what is observable in class, from grade 
point averages across school subjects, to comparisons in performance between classes, courses, and 
teachers (Lan, Chen, & Sung, 2017). The availability and often considerable transparency of the data are 
providing teachers and administrators alike with unprecedented opportunities. 
These opportunities come with significant challenges. Data is meaningless unless it can serve a pedagogic 
purpose, unless it can be mined, and unless it can be validated and interpreted. This may require a rethinking 
of the role of teachers—as well as everyone else who works in education, from researchers to managers. 
Researchers are likely to need to develop new skills (Godwin-Jones, 2017). New big data analytical 
techniques must be adopted to deal with the five Vs characteristic of big data (i.e. volume, velocity, variety, 
veracity, and value; see Gandomi & Haider, 2015). All of this is challenging enough, and then there are 
considerable privacy, security, and ethical concerns. Who owns the data? Who should have access to them? 
Who safeguards them? 
This special issue aims to provide a platform for discussing these and other questions. We are eager to 
initiate a dialogue on such questions as the following: What is the impact of big data on language education? 
How will language education (need to) change? What are the implications for policy and for teacher 
professional development? We invite contributions in these and related areas and that deal with topics such 
as (but not limited to) the below: 
• Learning analytics for language teachers 
• The impact of providing data to language learners 
• Language teacher education for big data 
• New research methodologies and skills for working with big data 
• The potential for early intervention in the language learning process 
• Ethical and other concerns relating to big data 
• Sources of big data for language education and research 
146 Language Learning & Technology 
 
• Monitoring, explaining, and predicting FL learners’ learning 
• Recording and supporting learning beyond the classroom 
Guidelines for Authors 
Articles should be no longer than 8,500 words (including references, but not appendices). For specific 
guidelines, refer to the LLT submission guidelines. Please note that articles containing only descriptions of 
software or pedagogical procedures without presenting in-depth empirical data and analysis on language 
learning processes or pragmatic outcomes will not be considered. 
To be considered for this special issue, please send a title and a 300-word abstract in a Word document by 
June 1, 2019 to llt@hawaii.edu. 
Publication Schedule 
June 1, 2019: Submission deadline for abstracts 
June 15, 2019: Invitation for authors to submit manuscripts 
November 1, 2019: Submission deadline for first drafts of manuscripts 
August 1, 2020: Submission deadline for revised manuscripts 
October 23, 2020: Submission deadline for final drafts of manuscripts 
February 1, 2021: Publication of special issue 
For Further Information 
Please contact the Managing Editor at llt@hawaii.edu. 
References 
Gandomi, A., & Haider, M. (2015). Beyond the hype: Big data concepts, methods, and analytics. 
International Journal of Information Management, 35(2), 137–144. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2017). Scaling up and zooming in: Big data and personalization in language learning. 
Language Learning & Technology, 21(1), 4–15. 
Halfpenny, P., & Procter, R. (Eds.). (2015). Innovations in digital research methods. London, UK: Sage. 
Lan, Y. J., Chen, N. S., & Sung, Y. T. (2017). Guest editorial: Learning analytics in technology enhanced 
language learning. Educational Technology & Society, 20(2), 158–160. 
Thomas, M., Reinders, H., & Gelan, A. (2017). Learning analytics in online language learning: 
Challenges and future directions. In L. Wong & K. Hyland (Eds.), Faces of English (pp. 197–212). 
New York, NY: Routledge. 
