Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2019, Volume 23, Issue 1 
pp. 40–43 
BOOK REVIEW  
 
 
Copyright © 2019 Lina Lee 
 
 
Review of Autonomous language learning with 
technology beyond the classroom 
Lina Lee, University of New Hampshire 
 
Autonomous language learning with technology beyond the 
classroom 
Lai, C. 
2017 
ISBN: 978-1474240413 
US $ 39.95 
240 pp. 
Bloomsbury 
New York, NY 
 
Learner autonomy is widely recognized as a key element of language learning and has received a great deal 
of attention from L2 researchers and practitioners over the years (Little, Dam, & Legenhausen, 2017). In 
the field of computer-assisted language learning (CALL), there has been a growing interest in learner 
autonomy and its impact on language teaching and learning (Cappellini, Lewis, & Mompean, 2017; 
Reinders & White, 2016). It is evident that the continuing development of learner autonomy will only 
enhance the language development. Emerging technologies offer a variety of opportunities for autonomous 
language learning (e.g., Lee, 2016; Smith & Craig, 2013). The book Autonomous language learning with 
technology beyond the classroom, written by Lai, is a welcome addition to the existing CALL autonomy 
volumes. From theoretical frameworks and research agendas to suggestions for promoting out-of-class 
autonomous language learning through technology, the book is comprised of 9 chapters and is divided into 
three main parts. Part 1 lays the foundation by presenting key concepts and theoretical backgrounds and 
discusses learner-related factors that affect learner autonomy. As the core of the book, Part 2 deals with 
how digital technologies are used to promote autonomous language learning. To that end, Lai examines 
different aspects of autonomy from learner capacity and training to instructional scaffolding in the learning 
process. Furthermore, the author emphasizes the importance of making connections between in-class and 
out-of-class learning experiences by supporting learner autonomy with technology. The last part of the book 
centers on the research efforts by identifying research areas, findings, and challenges of conducting studies 
in the field of technology-assisted autonomous language learning. 
Part 1 is made up of four chapters devoted to discussions of various aspects of autonomous language 
learning beyond the classroom. In Chapter 1, Lai gives an overview of autonomous language learning by 
introducing key concepts related to autonomy and technology. She further explores the nexus between 
autonomous learning and technology, emerging from a careful examination of the three important goals of 
autonomous learning: (a) autonomy as language learning, (b) autonomy as a language learner, and (c) 
autonomy as a person. The framework of reference for the relationship between autonomous learning and 
the three goals are particularly illuminating and useful to the reader. Chapter 2, entitled Theoretical 
backgrounds and frameworks provides a thorough review of theoretical perspectives associated with 
autonomous learning. The discussion, in conjunction with research studies, focuses on major theories under 
Lina Lee 41 
 
three sections: (1) learner experiences, (2) factors affecting learners’ experiences, and (3) development of 
autonomy with technology. The chapter ends with a useful conceptual framework proposed by Lai that 
helps the reader understand the complex and dynamic nature of the autonomous learning process. 
Chapter 3 is the widest in scope, as it addresses several issues related to the nature of out-of-class 
autonomous learning, including learner engagement and interaction with different types of technology. 
Despite research efforts on some evidence supporting active learning outside the classroom, Lai presents a 
balance-oriented framework to assess learning outcomes from different dimensions. Chapter 4 moves to 
the discussion of both internal factors (e.g., gender, language proficiency, beliefs, and preferences) and 
external factors (e.g., peers, teachers, instructional types) that affect the development of learner autonomy. 
The author underscores the urgency of including both internal and external factors when selecting 
technological tools and designing activities for both inside- and outside-the-classroom learning 
environments. Lai concludes by calling for more research to address factors that affect technology-
enhanced autonomous learning in out-of-class settings. 
Especially welcome is Part 2, consisting of three chapters. It addresses how language educators can support 
and foster autonomous learning through technology beyond the classroom. Chapter 5 focuses on a 
discussion about learners’ perspectives of and capacities for engaging in technology-mediated learning for 
the development of autonomous learning, whereas Chapter 6 addresses the role of teacher autonomy. In 
Chapter 5, Lai discusses ways to support effective and independent learning in technology-mediated 
environments. For example, the author stresses just how important digital literacy skills are to enable 
learners to evaluate technological tools and resources and use them in appropriate ways (e.g., Benson, 2013; 
Lai, Shum, & Tain, 2014). In Chapter 6, Lai proposes a process-oriented framework to guide teachers in 
using effective strategies to help students develop self-regulation outside the classroom. The author 
underscores that teachers should be trained to adopt a learner-centered pedagogy and create optimal online 
learning conditions through which students can work independently. More importantly, teachers need to 
help students build connections between in-class and out-of-class learning experiences (Henry, 2013). 
Rather than focusing on theory and research, Chapter 7 presents a discussion of material design and tool 
selection based on the relevant literature review. The author explains the three major design principles in 
relation to technological affordances: (a) maximizing language learning potentials, (b) maintaining a 
balance between in-class and out-of-class learning activities, and (c) utilizing learner-centric designs. 
Additionally, tables are used to illustrate a clear outline of the design principles for online autonomous 
learning beyond the classroom. 
The final part of the book is dedicated to the research agenda of the application of technology for out-of-
class autonomous language learning. Chapter 8 addresses three key areas of research and methods. Lai 
reviews and discusses some of the major studies in each key area of the research: (a) profiling learners, (b) 
evaluating learning outcomes, and (c) fostering autonomous learning with technology beyond the 
classroom. In the second part of the chapter, the author succeeds at critically identifying methodological 
issues of capturing learning processes and evaluating learning outcomes. Empirical findings from the 
current body of autonomy learning with technology are further discussed in the chapter. Throughout the 
chapter, the author utilizes tables to provide samples of showcase studies and highlights important future 
research. The chapter is useful for practitioners and researchers interested in investigating the field of digital 
technologies for autonomous language learning. 
Chapter 9, the final chapter, entitled Conclusion and the way forward begins with several quotations from 
different fields and continues with a summary to highlight the major components of the volume. To advance 
the research in the field, Lai argues for a need for “a more holistic spatio-temporal approach that takes into 
consideration the interactions of different technological and non-technological spaces inside and outside 
the classroom” (p. 191). The chapter concludes by showing a list of practical recommendations along with 
a set of thought-provoking questions for educators who are interested in designing learner training programs 
and conducting research to build and promote autonomous learning with digital technology. The closing 
chapter should be of special interest to researchers, as it points to the special needs and research areas of 
42 Language Learning & Technology 
 
future studies. 
According to Reinders and Benson (2017), most research studies have been carried out within the in-class 
contexts. This volume represents a much-needed contribution to the field of out-of-class autonomous 
language learning through technology, as it covers a wide range of discussions from many different angles. 
The book starts with theoretical considerations provided through extended literature reviews with numerous 
resources and continues with stimulating discussions on how to promote learner autonomy with technology 
beyond the classroom learning. The book ends with ideas and suggestions for future studies. The content is 
instructive with up-to-date information grounded in research findings. The organization is coherent and 
easy to follow. Figures and tables often accompany the text, giving the reader a quick way to visualize and 
understand large amounts of complex texts. In addition, the volume provides a comprehensive list of 
references. The book is not intended to provide definite answers or step-by-step of instructions to follow. 
Rather, it outlines new research directions and approaches to language learning autonomy through the use 
of technology beyond the classroom. 
Despite the aforementioned strengths, the book has a few shortcomings. First, the lack of an introductory 
chapter is noticeable. It would have been valuable to include a chapter providing an overview of the topics 
presented in the book and of how the book is organized. Such a chapter could have helped the reader 
understand the goals and purposes of the book. Moreover, while many empirical studies and references 
cited throughout the book are useful, the reader may find it too theoretically oriented and not practical 
enough to apply. Concrete examples may be beneficial to language practitioners who are looking for models 
of pedagogical reports, project descriptions, or implementations, rather than precise research discussion. A 
website could be particularly helpful as a supplement to the book if the author were to use the space as a 
forum for discussing how practical activities might fit into the curriculum at large. It could provide 
additional auxiliary resources for teachers. 
To conclude, the volume by Lai is well presented and it is timely, given the increasingly significant role 
played by digital technology in autonomous language learning. It is well suited for researchers, language 
practitioners, and graduate students interested in the field. 
References 
Benson, P. (2013). Learner autonomy. TESOL Quarterly, 47(4), 839–843. 
Cappellini, M., Lewis, T., & Mompean, A. R. (Eds.). (2017). Learner autonomy and Web 2.0: Advances 
in CALL research and practice. Sheffield, UK: Equinox. 
Henry, A. (2013). Digital games and ELT: Bridging the authenticity gap. In E. Ushioda (Ed.), 
International perspectives on motivation: Language learning and professional challenges (pp. 133–
155). Houndmills, UK: Palgrave MacMillan. 
Lai, C., Shum, M., & Tian, Y. (2016). Enhancing learners’ self-directed use of technology for language 
learning: The effectiveness of an online training platform. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 
29(1), 40–60. 
Lee, L. (2016). Autonomous learning through task-based instruction in fully online language courses. 
Language Learning & Technology, 20(2), 81–97. 
Little, D., Dam, L., & Legenhausen, L. (2017). Language learner autonomy: Theory, practice, and 
research. Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Reinders, H., & Benson, P. (2017). Language learning beyond the classroom: A research agenda. 
Language Teaching, 50(4), 561–578 
Reinders, H., & White, C. (2016). 20 years of autonomy and technology: How far have we come and 
where to next? Language Learning & Technology, 20(2), 143–154. 
Lina Lee 43 
 
Smith, K., & Craig, H. (2013). Enhancing the autonomous use of CALL: A new curriculum model in 
EFL. CALICO Journal, 30(2), 252–278. 
About the Author 
Lina Lee is a Professor of Spanish at the University of New Hampshire, where she teaches courses in second 
language acquisition, foreign language methodology, and applied linguistics. She has conducted research 
and published articles on computer-mediated communication, telecollaborative exchange for intercultural 
learning, study abroad, peer feedback, and discourse analysis in Foreign Language Annals, Hispania, 
CALICO Journal, Language Awareness, Language Learning & Technology, ReCALL, System, and 
International Journal of Computer-Assisted Language Learning and Teaching. 
E-mail: lina.lee@unh.edu 
