Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2019, Volume 23, Issue 1 
pp. 1–7 
COMMENTARY  
 
 
Copyright © 2019 Shannon Sauro & Katerina Zourou 
 
 
What are the digital wilds? 
Shannon Sauro, Malmö University 
Katerina Zourou, Web2Learn, Greece  
APA Citation: Sauro, S., & Zourou, K. (2019). What are the digital wilds? Language Learning & 
Technology, 23(1), 1–7. https://doi.org/10125/44666 
Introduction 
The scope of this special issue of Language Learning & Technology is to explore and deepen our 
understanding of computer-assisted language learning (CALL) practices in the digital wilds, including, but 
not limited to, their manifestations, processes, and outcomes (linguistic, sociocultural, cognitive, or 
didactic). While digitally enhanced, instructed language learning and classroom language learning research 
are well established fields of study, there remain fewer empirical studies of informal or beyond-the-class 
digital language learning. This special issue bridges this gap by exploring CALL in the digital wilds. Before 
moving on to the definition of the digital wilds, it may be worth justifying the selection of this term in the 
conceptual framing of this special issue. 
With respect to the term digital, one may question the utility of dedicating a special issue to technology 
enhanced out-of-class learning only. We argue that the technological dimension in this special issue is not 
meant to overemphasize the role that digital artifacts play in learning. Instead, it points to the possibilities 
afforded by digital artifacts, as well as to the increasingly natural and fluid digitally-assisted human 
interaction, which we consider crucial in enabling spontaneous, user-driven, bottom-up practices that 
support learning. Developments in technology—such as mobile devices that afford connection and social 
interaction anytime and anywhere, social networking offline and online, horizontal patterns of connectivity 
that allow users to create natural bonds based on shared interests—all offer possibilities for user-driven, 
self- and group- initiated practices that redraw models of production, distribution, and reuse of knowledge. 
This evolution is perceptible, for instance, in recent sociotechnical developments such as crowdsourcing, 
digital activism and citizenship science, and the creative practices of online user communities (including 
fan communities), all of which invite us to redefine the nature of out-of-class language learning that occurs 
in digital spaces. 
It could be argued that the term wild is an unusual lexical choice due to its emotional intensity and 
unconventionality in the education sector. But wild asks us to look beyond contexts directly embedded 
within or linked to formal and highly familiar educational institutions and practices. It pushes us, as Sauro 
and Chapelle (2017) have argued, to update our understanding of “technology-integrated conceptions of 
language knowledge and skills” (p. 461) stemming from the full range of technology-mediated contexts in 
which language learners and users presently communicate and learn. Our own research has shown how, in 
many instances the institutional and curricular constraints of formal education contexts heavily affect the 
use of artifacts in classrooms. In Zourou’s (in press) recent study regarding the use of technologies in formal 
education contexts, she claims that technologies—especially those not designed for educational purposes, 
such as social networking tools—are sometimes “tamed” to fit to curriculum-based, institutional 
frameworks and requirements, occasionally leading to paradoxical and unreal learner practices. This 
paradox is illustrated in an article by Sauro and Sundmark (2018) critically examining the blog-based 
collaborative fanfiction written by students for a university level English class. Although modeled after 
fanfiction genres found in online fan communities, adherence to assignment instructions driven by 
curriculum requirements guiding course assessment (see Sauro & Sundmark, 2016) resulted in classroom 
fanfiction that shared some common features with comparable fanfiction in the wild (e.g., prevalence of 
2 Language Learning & Technology 
 
certain characters featured in the stories, use of dialogue), but that diverged broadly in other ways (e.g., the 
highly segmented nature of the resulting stories, character perspectives). 
Understanding the wider context (historical, semiotic, cultural) in which language learning and socialization 
occurs is key in the pedagogical use of any artifact, particularly for unpredictable technologies. By 
prescribing learner activity or by confining it to pre-existing scenarios or mainstream assessment practices, 
we limit our view of the richness of wild technologies and their value in second language (L2) learning. 
Therefore, the choice of the word wild emphasizes the dynamic, unpredictable, erratic character of 
technologies, especially those not designed for learning purposes, and warns against a pedagogical use in a 
way that overcontrols this wilderness. In response to the extreme taming of unpredictable technologies, 
Thorne (2015) moves a step further in arguing for the rewilding of education. Specifically, he questions the 
degree to which the highly predictable and routinized environment of the classroom, with proscribed 
decision-making and agency granted to learners, is indeed the best environment in which to socialize 
students into the processes leading to transformation and human development (Little & Thorne, 2017). 
In this next section, we situate our working definition of the digital wilds with respect to research on out-
of-class learning. 
Terminological Considerations 
Several Definitions of Out-Of-Class Learning 
There are several terms, each of them naturally having its nuances, to address situations that may occur 
outside the language classroom, with some or no connection to a class environment. These terms are 
extramural English (Sylvén & Sundqvist, 2012), online informal learning of English (Sockett, 2014; Toffoli 
& Perrot, 2017), and out-of-class English learning (Lai, Zhu, & Gong, 2015). The degree of connection to 
classroom settings may vary. Informal learning is a dedicated topic of scholarly interest in CALL and in 
education in general (Schugurensky, 2000). It also coincides with out-of-class learning, although a more 
nuanced approach is useful (Eraut, 2004; Marsick & Watkins, 2001). Another concomitant term is self-
regulated learning (Schraw, Kauffman, & Lehman, 2006), which has found fertile ground in CALL studies 
(Lai & Gu, 2011). Although a critical analysis of these terms goes beyond the scope of this commentary, 
the wealth of studies and the definitory attempts reflect a growing interest in investigating the largely under-
explored area of processes and practices that learners develop in out-of-class contexts. 
A term which seems to be largely used is language learning and teaching beyond the classroom (LBC), 
adopted by Benson (2011) and Reinders and Benson (2017). Benson’s (2011) preliminary model of LBC 
identifies four main dimensions based on four of the more cited oppositions in the literature: location (out-
of-class vs. in-class), formality (informal vs. formal), pedagogy (non-instructed vs. instructed), and locus 
of control (self-directed vs. other-directed). This model provides a basic framework for analyzing 
participation in LBC activity and has been further elaborated by Lai et al. (2015) and Reinders and Benson 
(2017), among others. 
CALL in the Digital Wilds: A Working Definition 
The call for this special issue applied the following as its working definition of CALL in the digital wilds: 
“informal language learning that takes place in digital spaces, communities, and networks that are 
independent of formal instructional contexts” (Sauro & Zourou, 2017). Embedded within this definition are 
the following assumptions: 
• that learning takes place out-of-class within a digital context or community that is not governed or 
developed by a formally recognized school, university, or education provider; 
• that learning does not take place within a digital context or community with a primary goal of 
language teaching and learning; 
• that the impetus to learn in the out-of-class, digital context or community originates in the learner 
and not from curriculum guidelines, educational policy, or teacher direction; and 
Shannon Sauro and Katerina Zourou 3 
 
• that learning is not directly mediated by curriculum guidelines, educational policy, teacher practice, 
or norms of evaluation. 
This working definition draws upon the description of the digital wilds as “non-instructionally oriented 
contexts” (Thorne, Sauro, & Smith, 2015, p. 225). In other words, digital wilds are contexts that support 
social activity, are less controllable or organized than a classroom, “but which present interesting, and 
perhaps even compelling, opportunities for intercultural exchange, agentive action, and meaning making” 
(Thorne, 2010, p. 144). Key in understanding this concept is the desire to include student experience and 
agency and supporting and amplifying opportunities for language learners to participate in and learn from 
fandom, online gaming, online interest communities, and so forth (Thorne, 2015). 
In This Special Issue 
In this special issue, we prioritize studies that help explore the nature of self-directed learning, agency, and 
autonomy as well as the tools and frameworks for understanding and analyzing the complexity of learning 
in the digital wilds. Finally, in line with the journal’s scholarly standards, to be considered for this special 
issue, proposals had to present in-depth empirical data. Proposals which conceptually explored digital 
spaces, tools, or communities without placing language learning practices as the focus of the study fell 
outside the scope of this special issue. 
The response to our call for papers exceeded our expectations with 49 initial abstract proposals. Eleven 
were invited to submit a full paper, of which five were accepted for publication. We would like to note that 
it was a struggle to select from many excellent submissions and we had to make our decisions with an eye 
on achieving a broad topic coverage. 
There is, however, one additional goal embedded in our call which we did not fully realize. Although we 
set out to feature research that explored less commonly taught languages, all of the articles contained in this 
issue address the learning of English (sometimes exclusively or as one of multiple target languages), but 
among contexts and populations not always foregrounded in CALL research literature. Thus, the articles in 
this special issue include L2 learners and users in primary schools (ages 7–11), secondary schools (ages 
15–16), and universities as well as adults not affiliated in any way with educational institutions. The 
contributions to this issue reveal the wealth of processes and practices that emerge from users engaged in 
bottom-up, learner-initiated activity: learners “spread out across Sweden in rural areas, small towns, and 
cities of various sizes” (Sundqvist, 2019, pp. 90–91), members of Russian- and Spanish-speaking fandom 
communities (Shafirova & Cassany, 2019), plurilingual fan translators in Catalonia (Vazquez-Calvo, Zhang, 
Pascual, & Cassany, 2019), university students in Korea (Lee, 2019), and young Danish children between 
the ages of 7 and 11 (Hannibal Jensen, 2019). 
In the first article of this special issue, Fan translation of games, anime, and fanfiction, Vazquez-Calvo et 
al. merge perspectives from participatory culture and new literacy studies to report upon three case studies 
of fans in Catalonia engaged in different types of fan translation practices. They explore how these 
intermediate-level users of English and Japanese capitalize upon their fan practices to develop language 
and cultural knowledge. Among the data analyzed are screencast videos of the fans’ translation processes, 
from the inception of a translation project until its publication. Such detailed data reveal, for example, the 
resources and procedures the three participants used to resolve the meaning of unfamiliar words, idioms, 
and culturally bound terms. This includes not only which translation applications the fans used but also 
how they elicited and responded to feedback and input from fellow fans in online affinity groups. The 
findings reveal three very different ways in which informal language learning manifests among media fans 
who engage in highly language-focused fan practices in the digital wilds. 
In Language learning in the wild: A young user perspective, Hannibal Jensen explores the in-the-wild 
engagement with L2 English of 15 primary-school children (7–11 years old) in Denmark. Drawing upon 
activity theory and research on L2 motivation, she examines which social and cognitive motives drove 
children’s use of L2 English in the wild and how they engaged with English as a result of their motives. 
4 Language Learning & Technology 
 
The article begins by contextualizing the influential status of English in Denmark, evidenced by its 
presences at all levels of formal schooling and its visibility in popular and online media to which young 
children in Denmark are exposed. Descriptive ethnographic interviews elicited primarily social and higher-
order cognitive motives behind the children’s engagement with English. These included, for instance, the 
influence of the wider online community of English expertise around digital games that children could 
choose to play in either English or Danish. Findings from this study also highlight a difference in motives 
among some of these children regarding their use of English in school compared to English in the wild. 
In the third article in this special issue, Commercial-off-the-shelf games in the digital wild and L2 learner 
vocabulary, Sundqvist investigates the relationship between L2 English vocabulary development and the 
amount of time spent playing commercial digital games in English among Swedish secondary school 
students in Year 9 (15–16 years old). To examine this relationship, Sundqvist used the following to collect 
data from more than 1000 Year 9 students at nine different secondary schools: tests of productive and 
receptive vocabulary knowledge, national test scoring profiles, school leaving certificates, questionnaires 
regarding students learning and use of L2 English in the wild, and semi-structured interviews with focal 
participants (n = 6). Frequent gamers outperformed all other groups (non-gamers, low-frequent gamers, 
moderate gamers) on measures of both productive and receptive vocabulary knowledge. Further analysis 
revealed that the type of game played (single-player, multi-player, massively multiplayer online) was 
related to frequency of play, and that the frequency of play best predicted L2 vocabulary. Sundqvist’s study, 
while acknowledging that other English-mediated activities in the digital wilds have been shown to 
contribute to language learning, also provides large-scale evidence of the kind of L2 English vocabulary 
learning frequent gamers can achieve. 
In Quantity and diversity of informal digital learning of English, Lee asks whether the quantity and diversity 
of informal digital learning of English (IDLE) is related to L2 English learning outcomes among Korean 
university students of English as a foreign language. The study reports on data collected from questionnaires 
and interviews with 71 L2 English learners enrolled in three universities in Korea. Lee’s findings for this 
population reveal that the quantity of IDLE shares a significant association with confidence and enjoyment 
of the language, but not with productive language outcomes, standardized English test scores, or anxiety. 
However, the diversity of IDLE activities learners engaged in was significantly predictive of productive 
language outcomes, standardized English test scores, and anxiety. As Lee notes, the results of this study 
stand in contrast to findings of other studies on IDLE carried out among populations of English L2 learners 
in Nordic contexts, suggesting that culturally situated practices around IDLE may mediate L2 learning 
outcomes, laying the groundwork for cross-cultural comparative research on learning in the digital wilds. 
Returning once again to language learning and use among online media fans, the fifth paper in this special 
issue, Bronies learning English in the digital wild by Shafirova and Cassany, explores how bronies, adult 
fans of the animated television show My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic in Russia and Spain develop and 
use L2 English to carry out their fan practices within their respective online Russian- or Spanish-speaking 
fan communities. This study employed interviews and both active and passive observations to elicit 
examples of L2 English learning and development in both independent and collaborative fan practices. 
These fan practices included the viewing of episodes, the posting of and commenting on fanart, the 
collaborative translation of fanfiction from Russian into English, or the fandubbing (i.e., translating, 
performing, and recording dubbed versions) of episodes from English into Russian. Integral to these fans’ 
learning and development of L2 English is their desire to both interpret and localize media developed in 
English, as is their desire to communicate and share their locally-made fan works globally through the use 
of English. 
In all five articles, the autonomous and informal online language learning of the L2 learners or users was 
foregrounded and investigated—whether they were enrolled in formal educational practice in some part of 
their life or not. 
Shannon Sauro and Katerina Zourou 5 
 
Conclusion and the Way Ahead 
Looking ahead, scholars of L2 learning raise their voices in favor of a reconsideration of the classroom 
research agenda. Among them, Dubreil and Thorne (2017) call for the cultivation of social pedagogies as a 
means to “bridge between pedagogical amplification in classroom spaces and social action in the world, 
ultimately giving students the translingual and transcultural tools to participate effectively in complex and 
diverse communities in the future” (p. 6). They argue that framing L2 pedagogical practices as social 
pedagogies is an incentive for language educators to seriously envision what it would mean to manage the 
interface between formal and informal learning contexts and to relate this interface directly to instructed L2 
course design. 
In a related vein, attention should be brought to the fact that L2 learners increasingly craft learning 
trajectories through multiple platforms and sites. As Zhao, Lampe, and Ellison (2016) argue, “people make 
decisions based on their consideration of multiple parameters across social media platforms, including 
audience and norms” (p. 98, emphasis added). The agentive, self-driven character of learning in the digital 
wilds relates to the concept of autonomy (cf. Chik, 2014; Reinhardt, 2016). This also means that users enact 
various roles and identities, illustrating the dynamic, user-driven flow of networked activity. It is more and 
more common that users or language learners act as content producers and engage in collective initiatives 
online (two examples are crowdsourcing and citizen science). One cannot neglect that this practice is an 
example among many reflecting new, multi-layered roles and attitudes that L2 learners intentionally adopt 
in their lives. This aligns with participatory culture (Jenkins, Ito, & boyd, 2016) and represents a rich area 
in which evidence-based research is still scarce (Kessler, 2013), meriting further investigation. 
Acknowledgements 
We thank Ivan Banov, Managing Editor, and Dorothy Chun and Trude Heift, Editors-in-Chief, for their 
patience and support in bringing this special issue to fruition. We also thank the reviewers for their timely 
and valuable feedback to our contributing authors. 
References 
Benson, P. (2011). Language learning and teaching beyond the classroom: An introduction to the field. In 
P. Benson & H. Reinders (Eds.), Beyond the language classroom (pp. 7–16). London, UK: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Chik, A. (2014). Digital gaming and language learning: Autonomy and community. Language Learning 
& Technology, 18(2), 85–100. 
Dubreil, S., & Thorne, S. L. (2017). Social pedagogies and entwining language with the world. In S. 
Dubreil & S. L. Thorne, (Eds.), Engaging the world: Social pedagogies and language learning (pp. 
1–11). Boston, MA.: Cengage. 
Eraut, M. (2004). Informal learning in the workplace. Studies in Continuing Education, 26(2), 247–273. 
Hannibal Jensen, S. (2019). Language learning in the wild: A young user perspective. Language Learning 
& Technology, 23(1), 72–86. https://doi.org/10125/44673 
Jenkins, H., Ito, M., & boyd, d. (2016). Participatory culture in a networked era: A conversation on 
youth, learning, commerce, and politics. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 
Kessler, G. (2013). Collaborative language learning in co-constructed participatory culture. CALICO 
Journal, 30(3), 307–322. 
Lai, C., & Gu, M. (2011). Self-regulated out-of-class language learning with technology. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 24, 317–335. 
6 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Lai, C., Zhu, W., & Gong, G. (2015). Understanding the quality of out-of-class English learning. TESOL 
Quarterly, 49(2), 278–308. 
Lee, J. S. (2018). Quantity and diversity of informal digital learning of English. Language Learning & 
Technology, 23(1), 114–126. https://doi.org/10125/44675 
Little, D., & Thorne, S. L. (2017). From learner autonomy to rewilding: A discussion. In M. Cappellini, 
T. Lewis, & A. R. Mompean (Eds.), Learner autonomy and Web 2.0 (pp. 12–35). Sheffield, UK: 
Equinox. 
Marsick, V., & Watkins, K. (2001). Informal and incidental learning. New Directions for Adult and 
Continuing Education, 89, 25–34. 
Reinders, H., & Benson, P. (2017). Research agenda: Language learning beyond the classroom. Language 
Teaching, 50(4), 561–578. 
Reinhardt, J. (2017). Social network sites and language education. In S. L. Thorne & S. May (Eds.), 
Language, education, and technology: Encyclopedia of language and education, Volume 9 (3rd ed., 
pp. 389–400). New York, NY: Springer. 
Sauro, S., & Chapelle, C. A. (2017). Toward langua-technocultural competences. In C. A. Chapelle & S. 
Sauro (Eds.), The handbook of technology and second language teaching and learning (pp. 459–472). 
Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Sauro, S., & Sundmark, B. (2016). Report from Middle Earth: Fanfiction tasks in the EFL classroom. ELT 
Journal, 70(4), 414–423. https://doi.org/10.1093/elt/ccv075 
Sauro, S., & Sundmark, B. (2018). Critically examining the use of blog-based fan fiction in the advanced 
language classroom. ReCALL. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0958344018000071 
Sauro, S., & Zourou, K. (2017). Call for papers. Language Learning & Technology, 21(1), 186. 
https://doi.org/10125/44603 
Schraw, G., Kauffman, D. F., & Lehman, S. (2006). Self-regulated learning. In L. Nadel (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of cognitive science. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/0470018860.s00671 
Schugurensky, D. (2000). The forms of informal learning: Towards a conceptualization of the field. 
Toronto, ON: University of Toronto, Centre for the Study of Education and Work. 
Shafirova, L., & Cassany, D. (2019). Bronies learning English in the digital wild. Language Learning & 
Technology, 23(1), 127–144. https://doi.org/10125/44676 
Sockett, G. (2014). The online informal learning of English. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave MacMillan. 
Sundqvist, P. (2019). Commercial-off-the-shelf games in the digital wild and L2 learner vocabulary. 
Language Learning & Technology, 23(1), 87–113. https://doi.org/10125/44674 
Sylvén, L. K., & Sundqvist, P. (2012). Gaming as extramural English L2 learning and L2 proficiency 
among young learners. ReCALL, 24(3), 302–321. 
Thorne, S. L. (2010). The “intercultural turn” and language learning in the crucible of new media. In F. 
Helm & S. Guth (Eds.), Telecollaboration 2.0 for language and intercultural learning (pp. 139–164). 
Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Thorne, S. L. (2015). Rewilding situated and usage-based approaches to second language development 
and research. Presentation at Thinking, Doing, Learning: Usage-based Perspectives on Second 
Language Learning, Groningen, Netherlands. 
Thorne, S. L., Sauro, S., & Smith, B. (2015). Technologies, identities, and expressive activity. Annual 
Review of Applied Linguistics, 35, 215–233. 
Shannon Sauro and Katerina Zourou 7 
 
Toffoli, D., & Perrot, L. (2017). Autonomy and the online informal learning of English (OILE): The 
relationships between learner autonomy, L2 proficiency, L2 autonomy, and digital literacy. In M. 
Cappellini, T. Lewis, & A. R. Mompean (Eds.), Learner autonomy and Web 2.0 (pp. 198–228). 
Sheffield, UK: Equinox. 
Vazquez-Calvo, B., Zhang, L. T., Pascual, M., & Cassany, D. (2019). Fan translation of games, anime, 
and fanfiction. Language Learning & Technology, 23(1), 49–71. https://doi.org/10125/44672 
Zhao, X., Lampe, C., & Ellison, N. B. (2016). The social media ecology: User perceptions, strategies, and 
challenges. In J. Kaye, A. Druin, C. Lampe, D. Morris, & J. P. Hourcade (Eds.), Proceedings of the 
2016 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 89–100). New York, NY: ACM. 
Zourou, K. (in press). A critical review of social networks for language learning beyond the classroom. In 
M. Dressman & R. Sadler (Eds.), Handbook of informal language learning. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-
Blackwell. 
About the Authors 
Shannon Sauro, PhD, is an associate professor in the Department of Culture, Languages, and Media at 
Malmö University in Sweden. Her research interests include task-based language teaching in online 
environments, the intersection of online media fandoms and language learning, and virtual exchange for 
language and intercultural learning. She and Carol Chapelle are co-editors of The handbook of technology 
and second language teaching and learning (Wiley-Blackwell, 2017). She is also a past president of 
CALICO and executive board member of UNICollaboration, a cross-disciplinary organization for virtual 
exchange. She can be found on Twitter: @shansauro. 
E-mail: shannon.sauro@mau.se 
Katerina Zourou, PhD, is a scholar in language learning and teaching from an open perspective (open 
educational resources and practices) and from a networking and collaboration perspective (collective 
learning, social networked learning). She is also head of Web2Learn in Greece. She acts as project leader 
or partner in transnational projects funded by the Council of Europe, the European Commission, and 
national funds. 
E-mail: katerinazourou@gmail.com 
