Language Learning & Technology 
ISSN 1094-3501 
February 2019, Volume 23, Issue 1 
pp. 127–144 
ARTICLE  
 
 
Copyright © 2019 Liudmila Shafirova & Daniel Cassany 
 
 
Bronies learning English in the digital wild 
Liudmila Shafirova, Universitat Pompeu Fabra 
Daniel Cassany, Universitat Pompeu Fabra 
Abstract 
This article reports on fan practices, in English, among an international community of bronies—adult fans 
of the animated cartoon My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic (MLP). Originally directed at a target 
audience of young girls, MLP has become popular among men. These older male fans have been extremely 
active in producing multimodal and plurilingual fan practices. We explore how two different groups of 
bronies—one in Russia and the other in Spain—carry out fan practices in English. Applying digital 
ethnography, we describe six different cases of adult MLP fans. They both consume and create products 
such as fanfiction, translations, and fandubbing in different contexts with the use of sophisticated 
technologies. Not only do fandom practices allow these fans to develop digital identities and reach new 
audiences, they also help them to improve their English language skills—a task at which they reveal 
themselves to be both autonomous and self-critical. Regarding translation practices, we note several 
instances of bronies receiving mentoring from fellow fans who have a higher level of English. Finally, this 
article points out how, in the process of adapting their written output for global readerships, bronies can 
acquire some important transcultural skills. 
Keywords: Fandom, Collaborative Learning, Digital Ethnography, New Literacies 
Language(s) Learned in This Study: English 
APA Citation: Shafirova, L., & Cassany, D. (2019). Bronies learning English in the digital wild. Language 
Learning & Technology, 23(1), 127–144. https://doi.org/10125/44676 
Introduction 
Much of the leisure activity that was once labeled a hobby now takes place on the Internet. A considerable 
portion of online hobbying is centered around fan practices—activities which involve not only consumption 
of popular culture products, but also participation in larger communities that share a similar degree of 
emotional engagement with those products (Jenkins, 2006). Fan practices can vary from receptive activities 
like watching videos, gaming, and following social media to creative activities such as fanfiction1 writing, 
fandubbing,2 and so on. According to Gee (2004), these practices are not only ludic in function but may 
also involve the production and exchange of tacit, practical knowledge quite unlike knowledge of a purely 
academic nature. Taken together, the wide variety of fan practices observable today might most aptly be 
labeled the digital wild, as indicated by the name of this special issue. 
In this study we propose to explore how members of a fandom execute fan practices using a foreign 
language in their daily routines. Our study is based on two communities of adult fans of the TV series titled 
My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic (MLP) who denominate themselves as bronies (bro [brother] + ponies). 
Though the cartoon was targeted at young girls when it first appeared in 2010, it has since become extremely 
popular among young men aged 18 to 30 who have developed a kind of ideology based on friendship, 
harmony, and tolerance (Kosnác, 2016). This community is famous for the intense productivity of its fan 
practices, which, according to some users, have invaded the Internet (Jones, 2015). Although the bulk of 
brony fandom is located in the US, some European countries have their own well-developed communities 
that communicate in their respective languages, but also use English as a lingua franca. 
128 Language Learning & Technology 
 
The current body of research on brony fandom has largely centered around gender and masculinity (e.g., 
Gilbert, 2015; Hautakangas, 2015; Jones, 2015; Valiente & Rasmusson, 2015), identity (e.g., Robertson, 
2014), or ideology (e.g., Kosnác, 2016). Relatively little work has been devoted to the topics of language 
use or language learning. Based on the vast productivity of the fandom, its ideology, and the context, we 
suggest that it would be a relevant field of research to assess second language learning from a new literacies 
perspective, the perspective that views learning as embodied in social practices. In this article, we therefore 
explore how two different groups of bronies—one in Spain and the other in Russia—execute fan practices 
in English. 
Literature Review 
New Digital Literacies in a Fandom Space 
According to various scholars, the use of digital technologies in informal surroundings, and specifically in 
fan communities, can generate new sources of learning (Gee, 2004; Jenkins, 2006; Lankshear & Knobel, 
2006). Using the term fans, we mean those individuals who are emotionally attached to a pop-cultural 
product and who use digital technologies to consume and discuss the original products or create variations 
of them (Duffett, 2013; Sauro, 2014, 2017). 
We propose to analyze language use in a fan community within the framework of new literacies. This 
framework draws from sociocultural approaches to literacy as a social phenomenon embedded within 
communities, values, norms, and social identities and regards literacy as an everyday practice situated 
within a specific context, timeframe, and space (Black, 2008; Gee, 1997; Lankshear, 1997). 
Lankshear and Knobel (2006) claim that, with the appearance of participatory digital communication media, 
and Web 2.0 technology in particular, both the research approach to literacies and literacy practices 
themselves have changed. Specific platforms and digital communities (e.g., Wikipedia) enhance the notion 
of social in the reading and writing processes. They have not only a different appearance and interface, 
involving screens, pixels, codes, and so on, but also a new core “ethos” that is more collaborative, 
“participatory, and distributed than in conventional literacies (p. 25). These characteristics are conducive 
to a different mindset that produces different types of social practices and relationships (Lankshear & 
Knobel, 2006). The concept of these new literacies can be clearly observed in online fandoms, where fan 
communities produce unique practices and relationships driven by their shared affinity for specific pop-
culture genres or products. 
Black (2005) describes the social character of fanfiction writing, organized along participative and 
collaborative lines, with positive feedback, constructive criticism, and encouraging comments by voluntary 
proofreaders from within the fan community. Members of the community created a safe scaffolding 
environment for novice authors, thus fostering the development of foreign language literacies. 
More recently, Zhang and Cassany (2016) explored the fansubbing of Spanish TV shows into Chinese and 
revealed it to be a highly collaborative, participative, and multimodal new literacy practice. However, 
compared to fanfiction, where the text is written by one person and then reviewed and discussed, the 
fansubbing process is a team undertaking from the start and involves the creation of a hierarchical structure 
in which each member is assigned a specific role (transcriber, translator, corrector, or editor). Such 
fansubbing teams are eager to achieve the best and closest to professional translation, leading to the 
construction of social norms according to strict quality standards and the values of the community. 
These examples describe different forms of collaboration and knowledge construction in online fandoms, 
which vary from more flexible organizations to highly hierarchical structures. Nonetheless, these systems 
are always grounded in the specific practices, norms, and values of a particular community, and 
participation in them can develop new literacies. 
Liudmila Shafirova and Daniel Cassany 129 
 
Transcultural Flows and Identity Development 
Another widely debated issue is the bounded connection between digital identities and cultural flows of 
communities and learning (Black, 2006; Lam, 2006; Lee & Barton, 2011; Pearson, 2009). Taking a 
sociolinguistic perspective, Pennycook (2007) coined the term transcultural flows in order “to address the 
ways in which cultural forms move, change, and are reused to fashion new identities in diverse contexts” 
(p. 6). He analyzed how the English language and the popular culture of hip-hop are appropriated and 
localized in different countries and how this can reshape the performative identities of the users. 
Studies on fandom and new literacies have also been concerned with cultural flows and identity 
development (Fukunaga, 2006; Valero-Porras, 2018). Lam (2006) was the first to address this issue in 
describing the case of a Chinese immigrant in the US who constructed his plurilingual and global identity 
in an anime fandom. She claims that migration processes cannot be analyzed in a monolingual and 
unicultured way given how digital technology facilitates the “socialisation to multiple modes of belonging 
and participation across national boundaries” (p. 173). This goes beyond the term acculturation and is better 
defined as transculturation. Black (2008) goes further and suggests that the notion of transculturation 
should be extended beyond migration studies. Applying it to formal education settings, she argues that 
transculturation can help students to develop “soft skills” to operate in a “transnational society” (p. 602). 
Several publications (e.g., Blommaert, 2005; Thorne, Sauro & Smith, 2015) have pointed to the fluidity, 
multiplicity, and performativity of digital identity. This has further been supported by the work of scholars 
in the fields of both fandom and language learning. For instance, Valero-Porras and Cassany (2015, 2016) 
describe how a scanlation community, a fan community that specializes in translating manga, translated 
manga from English to Spanish. Members of this community considered it important to preserve Japanese 
or Asian connotations in the text, avoiding any cultural references to English culture or language, even 
though English was used as a mediation language. Valero-Porras and Cassany argue that the identity of a 
fan, in this case a fan of manga and fan of Japanese culture, is actually performed through this kind of 
language use. Along similar lines, Sauro (2017) claims that fanfiction writing can empower “multilingual 
youth” to “use their second language as a resource for indexing a global and multilingual identity” and 
reach “wider international readership” (p. 138). 
In our case, the brony identity can be represented as a group affiliation identity which is “performed and 
negotiated in collaborative creative spaces” (Thorne et al., 2015, p. 226). At the same time, the choice of 
identifying oneself as a brony could be described as a performative act that underlines the otherness of adult 
men who choose to watch MLP. 
Previous research on fan practices and language learning is clearly situated within themes such as new 
literacies, identity development, and transcultural flows. Within this theoretical context, we formulate two 
research questions (RQs): 
1. How do bronies use English in their daily online routines?  
2. How do bronies articulate their English language use?  
Methodology 
We used digital ethnography as it was the methodology most commonly used in the fan studies discussed 
above (see Valero-Porras, 2018; Zhang & Cassany, 2016). In epistemological terms, this approach was 
suitable to work with the notion of new literacies spawned by the Internet and new technologies 
interconnected with social practices and meanings (Lankshear & Knobel, 2006). In addition, Hine (2015) 
underlines the importance of going to the digital field directly and not confining the gathering of data to 
interviews. Therefore, for our data collection, we combined semi-structured interviews (SIs) with 
participant observations over a 6-month period, from March 2017 to August 2017. 
The number of interviews and observations varied due to the availability of the participants and the 
complexity of their practices. Observations were divided into active participation (in the case of fandubbing 
130 Language Learning & Technology 
 
routines and reverse translation), where the first author actually took part in the translating team, and passive 
participation, merely involving monitoring fan output and web spaces (DeWalt & DeWalt, 2011). In both 
cases, the first author documented the process by keeping field notes and making screenshots.  
This work formed part of a larger research project including exploration of the field site and data 
interpretation, undertaken as partial completion of the requirements for a PhD at the Universitat Pompeu 
Fabra. 
Data Collection 
In the course of researching the topic of language learning through animated online cartoons, the first author 
carried out an exhaustive search of different cartoon-based fandoms. The brony fandom was chosen over 
other options (e.g., the fandom devoted to The Simpsons) due to its high level of activity, large-scale 
community, and particularities (e.g., number of the brony haters and the unexpected popularity of MLP 
among young men). 
Both researchers did not identify themselves as fans of the show before conducting the research. 
Nevertheless, the first author became familiarized with the show by watching every episode and reading 
the most popular works of fanfiction and grew to greatly enjoy it. Being an active consumer and genuinely 
liking the show helped her access the participants, interpret observations, and ask relevant questions during 
the interviews. 
For their part, the bronies became interested in the researcher as a language specialist. When declaring that 
the first author was researching language learning, the bronies perceived it as something positive and were 
eager to explain and illustrate their language practices. Also, her proficient command of English helped the 
researcher to be accepted by the translators’ team, because she could participate in the process fully. 
The participants were members of two communities, each based in a MLP fandom space, a Russian-
language space with 41,247 members, and a Spanish-language space with 937 members. Both included 
profile-driven forums with uploaded content and private chats, and both were linked to other spaces such 
as DeviantArt and FimFiction.net where the participants, who created fanfiction or fan-art, posted their 
content seeking broader audiences. The first author approached these sites because they enabled her to 
recruit participants and gather their ages, genders, geographic regions, and fan-practices, as these data were 
displayed in open profiles. Table 1 shows information about the Spanish-speaking participants in the study. 
Table 1. Participants From the Spanish-Speaking Brony Online Community 
Name Age Occupation Interests and Fan Practices English Learning 
Derpy 19 Student of an 
illustration 
course in 
Galicia, Spain 
He watches MLP and 
YouTube, reads Reddit 
threads, plays role games, and 
draws and publishes fan-art. 
He started to learn English in 
elementary school; however, he 
claimed that MLP was a major 
influence on his English level. 
Gork 20 Student of 
mechanical 
engineering in 
Barcelona, Spain 
He watches MLP, reads 
fanfiction, reads and writes 
posts on Reddit, and draws and 
publishes fan-art. 
He joined the community with a high 
level of English proficiency; however, 
he admitted that MLP helped him to 
acquire new vocabulary. 
Zlos 30 Pharmacist in 
Madrid, Spain 
He watches MLP, reads and 
writes fanfiction, moderates 
the MLP forum, and manages 
a Spanish podcast about MLP. 
He joined the community with a high 
level of English; however, he admitted 
that reading and writing fanfiction 
helped him to acquire new vocabulary. 
Note. Pseudonyms are used throughout this article. 
The first author registered on the Spanish forum and sent private messages in Spanish to the most active 
participants. For the Russian forum, she approached the active bronies in Russian using the VK social 
Liudmila Shafirova and Daniel Cassany 131 
 
network—an extremely popular social media platform in Russia—as it was linked to many of the forum 
members’ profiles. Users who were active in the forum, admitted that MLP had helped them to learn English, 
and were open to collaborating were selected as participants (see Table 2). Prior to data collection, the 
research goals were explained and informed consent obtained from all six participants. The number of 
participants was limited to six because of the potentially huge amount of data to be gathered. Both 
communities were observed for a month before data were systematically collected in order to get a 
preliminary idea of the different discussions, activities, and communities linked to the forum (e.g., 
DeviantArt). 
Table 2. Participants From the Russian-Speaking Brony Online Community 
Name Age Occupation Interests and fan practices English learning 
Shor 25 Figurine crafter 
in Omsk, 
Russia 
He watches MLP, crafts figurines of 
characters from the show, and posts 
images of the figurines online. 
He started to learn English in 
elementary school; however, he 
claimed that MLP was a major 
influence on his English level. 
Bolk 24 Employee of an 
IT company in 
Minsk, Belarus 
He watches MLP, does fandubbing, and 
translates for foreign guests at 
conventions. He is also part of a team 
translating the fanfiction novel The B.T. 
He joined the community with 
a high level of English 
proficiency; but he admitted 
that MLP helped him to acquire 
new vocabulary. 
Nork 35 Designer in a 
small city in 
Ukraine 
He does not identify himself as a big fan 
of MLP. However, he is the leader of 
the translation project The B. T. He 
produces illustrations and an audiobook 
for the project. 
He joined the community with 
a high level of English. He 
admitted that working in a team 
greatly helped him to improve 
his English. 
The fan practices of the Russian-speaking participants were more diverse and recent than those of the 
Spanish-speaking participants, probably due to differences between the two communities as a whole in 
terms of size and level of activity. All six participants were men due to the overall imbalance in the 
international community. 
Table 3. Data Collected From the Participants 
Participants Research 
Techniques 
Online Chat 
Interview 
Word Count 
Other Data 
Derpy 2 SI, FPO 8,385 10 scrolling screenshots from DeviantArt 
Gork 1 SI, FPO 2,968 10 scrolling screenshots from DeviantArt 
Zlos 3 SI, FPO 5,643 - 
Shor 1 SI, FPO 6,132 10 scrolling screenshots from DeviantArt 
Bolk and Nork 1 SI, FPO, PO, 
CCs 
7,888 Field notes (N = 3, 624 words), 8 screenshots, 
translated chapters of the B.T. (N = 12, 388 words), 
YouTube narrations (76 minutes), dubbing process 
recording (30 minutes) 
Notes. SI = semi-structured interview; FPO = fan product observation; PO = participant observation; CCs = chat 
conversations 
We analyzed the interviews and field notes (see Table 3) using a bottom-up qualitative content analysis 
132 Language Learning & Technology 
 
with Atlas.Ti software. In doing so, we followed Fukunaga (2006) and Cho and Lee (2014), who suggest 
that this type of analysis is the one best suited to thoroughly and systematically describing meaning. To 
analyze specific participants’ fan practices, we carried out a discourse analysis (DA) focusing on language 
use (Gee, 2011). 
Data Analysis 
The first author open-coded interviews and field notes twice to ensure reliability. For each interview or 
filed note, she then created analytic memos to label all main observations and interpretations by means of 
a tool built into the Atlas.Ti application. This helped us to interrelate the codes and then construct categories 
while keeping the two RQs in mind. In order to induce the main categories, a schematic diagram of different 
levels of codes was made (Yin, 2016). Main categories (e.g., the viewing routines, the fan practices, English 
improvement with MLP, the use of technologies) emerged as we contrasted the gathered data. 
Subsequently, the first author applied DA to the specific practices such as fandubbing and comment writing 
on DeviantArt. She coded how bronies used English in order to achieve their objectives, using the toolkit 
described by Gee (2011). In this fashion, she determined that the main themes of the two particular practices 
were the sociocultural translation of idioms (in the case of fandubbing) and changes in the use of articles 
and connectors (in the case of DeviantArt comments). This helped her to triangulate them with such 
subcategories such as cultural value in fan translation and English improvement with MLP. Finally, the 
second author revised the main categories and subcategories in order to facilitate the interpretation of results 
(Yin, 2016). 
Results 
We divided the results into two parts, following the two RQs. 
RQ1. How Do Bronies Use English? 
The Viewing Routines 
Several conclusions could be drawn about participants’ MLP viewing habits on the basis of their interviews. 
All six participants preferred to watch MLP streamed online in English. In both communities, the original 
English voice track was more popular, while official dubbed foreign language tracks were ridiculed by the 
members of both communities. However, with different levels of experience with English use, the 
participants described diverse strategies in order to improve comprehension. For two of them (Shor and 
Derpy), MLP was the first show they had ever watched in English and they depended heavily on subtitles. 
Other participants mentioned having previously relied on subtitles to help understand MLP or other shows. 
Nork even called this “the subtitles phase” of the learning process. 
Shor started to watch MLP in 2013, developing a specific viewing routine. He watched each episode twice: 
the first time, with subtitles in Russian and socially (with his brother), and the second time, on the following 
day, without subtitles, and by himself. During the second viewing, undistracted by subtitles, he paid close 
attention to every detail in the animation. He never used a dictionary or paused the video, always either 
remembering the meaning from the previous viewing with its subtitles or deriving understanding from the 
context. Although he labeled these cartoons “easy to comprehend,” he admitted that this routine had helped 
him gain a large amount of new vocabulary. 
Derpy started out watching MLP in English with Spanish subtitles from 2013 to 2014, when he chose to 
watch it raw. When watching without subtitles, doubts about meaning would occasionally arise, at which 
point he would pause the video and go through the transcript of the episode on a MLP fan page. There, he 
was able to find phrases he had not understood and decipher them. Furthermore, if he did not know the 
meaning of a word or a phrase, he used WordReference to translate it. Gork reported following a similar 
procedure. 
All in all, for Shor and Derpy, MLP had provided the crucial initial motivation to move from viewing 
Liudmila Shafirova and Daniel Cassany 133 
 
audiovisual content in their respective mother tongues (Russian and Spanish) to viewing it in a foreign 
language. 
English Use in Fan Practices 
The bronies’ use of English was closely tied to the specific linguistic demands of the fan practices they 
were engaged in. Below, we focus on fandubbing and inverse translation. 
Bolk had been producing the fandubbing project of the last season of MLP (Season 7). This project was 
constructed in the form of an experiment in which Bolk would translate an episode phrase by phrase after 
hearing it and then dub it into Russian almost simultaneously. In the process, he recorded his output as a 
Russian language track for the cartoon sequence in question. He used Mumble software both to record and 
to share it with his fandubbing partner, V. For Bolk, it was a way to challenge himself to translate an 
audiovisual product extremely fast while also applying some acting skills. He followed four main steps: 
• Step 1. Watching an Episode in English and Writing Notes 
This was a useful technique for the more challenging English phrases, which could become difficult 
to translate spontaneously during the recording process, such as specific names from the pony world, 
puns, idioms, or inside jokes. See these examples: 
Oh, my bustles and bows! (Season 7, Episode 6) This phrase was difficult to translate because of 
its specific relation to fashion, with which Bolk was unfamiliar. In this case, he resorted to using 
an online dictionary and the Russian-language Wikipedia site to find an acceptable translation 
(турнюры и бантики). 
Eternal Elegance Empire Silhouette (name of a dress in Season 7, Episode 6) This was difficult to 
translate literally because it did not sound right or natural in Russian from Bolk’s point of view. He 
ruminated on a better translation for a while and even asked my opinion. Finally, he looked through 
the subtitles of a popular fansubbing MLP group and was pleased with their translation: Силуэт 
Империи Непроходящего Лоска (roughly, The silhouette of Empire of Eternal Gloss). However, 
he ultimately preferred to invent a new interpretation, Имперский Силуэт Вечного Изящества 
(Empire Silhouette of Eternal Elegance). 
• Step 2. Recording Translations Directly into Russian 
Bolk’s technique consisted of playing the video in raw format and listening to an English phrase, 
then pausing the video, translating it into Russian, and within seconds, recording it. He tried to 
reproduce the same pacing as in the original episode and also act out the emotions of the character. 
In addition, Bolk was eager to replicate the various accents heard on the show. For instance, Bolk 
transformed the Latin American accent (due to the MLP fandom page) of one of the characters 
(Zipporwhill, in Season 7, Episode 6) into the accent of an English-speaker talking in Russian, 
which he felt was most appropriate in a Russian-speaking context. 
• Step 3. Repetition of the Process if Initial Attempts Are Unsatisfactory 
The most frequent difficulties came from the acting or the translation chosen. See these examples: 
According to Bolk, the first phrase in Figure 1 cannot be translated literally, because it includes a 
pun. It means that the characters were beaten up at their party. Bolk wanted to save the wordplay 
with cupcakes, which was an important element of the ponies’ world. He made five attempts to 
reproduce it. Firstly, he focused on the meaning: Нам только что надрала круп самая ужасная 
гостья (roughly, We just got our croups beaten up by the worst guest). Secondly, he replaced 
croups with the cupcakes. At his third attempt, he was able to reproduce the pun itself: Нам только 
что надрала по самые кексики самая ужасная кайфоломщица в мире! (We just got our 
cupcakes beaten up by the worst hype-crasher ever). He then made two further attempts to slightly 
improve the phrase: Нам только что надрала крупы по самые кексики самая ужасная 
кайфоломщица в мире! (We just got our croups beaten up to cupcakes by the worst hype-crasher 
ever) and to act out this phrase at a fast pace and in a high voice to mimic the character Pinkie. We 
134 Language Learning & Technology 
 
can see how our participant is eager to reproduce the meaning of the phrase, the wordplay, and 
accurate acting. 
Likewise, another phrase consisted of an idiom with a joke: Easy as pie… Oh, I love pie! Here, the 
challenge was to replace the English easy as pie idiom with a Russian idiom that could be similarly 
followed up, which Bolk managed to do by translating it as как конфетку у ребенка. оо я обожаю 
конфетки! (As easy as taking candy from a child. I love candy!). 
• Step 4. Sharing Results and Publishing the Translation 
When Bolk finished the dubbed audio track, his collaborator, V, would listen to his work, eliminate 
faulty segments, synchronize the dubbed audio track with the original video, and then publish the 
result online. 
 
Figure 1. MLP movie trailer dubbing process, fan products, and translation 
Cultural mediation played an important role in both the translation (idioms, jokes) and dubbing processes 
(voice acting, reproducing accents). The translator perceived his job to be not only showing the feelings 
and emotions of the characters, but also transferring semantic nuances in order to convey the same meaning 
and effect in Russian. In many instances, Bolk admitted that he ended up learning the meaning of many 
unusual English lexical items like bustles and bows. 
Collaborative Inverse Translation Practice 
Bolk and Nork were also heavily involved in translating a work of brony fanfiction entitled The B.T. from 
Russian to English. They were assisted by two other members, V and D, who were living in other countries 
of the former Soviet Union. Each of the four had a specific role and function in this digital process, with 
Nork serving as the main translator and leader of the group; Bolk acting as the self-styled “grammar Nazi” 
responsible for checking the work of the others; D working as editor of the original Russian text, monitoring 
plot and character development in the English version; and V translating and providing technical support, 
explaining to the other members how to use the Etherpad editing platform and customizing it for the group’s 
purposes. Their objectives were not only to translate the text, but also to adapt it for an English-speaking 
readership. The process consisted of five steps, which Nork and Bolk described as “the five stages of hell”: 
• Step 1. Preparing the Russian Text 
First, the translators read the original Russian text and discussed what parts would have to be 
changed or adapted for English readers. Special attention was paid to parts that might be culturally 
Liudmila Shafirova and Daniel Cassany 135 
 
misunderstood, involved stylistic problems, or might not properly capture the development of a 
particular character. Collaboration was carried out by working simultaneously on a document 
uploaded in Google Docs (see Figure 2), and final changes were decided by majority vote. 
• Step 2. Draft Translation 
Each participant chose some parts of the text in order to translate it. This stage took place on the 
free online editing platform Etherpad, which is similar to Google Docs. The main difference 
between them was that instead of leaving comments, the users had an additional window on the 
right of the screen (see Figure 3), in which participants would discuss difficult fragments of the 
translation or engage in short conversations. A different color was assigned to each user so their 
contributions to the translation could be tracked. The Etherpad could be easily personalized as users 
could program different extensions into it. For instance, V developed an automated translation 
engine similar to Google Translate, with punctuation corrections incorporated, and then added it to 
the script of the translation plugin. These corrections were based on previous editing of their work 
by English native speakers. 
• Step 3. Draft Editing 
The participants read and edited the translation, introducing their versions of translation. To 
facilitate this process, they sometimes used Skype calls to read excerpts from the text aloud and 
comment on them. In this stage, one participant was responsible for introducing all changes into 
the draft document. Particularly difficult parts might be marked as interesting for further editing by 
native speakers. 
• Step 4. Native Speakers’ Editing 
In this stage, native speakers checked the text for grammar, punctuation, and language flow, the 
last item being the area causing most difficulties for the Russian translators. The English-speaking 
editors also dealt with the items marked interesting in the preceding stage. 
• Step 5. Final Revision 
Once all corrections to the text were complete and all difficulties resolved, the final draft was 
formatted and published on the Fimfiction website. Also at this stage, Nork would receive 
comments from other members of the group about an audiobook he was producing, with a special 
focus on improving his pronunciation in English. 
 
Figure 2. Fanfiction adaptation 
136 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 3. Fanfiction translation in Etherpad 
English Use in Written Discourse 
Some of the participants posted on a discussion website, Reddit, or created fanfiction in English based on 
MLP. However, all of these practices had taken place between three and five years prior to our research, 
and participants did not seem to regard them as crucial to their language learning process. 
The exception was Shor, who claimed that he had obtained 70% of his mastery of English by means of 
writing. He had been crafting pony figurines for over a year and quickly realized that in order to sell them 
online, he would have to be able to communicate with his customers in English. He also promoted his work 
on DeviantArt by writing descriptions of the figurines in English and responding to the comments he 
received. Initially, he would have the messages translated automatically from Russian using Google 
Translate. However, he admitted that this application made “a myriad of mistakes,” so he had to thoroughly 
check its output and make corrections before using it if necessary. 
We observed two tendencies in his public messages and comments on DeviantArt from March of 2016 to 
May of 2017. The first was related to the content of his posts, which started out as simple descriptive labels 
for images of his figurines and evolved into much more fully-structured and emotionally engaging texts. 
The second tendency was connected to the increased grammatical competence exhibited in his texts. Two 
instances of the latter—one regarding his use of articles, the other his use of connectors—are described 
below. 
In the beginning of 2016, Shor used almost no articles in English, reflecting the lack of articles in his 
native Russian. However, by December 2016, he had already started to use them occasionally. Figure 
4 illustrates several grammar mistakes. Though he does use a definite article correctly (the modeling 
sculpture), Shor fails to use the indefinite article a in the sentence I’m newbie. However, in reply to a 
comment expressing surprise at Shor’s self-description a year later (You say “I’m still a newbie”?), 
Shor uses the article correctly (see Figure 5). 
Liudmila Shafirova and Daniel Cassany 137 
 
 
Figure 4. Message published by Shor on DeviantArt, March 9, 2016 (reproduced here with the author’s 
permission) 
 
Figure 5. Message published by Shor on DeviantArt, August 26, 2016 (reproduced with the author’s 
permission) 
We suggest that there is a connection between the correction offered by the commenter and then Shor’s 
subsequent self-correction. This type of interaction could have played an important role in Shor’s language 
development. Over the same period of time, Shor began to create more complex sentences in English using 
connectors like so and as a result. This can be seen in the publication from May 2017 in Figure 6. We see 
that compared with the earlier post from March of the previous year (Figure 4), Shor’s use of English 
became more sophisticated. Note also the use of discourse markers like Oh and P.S. 
Moreover, the text was longer than before, explaining the work process and the difficulties involved. Also, 
articles were used. He made some mistakes but, nevertheless, the message became much more engaging. 
138 Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
Figure 6. Message published by Shor on DeviantArt, May 2017 (reprinted with the author’s permission) 
RQ2. How Do Bronies Articulate Their English Use? 
Technology Use 
Our research showed that digital technology was related to improved English language skills in 
comprehension and writing or translation and also facilitated collaborative undertakings. The participants 
relied on various elements or tool features to increase their reading and listening comprehension, 
particularly when they were just beginning to learn English: 
• Reading 
During the viewing routines, almost every participant described the use of subtitles in order to 
understand the audio as a “phase” when improving their audiovisual comprehension. 
• Video Control 
The participants used features of the video control such as pausing and re-watching fragments or 
episodes in order to improve their comprehension. 
• Dictionaries 
Some of the participants used dictionaries such as WordReference or Dictionary.com during 
viewing and reading routines. 
All participants depended on both dictionaries and machine translators to facilitate their production of 
written English: 
• Machine Translators 
Google Translate was used by the English beginner, Shor, and also the translator, Nork. In both 
cases, the participants addressed the use critically, assuming that the machine translator offered 
only a draft that needed to be revised. 
• Diverse Dictionaries 
During the reverse translation or fandubbing routine, participants would keep more than one 
Liudmila Shafirova and Daniel Cassany 139 
 
dictionary on hand. Bolk mentioned that he mostly used definition and synonyms dictionaries such 
as Dictionary.com, The Macmillan Dictionary, or the Oxford Dictionary. Also, translation 
(Russian–English), collocation, and slang dictionaries were used. 
Other software facilitated collaboration among the participants and was also used to disseminate or promote 
the fan products. Platforms such as Google Docs or Etherpad were used to work together on texts and share 
opinions about translations. We saw that Etherpad was particularly useful because of its customizability. 
As also noted with regard to the inverse translation process, a group chat was created using Skype in order 
to communicate about the work in progress. In the case of fandubbing, Mumble software was used to ensure 
high quality audio recordings. And finally, web pages and social media groups were key to publicizing and 
promoting the English translation of The B.T. 
English Language Learning 
All of the participants admitted that MLP helped them to improve their English skills or at least to maintain 
their level. The reasons for this progress fall under three topics: motivation, collaboration, and sociocultural 
knowledge. 
The majority of the participants affirmed that MLP was a motivational factor in their developing new 
language skills. For some of them, the most motivational breakthrough practice was the viewing routine. 
For others, it was reading or interacting with other users. For instance, Derpy claimed that MLP motivated 
him to start to use English more frequently, helping him to improve his language skills dramatically. When 
asked how this progress had become apparent to him, he said that when a native speaker was invited to 
participate in an English class he was taking, he found himself able to speak “freely” with him. This progress 
was manifested in his online practices too, as he started to perform a lot of them in English. 
When I want to search for something in Google, I do it in English. If I read manga, the same, in English. 
I follow a lot of channels on YouTube which are in English. I have plenty of examples XD. This is almost 
a second language for me, and everything thanks to this show about ponies xD. (Translated from 
Spanish) 
In fandubbing and inverse translation, the participants were motivated to use English not solely for the fan 
practice, but also with the clear aim of developing new language skills. For instance, Nork wanted to 
improve his intonation and writing through his participation in the B.T. project. Moreover, in the course of 
doing inverse translations, the participants noticed that they improved their English skills when 
collaborating. They corrected each other and members with higher levels of English proficiency helped 
those with lower levels. Nork claimed, for example, that his intonation in English had greatly improved 
thanks to Bolk’s help and corrections. Also, native English speakers were involved at a late stage in the 
editing process. 
Furthermore, in every fan routine, the participants were aware of the implicit sociocultural context of the 
North American cartoon and, on several occasions, articulated what they had learned from this context. 
Most of them connected language learning with obtaining new lexis, which was generally situated in a 
specific context within the cartoon narrative. For example, Zlos reported that it was thanks to the story line 
of the MLP episode “Rarity Investigates,” he was able to learn the word filly and the idiom ducks in a row. 
He claimed that the practice of reading fanfiction also helped him acquire vocabulary through context: 
And yes, reading fanfic (of MLP and other things) helped me with my English. I have learned words, 
expressions, gags, and situations on the basis of reading, which probably would have been more 
difficult if I had consulted more conventional material. (Translated from Spanish) 
According to the participants, another advantage of watching MLP was that it allowed them to get 
accustomed a U.S. English accent. This was especially the case of the Spanish-speaking participants as 
many of them were used to British English. Also, all of the participants learned to distinguish the Southern 
U.S. accent of some of the characters in MLP, which was initially difficult for even the more advanced 
learners to comprehend. 
140 Language Learning & Technology 
 
This sort of sociocultural awareness was particularly important when it came to fandubbing and inverse 
translation, because both processes involved situating the translated output within a different sociocultural 
context. Bolk claimed that one of the most important tasks in translation for him was adapting jokes and 
idiomatic expressions appropriately so that a Russian audience could understand and enjoy them in their 
local context. 
By the same token, participants reported that cultural adaptation was one of their main goals in the fan 
language practices. They changed some parts of the fanfic in order to adapt the local rhetorical Russian 
traditions to a more global audience. For instance, when describing a character’s thought process, they 
replaced the third-person point of view with a first-person narration, because, according to them, the use of 
first-person inner dialogs was the appropriate rhetorical practice for presenting the thoughts of a character 
in English fiction. This can be seen in Figure 2 above, where the main character, Victor, is thinking about 
how the pony Celestia knew how to comfort the other ponies. In Russian, these thoughts are written in third 
person, but in the adaptation, they take an inner-dialog, first-person form. 
Discussion 
With regard to RQ1, we have seen that the way bronies use English in their daily online routines is 
characterized by several features that concur with those described in previous fandom studies. Among the 
most noteworthy of these features are a dedicated consumption of the cartoon in English, the creation of 
personal fan products, and extensive collaboration among the members during these practices (Jenkins, 
2006; Sauro, 2017; Williams, 2006). We saw these uses of English illustrated in the case of a Russian brony 
figurine-maker, Shor, who improved his English use in specific discourse coordinates, making 
progressively more structured and emotionally engaging descriptions of his products. This process could 
be viewed as an example of how an individual in a specific context, with a specific role in the community 
can start to dominate one of the multiple literacies of his second language (Knobel & Lankshear, 2015). 
Writing comments, fandubbing, and inverse translation can be characterized as new literacy practices in the 
terms defined by Lankshear and Knobel (2006, p. 27): they are situated; dispersed among different 
platforms and software, from collaborative writing platforms to individual social media accounts; intensely 
collaborative, as during inverse translation and fandubbing; and participative, as when other fans discuss 
the products and comment on them. In addition, they involve distributed expertise, exemplified by the 
correction of English in Shor’s comments or the participation of native-speaker correctors in the inverse 
translation process. 
The language practices of a particular fandom can have different levels of participation and collaboration. 
We observed individual-driven practices, where the writing or translating process is mainly carried out by 
one person, such as fandubbing and descriptive writing. We also saw more team-driven practices, such as 
inverse translation. The team-driven practice in this study was similar to the fansubber activity described 
by Zhang and Cassany (2016), as in both cases the aim was to create a more professional product. The 
process of translation was not only participative and collaborative but also carefully organized and 
hierarchical, with clearly distributed roles. Therefore, we suggest that collaborative and participative 
notions can be pursued by fans in multiple ways, which may be linked to whether they are individual- or 
team-driven. 
With regard to RQ2, the bronies in our study attested to the frequent use of sophisticated technologies when 
using English—many of them greatly facilitating collaboration, such as Mumble, Etherpad, Google Drive, 
or Skype, through which they chatted, edited texts, made comments, and discussed their projects. This use 
of technology could also provide opportunities for all participants to mediate their English use at different 
stages. A more sophisticated use of digital technology to improve English language output was seen in the 
creation of an Etherpad extension to correct punctuation by the B.T. team (with the help of input from a 
native speaker). We considered this important not only because it was an instance of technology enhancing 
collaboration among team members (Lankshear & Knobel, 2006), but also because this collaboration led 
Liudmila Shafirova and Daniel Cassany 141 
 
to the creation of a new tool designed to improve their written English output. 
Furthermore, our research showed that the bronies were keenly aware of the sociocultural value of their 
language practices. Many of them connected the learning of new vocabulary within a specific context, 
during reading or watching MLP, with a successful learning strategy. This is reminiscent of the “anime 
students” described in Fukunaga (2006, p. 206), who admitted that seeing new words in context helped in 
acquiring vocabulary. The participants in our research were also fully conscious that during the translation 
process, they were playing the role of cultural mediators by adapting their products to the sociocultural 
realities of their target audience. This cultural mediation was, in fact, bidirectional, with inverse translation 
implying movement from local community to global and fandubbing involving flow from global 
community to local. 
In the case of fandubbing, for example, Bolk, a Russian-speaking brony, took a US pop cultural product 
(MLP) and appropriated it in order to adapt it for a Russian-speaking audience. He treated it as a personal 
project where he could perform his skills in a creative way. Bolk was performing the role of a translator in 
the community, appropriating culturally bounded expressions and then localizing them for a new audience 
in a way that was meaningful for the fandom. His creative performance was therefore shaped by rules 
connected with his identity as both a brony and a translator. 
In the case of inverse translation, one of the main objectives was mediation between audiences. The 
Russian-speaking bronies were working to present a Russian product to a broader audience. They had to 
imagine how a Russian fanfic text might be perceived by an English-speaking readership and adjust it 
accordingly. Thus, while enacting their digital identities as both Russian-speaking bronies and translators, 
they had to be socioculturally aware of a global readership’s response to their adaptation of the novel. 
Drawing on Pennycook (2007), transcultural flows are moving in digital communities, and we suggest that 
bronies construct their digital identities on the basis of this transcultural mediation. However, they not only 
appropriate and localize products made in English, but also, with the development of the Russian brony 
community, seek to present the local product to a global audience. Therefore, brony identity seems to unite 
local brony communities on a global scale, which in turn provides motivation for many bronies to use 
English. 
We suggest that bronies reflect and learn about cultural differences during these transcultural mediations. 
It is thus appropriate to associate them with the term transculturation, which includes not only new ways 
of constructing meaning, but also socialization to different cultures (Black, 2008; Lam, 2006). This 
transcultural skill offers bronies “the sort of learning and participation valued in contemporary workplaces 
as well as social spaces” (Black, 2008, p. 602), which can be extremely useful in a globalized society. 
Moreover, members of the inverse translation team articulated two main goals for the translation process: 
to improve their English and to create a high-quality product. This contrasted with previous fandom studies, 
where informal language learning was observed to be more incidental, and the main goal of productive 
effort was generally described as being made by fans for fans (Black, 2006; Gee, 2004; Lam, 2006; Valero-
Porras & Cassany, 2016). Also, the fact that fans could see their improvements while using the language 
was a motivational factor to continue learning (Fukunaga, 2006; Williams, 2006). In our case, the 
participants were motivated not only by their English improvement (particularly in intonation and writing), 
but also by the fact that they were producing fan products for a brony audience, thereby allowing them to 
identify themselves as brony-translators or crafters. 
We suggest that in specific language-based fan practices such as inverse translation, there is a chance that 
the participants are actively aiming for language learning and can therefore be reflective and critical about 
their learning. This, according to Barton and Lee (2013), is central in adult learning processes and leads to 
autonomous learning. 
142 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Conclusion 
Our study presents an initial exploration of informal learning of English in Russian- and Spanish-speaking 
communities of bronies. Observing and analyzing a wide variety of practices within an individual fandom 
enabled us to document practices with different levels of collaboration and participation, the personalization 
and creation of new technologies, the value of sociocultural knowledge and transculturation, and the variety 
of motivations that drive fans. 
As for limitations of the study, we depended on the availability of the participants and their levels of 
participation. Moreover, as this was an exploratory study, our focus was wide in scope, and some of the 
practices we describe, such as inverse translation, deserve a more detailed analysis. The last limitation was 
the small number of participants from whom our data was gathered. This made it difficult to draw broad, 
generalizable conclusions about this particular community—especially since there are currently no other 
studies devoted to it. However, we believe that further research on brony fandom communities will be richly 
rewarded, given their productivity and collaborative nature. To this end, our own research goals include 
observing the brony community and their language practices over a much longer period in order to gain a 
larger and more detailed body of data, allowing us to analyze collaborative practices and language behaviors 
more precisely. 
Acknowledgements 
We want to especially thank all the participants of the study, for their time and willingness to help. This 
research was partly funded by the doctoral scholarship (2017FI_B_00181, Government of Catalonia) and 
by the research projects ICUDEL (EDU2014-57677-C2-1-R, Ministry of Economy, Spain) and Fandom in 
Spain (third call, Queen Sophia Center for Youth and Adolescence, Spain). 
Notes 
1. Fanfiction is a writing practice “in which fans use media narratives and pop cultural icons as inspiration 
for creating their own texts” (Black, 2006, p. 172). 
2. Fandubbing is dubbing by fans not based on strict translation, often intended for comic effect (Nord, 
Khoshsaligheh, & Ameri, 2015). 
References 
Barton, D., & Lee, C. (2013). Language online: Investigating digital texts and practices. New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Black, R. W. (2005). Access and affiliation: The literacy and composition practices of English-language 
learners in an online fanfiction community. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 49(2), 118–128. 
Black, R. W. (2006). Language, culture, and identity in online fan fiction. E-Learning, 3, 180–184. 
Black, R. W. (2008). Just don’t call them cartoons: The new literacy spaces of anime, manga, and 
fanfiction. In J. Coiro, M. Knobel, C. Lankshear, & D. J. Leu (Eds.), Handbook of research on new 
literacies (pp. 583–610). New York, NY: Taylor & Francis. 
Blommaert, J. (2005). Discourse. A critical introduction. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Cho, J. Y., & Lee, E. H. (2014). Reducing confusion about grounded theory and qualitative content 
analysis: Similarities and differences. The Qualitative Report, 19(32), 1–20. 
DeWalt, K. M., & DeWalt, B. R. (2011). Participant observation: A guide for fieldworkers. Plymouth, 
UK: AltaMira Press. 
Liudmila Shafirova and Daniel Cassany 143 
 
Duffett, M. (2013). Understanding fandom: An introduction to the study of media fan culture. New York, 
NY: Bloomsbury.  
Fukunaga, N. (2006). “Those anime students”: Foreign language literacy development through Japanese 
popular culture. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 50(3), 206–222. 
https://doi.org/10.1598/JAAL.50.3.5 
Gee, J. P. (1997) Foreword: A discourse approach to language and literacy. In C. Lankshear (Ed.), 
Changing literacies (pp. xiii–xix). Buckingham, UK: Open University Press. 
Gee, J. P. (2004). Situated language and learning: A critique of traditional schooling. New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Gee, J. P. (2011). How to do discourse analysis: A toolkit. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Gilbert, A. (2015). What we talk about when we talk about bronies. Transformative Works and Cultures, 
20. Retrieved from http://journal.transformativeworks.org/index.php/twc/article/view/666/549 
Hautakangas, M. (2015). It’s ok to be joyful? My Little Pony and Brony masculinity. The Journal of 
Popular Television, 3(1), 111–118. 
Hine, C. (2015). Ethnography for the internet: Embedded, embodied, and everyday. New York, NY: 
Bloomsbury. 
Jenkins, H. (2006). Fans, bloggers, and gamers: Exploring participatory culture. New York, NY: New 
York University Press. 
Jones, B. (2015). My Little Pony, tolerance is magic: Gender policing and brony anti-fandom. The 
Journal of Popular Television, 3(1), 119–125. 
Knobel, M., & Lankshear, C. (2015). Researching and understanding new literacies from a social 
languages perspective. Paper presented at Futuuri! Language Summer School and the Language 
Centre Conference, Jyväskylä, Finland. Retrieved from 
https://www.academia.edu/12829531/Researching_and_Understanding_New_Literacies_from_a_Soc
ial_Languages_Perspective 
Kosnác, P. (2016). The development of spirituality in the Brony community. In C. M. Cusack (Ed.), 
Fiction, invention, and hyper-reality: From popular culture to religion (pp. 79–99). New York, NY: 
Routledge. 
Lam, W. S. E. (2006). Re-envisioning language, literacy, and the immigrant subject in new mediascapes. 
Pedagogies: An International Journal, 1, 171–195. 
Lankshear, C. (1997). Changing literacies. Philadelphia, PA: Open University Press. 
Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (2006). New literacies: Everyday practices and classroom learning. 
Maidenhead, UK: Open University Press. 
Lee, C. K., & Barton, D. (2011). Constructing glocal identities through multilingual writing practices on 
Flickr.com. International Multilingual Research Journal, 5(1), 39–59. 
Nord, C., Khoshsaligheh, M., & Ameri, S. (2015). Socio-cultural and technical issues in non-expert 
dubbing: A case study. International Journal of Society, Culture, & Language, 3(2), 1–16. 
Pearson, E. (2009). All the World Wide Web’s a stage: The performance of identity in online social 
networks. First Monday, 14(3). Retrieved from 
https://www.firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/2162 
Pennycook, A. (2007). Global Englishes and transcultural flows. New York, NY: Routledge. 
144 Language Learning & Technology 
 
Robertson, V. L. D. (2014). Of ponies and men: My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic and the brony 
fandom. International Journal of Cultural Studies, 17(1), 21–37. 
Sauro, S. (2014). Lessons from the fandom: Task models for technology-enhanced language learning. In 
M. González-Lloret & L. Ortega (Eds.), Technology-mediated TBLT: Researching technology and 
tasks (pp. 239–262). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Sauro, S. (2017). Online fan practices and CALL. CALICO Journal, 34(2), 131–146. 
Thorne, S. L., Sauro, S., & Smith, B. (2015). Technologies, identities, and expressive activity. Annual 
Review of Applied Linguistics, 35, 215–233. 
Valero-Porras, M. J. (2018). La construcción discursiva de la identidad en el fandom: Estudio de caso de 
una aficionada al manga (Doctoral dissertation). Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. 
Retrieved from https://www.tdx.cat/handle/10803/459254 
Valero-Porras, M. J., & Cassany, D. (2015). Multimodality and language learning in a scanlation 
community. Procedia: Social and Behavioral Sciences, 212, 9–15. 
Valero-Porras, M. J., & Cassany, D. (2016). “Translation by fans for fans”: Organization and practices in 
a Hispanic community of scanlation. BiD: Textos universitaris de biblioteconomia i documentació, 
37(2). Retrieved from http://bid.ub.edu/37/cassany.htm 
Valiente, C., & Rasmusson, X. (2015), Bucking the stereotypes: My Little Pony and challenges to 
traditional gender roles. Journal of Psychological Issues in Organizational Culture, 5, 88–97. 
Williams, K. L. (2006). The impact of popular culture fandom on perceptions of Japanese language and 
culture learning: The case of student anime fans (Doctoral dissertation). The University of Texas at 
Austin, Austin, TX. Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.net/2152/2657 
Yin, R. K. (2016). Qualitative research from start to finish. New York, NY: Guilford. 
Zhang, L. T., & Cassany, D. (2016). Fansubbing from Spanish to Chinese: Organization, roles, and norms 
in collaborative writing. BiD: Textos universitaris de biblioteconomia i documentació, 37(2). 
Retrieved from: http://bid.ub.edu/en/37/tian.htm 
About the Authors 
Liudmila Shafirova is a predoctoral researcher of Pompeu Fabra University, Spain. Her research interests 
include informal learning, digital identity development, and fan communities.  
E-mail: liudmila.shafirova@upf.edu 
Daniel Cassany is a professor of discourse analysis at Pompeu Fabra University. Daniel currently leads the 
research projects ICUDEL and Fandom in Spain. 
E-mail: daniel.cassany@upf.edu 
