Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2013/ballance.pdf

February 2013, Volume 17, Number 1
pp. 37–46

MALL—SOMEWHERE BETWEEN THE TOWER, THE FIELD,
THE CLASSROOM AND THE MARKET:
A REPLY TO PROFESSOR STOCKWELL’S RESPONSE
Oliver James Ballance, The University of Nottingham, Ningbo, China
In the previous issue of LLT, I commented upon Stockwell (2010), suggesting that the
learning activities investigated limited the scope of his research on the effects of the
MALL platform. Professor Stockwell responded in the same issue with a spirited riposte.
However, it became clear that much of the disagreement lay in a matter of definition. The
reply I present here provides a definition of learning activity, intended to clarify any
misunderstanding. I then proceed to outline a design for learning activities that would be
highly relevant to MALL platforms: I attempt to address the learning activity not only in
terms of the constraints imposed on MALL by technological limitations, but also in terms
of the psychological and environmental contexts MALL is likely to be used in. My
original commentary suggested “that more care needs to be taken to develop a research
framework within which the platform is not artificially separated from the learning
activity” (Ballance, 2012, p.21); the reply presented here concludes with reflections on the
limitations of the design presented herein and implications for future MALL research, with
particular reference to “working within constraints in mobile learning” (Stockwell, 2012a,
p.24).
INTRODUCTION
Professor Stockwell’s generosity in replying to my commentary (see previous issue of LLT) was greatly
appreciated, as his response was both lively and thought provoking, just as the article I had been
commenting upon had been (Stockwell, 2010). However, I feel my comments and Stockwell’s response
are, to some extent, speaking at cross-purposes, and I hope to clarify my point in the reply which follows.
While Stockwell expresses disappointment that I failed to understand many significant points in his work,
I will argue that it would be more precise to say that I failed to make myself understood, and I hope that
by taking more care to define my terms, the point my original commentary failed to make will become
clear: research which separates the platform, MALL for example, from the learning activity that is being
engaged with on this platform constrains its relevance in very important ways. Professor Stockwell
organised his response under two subheadings which he presented as the core claims of my commentary:
“response to claim one: nature of the activities” and “response to claim two: the impact of smart phones.”
They will be discussed in turn. In line with a criticism in Stockwell’s response, a sketch will be offered of
a potential smart app, concluding with a discussion that draws on Professor Stockwell’s highlighting of
constraints in app production, raising the question of how MALL research can be positioned in relation to
learners, teachers, publishers, and educational institutions as variously both consumers and producers of
MALL research and MALL technology.
Regarding Claim One: “the nature of the activities”—What is an activity?
Stockwell (2012a) begins by suggesting that I failed to understand the MALL vocabulary activities
reported on. However, the fault may actually have been a failure to clearly define what was meant by a
learning activity, a serious oversight. The term learning activity was intended to refer to any task the
learner engages in which is purported to improve the likelihood of the learner acquiring a new skill or
level of understanding. Thus, if we take Nation’s (1998, 2001) three-stage model of vocabulary
acquisition as a point of departure (noticing, retrieving, and generating), any task which purported to help
the learner notice, retrieve, or generate target vocabulary could be viewed as a learning activity in a piece
of software. If, for instance, Laufer’s (2010) framework for skill acquisition is preferred, a learning

Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501

37

Oliver James Ballance

MALL—Somewhere between the Tower, the Field, the Classroom, and the Market

activity would be any task which was purported to help the learner achieve declarative knowledge,
proceduralisation, or automatisation of target language. No matter which theory of language acquisition is
operationalised, with the term learning activity only referring to tasks that are specifically intended to
facilitate language acquisition, it becomes clear that the disagreement between Stockwell and I was
basically one of definition. With this clarification made, the claim that the learning activities the learners
engaged with could have been completed either in pen and paper format or else on a PC quite clearly does
not constitute a misunderstanding of the activities the learners engaged with.
Some of the features that Stockwell (2012a) argues make his software incomparable to pen and paper
activities are the software’s ability to: (a) keep records, (b) regulate the frequency with which learners
were exposed to items in response to their performance, (c) be seen clearly on a range of platforms and
(d) utilise push and pull modes. Stockwell also emphasises how the mobile delivery differed from the PC
in terms of (e) formatting, (f) pacing, and (g) modes of access. However, it can be argued that, while each
of the features is excellent and contributes greatly to the utility of the software used in the study, none of
these features pertains directly to the concept of a learning activity, as defined above.
Stockwell (2007, p. 371) lists the task types selected as follows: “choose the appropriate word for a
sentence, choose the appropriate word for an English definition, choose the appropriate word for a
Japanese meaning, match a list of words with their English definition, and write the appropriate word for
an English sentence.” It would seem fair to say that these are all fairly well-accepted pen and paper
vocabulary learning activities used in classrooms around the world. Not wishing to overburden the point,
taking the concept of task to be synonymous with the concept of learning activity as given above,
Stockwell (2007, p. 374) writes “the tasks for both the PC and mobile platforms were the same.” If more
care to define terms had been taken, and if greater awareness of the details of Professor Stockwell’s work
had been demonstrated, this misunderstanding could clearly have been avoided.
Given that my commentary was somewhat cavalier in tone towards Professor Stockwell’s research, a
certain degree of hyperbole on his part is quite understandable. Thus, regarding his second point, that I
believe “activities carried out on mobile devices must not replicate paper-based activities” (Stockwell,
2012a, p. 24), I feel sure he would accept that I am not committed to this by claiming that separating the
design of learning activities from the platforms they are to be delivered on raises issues about their
relevance. I am only committed to the claim that, if the activities are basically just pen and paper activities
delivered on a mobile platform, then the scope of those findings, taken in isolation, will be limited to just
that. This, however, is perhaps the contentious point: whether it is reasonable to ask whether MALL
technologies might not have a very different impact when providing learners with some genuinely
different types of learning activity.
Regarding Claim Two: “The impact of smart phones”
The abstract of Stockwell (2010, p. 95) complains that “we still have little knowledge of how the mobile
platform affects the way in which activities are completed and how learners make decisions about using
mobile phones,” and concludes with, “the results of the study are discussed in terms of how the platform
affects learners’ ability to complete tasks, whether continued usage contributes to improved performance
or sustained use of the platform over time.” Stockwell (2012a, p. 29) suggests that my commentary
exhibits “an inflated expectation that new technologies will solve the problems of earlier ones because
they have enhanced functionality.” I would counter that if new technologies are not explored in terms of
the potentialities brought about by their enhanced functionality, it would be unwise to hope they will ever
be able to solve any of the problems which previous technologies could not address. Indeed, it may not
even be a question of enhanced functionality solving old problems, but perhaps enhanced functionality
allowing smart phones to supplement learners’ learning experiences with something new and
complementary to existing learning activities and practices. Perhaps learner engagement with the mobile
platform in Stockwell’s study (2010) would have been very different if the learning activities had been

Language Learning & Technology

38

Oliver James Ballance

MALL—Somewhere between the Tower, the Field, the Classroom, and the Market

designed for the MALL platform, perhaps running in tandem with more traditional activities, as opposed
to replicating existing ones on a different platform.
Ironically, Stockwell’s (2012a) response that there were factors at play which I failed to take account of is
actually very much the point my commentary failed to express with sufficient clarity. When Stockwell
(2008, p. 260; 2012a, p. 27) points out that some students reported that studying on a mobile “didn’t feel
like studying” or that the mobile platform is “not a tool for studying,” or that others did not want to even
try the mobile platform because they felt their surroundings when using the mobile would be
inappropriate for study, I then wonder whether learning activities could be designed which do not feel like
study, which would not be affected by distractions, and for this very reason, could foster sustained usage
on the mobile platform.
Of course, Stockwell (2012a) is quite correct to point out that I “failed to provide any concrete
suggestions beyond using smart phones and apps, or more importantly, any empirical evidence.”
However, as my commentary was intended as a call for more empirical evidence, I will only attempt to
address the issue of failing to offer something hypothetical in place of that which I, to some extent
inadvertently, critiqued. The following section will outline a particular language acquisition need
identifiable in the literature and provide a sketch of a hypothetical app which could potentially provide a
learning activity to address this need and how it could be realised on the MALL platform. I will then
conclude with a discussion of the limitations of the app presented.
A SUGGESTION FOR A MALL VOCABULARY APP: SEMANTIC FEATURES GAMES
A Vocabulary Problem
Nation (2001) has long warned of the dangers of unlearning, resulting from trying to learn vocabulary in
inappropriate lexical sets: presenting semantically similar form-meaning pairs at the early stage of
acquisition can easily result in confusion between signs and their referents. However, research from
Llarch (2011) suggests that as learners become more advanced, subtle distinctions between semantically
similar form-meaning pairs become an increasingly important issue:
Semantic lexical errors are relevant because they become more prominent as learning progresses as
our results have shown. Therefore, L2 semantic associations, which are complex for the learner,
will demand higher attention in classroom. Presentation of semantic fields and typical associative
networks will enhance acquisition (Fernández, 1997; Gu, 2003). In this sense, in the light of the
results that learners seem to acquire first the formal aspects of words and afterwards the semantic or
meaning aspects, we call for classroom activities that focus on meaning, particularly at higher
proficiency levels (McNeil, 1996). (Llarch, 2011, p. 200)
Thus, if we assume learners are being exposed to new vocabulary, either in class or through some other
CALL or MALL application, and some care has been taken to present new vocabulary items in a manner
which minimises the potential for unlearning, it can be assumed at some point the learners would benefit
from engaging in a learning activity which helped them with semantic disambiguation, whether this was
undertaken in a classroom environment or through CALL.
A Hypothetical MALL App
From a Saussurean perspective, translations never have true equivalents, as “signs are not positively
definitive by virtue of their inherent characteristics, but instead are negatively significant as a result of
their differentiation from other signs in the system” (Elhindi, 2005, p. 243). Thus, one goal of semantic
awareness would be to represent the semantic space particular lexemes occupy within their system,
through a semantic box diagram, (see Murphy, 2010, pp. 125–127, for a concise introduction to this
topic).

Language Learning & Technology

39

Oliver James Ballance

MALL—Somewhere between the Tower, the Field, the Classroom, and the Market

Scanning through Hsu’s (2011) Business Word List, one finds seven verbs commonly used for reporting
in academic writing: acknowledge, allege, conclude, contend, infer, imply, and posit. These seven words
could be presented in a box diagram, with movement across the box representing relationships of
synonymy (words being written within the same box) or near-synonymy (neighbouring boxes), through to
a degree of antonymy (distance between boxes), and with boxes above and below representing
relationships of hypernymy (superordinate words) and hyponymy (words with a higher degree of
semantic specificity). Thus, the box diagram presented in Figure 1 represents words so as to suggest their
contrastive relations to one another.
Report
Posit
Imply

Allege

Conclude
Contend

Acknowledge

Infer

Figure 1. Semantic box diagram for BWL reporting verbs.
This kind of analysis could be used to create a simple puzzle game wherein players have to fill in an
empty box diagram, dragging the appropriate words into the appropriate spaces (see Figure 2).

Figure 2. Semantic box puzzle game for BWL reporting verbs.
To give a thumbnail sketch, when the app is accessed, a semantic set could be selected, which would open
a window displaying the target words at the top, the semantic spaces in the middle, and the player’s score
and lives at the bottom. Utilising touch screen technology, the player would select target words by
touching them, and then drag these words to a space. When positioned correctly, the word would then
expand to occupy the space (see the words report, posit, or infer in Figure 2). The score would reflect
how many words the player had placed correctly. Correct answers could be confirmed both graphically,
by colour or animation, and aurally, by the word clicking into place; incorrect answers would be signaled
by a quick vibration, the word snapping back to its original position, the sound of an incorrect answer
familiar from game shows, and the loss of a life. Given that research has shown that learners show a
tendency to select more general words, as more specific words will have a higher learning burden and
more restrictions on use (Laufer, 1997, p.150), one could score the words differently, with the words
which occupy a more specific semantic space being assigned a higher score for a correct answer. To put it
succinctly, a wide range of game mechanics could be employed to make the learning activity feel as much

Language Learning & Technology

40

Oliver James Ballance

MALL—Somewhere between the Tower, the Field, the Classroom, and the Market

like an app game as possible.

+

+

Infer

+

+

Posit

+

Imply

(SUGGESTS what is
reported was used to)
accuse

Conclude

(SUGGESTS existence of)
disagreement
(with reported view)

+

(MUST report a)
claim

+

(MUST have)
indirect
(quality)

(MUST report a)
reply
(to someone else’s view)

Acknowledge

(MUST report the)
conclusion
(of an argument)

(CAN report)
thoughts
(as well as words)

This activity would do little to establish the exact nature of the target words, only their relations to one
another in terms of their relative semantic space; however, assuming the fundaments of word knowledge
have been established previously, whether through self-guided word card study or in class, this may not
be too serious an issue, as its aim would be to promote connections between the lexemes in the learners
lexicon, not to establish their meanings. However, a different kind of semantic analysis may have more
potential for more detailed semantic exploration. Schmitt suggests that, in learning the meaning of words
which do not refer to very conceptually basic entities, learners “have to assimilate enough additional
features to disambiguate similar words that may have almost the same core meaning, but with subtle
differences” (2000, p. 125). Thus, a second game-like activity aimed at helping learners engage with
semantic features of vocabulary could be based on a taxonomic analysis. While it is not suggested that
words are learnt by additively compiling lists of semantic features, lists of semantic features can serve as
a checklist when trying to decide whether a word is semantically appropriate in a given context or not
(Schmitt, 2000; Hatch & Brown, 1995). An example using the same seven verbs is presented below in
Figure 3.

+
+
+

+

Allege

+

Contend

+

+
+

Figure 3. Semantic field analysis for BWL reporting verbs.
Clearly, for the exercise to have pedagogical validity, it would be necessary for the target words to be
explained through simpler words. Thus, the words chosen to provide the taxonomy of semantic features
were all within the BNC 3,000, (with all except accuse being in the BNC 2,000), as the seven target
words were all from the BNC fourth 1,000 or above. However, using simple words necessitates fairly
lengthy descriptions of the semantic features, which conflicts with the typical screen sizes encountered on
the MALL platform, so it is suggested that a single word be provided as a shorthand for each of the
semantic features, with a pop-up expanded definition being accessed via touch screen. To turn the grid
into a potentially engaging game-like activity, it would seem necessary to do little more than transfer the
grid into a game set up like the classic game Battleship or the Windows OS game Minesweeper, the
difference being that guessing would be based on lexical knowledge as opposed to probability. Selecting a

Language Learning & Technology

41

Oliver James Ballance

MALL—Somewhere between the Tower, the Field, the Classroom, and the Market

given point on the grid could open a radial menu, allowing the user to select an answer option, which
would then be revealed as either correct (i.e., a filled in blank or removal of the blank), or an explosion
icon. These results would simultaneously be represented as either points or as a reduction in the number
of remaining lives respectively (see Figure 4).

Figure 4. Semantic mine field puzzle game BWL reporting verbs: showing a pop-up expanded definition
(left) and a radial menu (right).
Relevance to the MALL Platform
Discussing the potentialities of MALL, Godwin-Jones writes:
It is not just the mobility, enhanced hardware, and better software of new mobile-devices that
should encourage new thinking. The devices in and of themselves encourage a new kind of
relationship between user and machine. The responsive touchscreen interface seems to create a
more personal, even intimate connection, becoming part of one’s personal identity. According to a
recent report on creating mobile apps from Forrester Research, the emotional bond is something to
bear in mind when developing mobile apps. The devices are more personal also in the sense that
they are individually highly customizable and small enough to always have within reach… the
screen size and touch interface tend to invite users to focus exclusively on one task at a time, this
may present a welcome opportunity to capture, at least for a short time, the full attention of the
learner. (2011, p. 8)
The app outlined above attempts to take advantage of the touch screen interface available on most modern
mobiles and the potential for intense and personal engagement between learner and machine. Utilising the
touch screen for a drag and drop interface allows of incredibly fast and effortless engagement on the part
of the user, with no fiddly typing required, something Stockwell (2012b) identifies as a potential concern
in MALL design. The feedback mechanism, which could be customizable so as to give the learner the
choice as to whether or not they have visual, aural, and/or tactile feedback on their answers, could also
provide quite a powerful emotional element to the learning activity: the two falling tones used by quiz
shows worldwide to denote an incorrect answer is, arguably, one of the most iconic sounds in the world
today (see Oswald, 2012 for a relevant discussion). Similarly, anyone familiar with computer games will
be well aware of the powerful motivational effect that the game concepts of lives and score can have on
engagement with even very simple or repetitive puzzle game formats, the sense that one must get to the
next level or beat one’s old score, so you’ll play just one more time. Though such game concepts as lives
and score may be very basic, it is worth exploring whether they yet have the potential to stimulate a
motivational game cycle wherein iterative play is self-perpetuating through “repeated judgment-behaviorfeedback loops” (see Garris, Ahlers, and Driskell, 2002, p. 445, for a detailed exposition of the notion of a
game cycle). Indeed, by the design of the learning activity attempting to simulate popular pre-existing
game formats, concerns over psychological barriers, appropriateness to MALL contexts of use and
learners’ technological competencies should be minimised (Stockwell 2012b).

Language Learning & Technology

42

Oliver James Ballance

MALL—Somewhere between the Tower, the Field, the Classroom, and the Market

Stockwell (2012b) notes that mobile use is likely to be focused on transient concerns, with more
concentrated activity likely to be taken up on non-mobile devices. To replicate this app with pen and
paper would be laborious and fiddly; in contrast, drag and drop, automatic refreshing of the activity and
answer checking, and the conceits of lives and scores could encourage rapid and repeated play. Stockwell
(2012b, p. 211) urges that MALL researchers bear in mind “the ways in which learners typically use
mobile devices for personal purposes.” If the app outlined above did not feel like study, but did feel in
some ways like playing popular apps like Angry Birds or Fruit Ninja, it could potentially be considered as
somewhere between killing time and a learning activity, bridging the gap between what one ought to do
and what one is willing to do in those little snippets of time that crop up in the course of a day, moments
when one is unlikely to open a textbook. Given that it would be, first and foremost, a learning activity, it
may not be as enjoyable as a pure gaming app, yet if such an app were developed, it would surely be
worth conducting comparable research to that of Stockwell (2007, 2008, 2010) to establish the extent to
which engagement with MALL is sensitive to the design of the learning activity being tailored to the
likely psychological and environmental contexts of MALL use. It is worth asking whether a learning
activity like this would be able to convince the learner of its educational utility while maintaining a design
which reflected the likely psychological and environmental contexts of MALL use, persuading learners to
while away odd snippets of time by improving their depth of semantic vocabulary knowledge instead of
on some other entirely non-educational pursuit and, thus, in a supplementary manner, “increase the
amount of time that individual learners spend engaged in language learning activities” (Stockwell, 2012b,
p. 201).
Limitations
Obviously, the sketch given above is very rudimentary, and even if the app were actually made, whether
or not it would foster greater semantic sensitivity in users in a task transferable manner would of course
require careful investigation. Furthermore, there is no guarantee the activity would be enjoyable from a
gaming perspective, and a good deal of play-testing might be required to make it so. From an instructional
perspective, its pedagogical value would only be clear to users if it were contextualised in a wider context
of study, be this CALL or classroom-based, emphasising the value of the target vocabulary and
motivating learners to engage with this facet of word knowledge. However, these may not actually be the
greatest challenges to producing a successful app. While current technology can certainly deliver an app
such as the one outlined above, and assuming that trials evidenced that the learning activities were both
genuinely enjoyable and educationally effective, Stockwell’s (2012a) typology of apps based on their
mode of production (commercial apps, teacher created apps, and web apps) raises questions about the
practicalities of actually producing such an app.
Clearly, the app outlined would benefit from being downloaded as opposed to being a web app: access
costs and data transfer speeds would both limit its potential as a tool for ubiquitous learning. However, as
a teacher-generated app, its potential is equally unclear. From the technical perspective, the app could be
designed open source, or probably preferably for most teachers, it does not seem farfetched to suggest it
could be programmed in such a way that teachers could access a user-friendly interface online into which
they enter the semantic information required for the program to then reproduce the games with reference
to that lexical set, which could then be downloaded as additional data for the app when convenient: a kind
of “hybrid app” (Godwin-Jones, 2011). However, the sheer amount of lexical research which would need
to be done for a meaningful number of semantic sets to be developed is staggering. Even if the app were
linked to a site at which different sets could be exchanged, the number of practitioners that would have
the time or inclination to do this is highly questionable, especially if there were no financial interest
involved to promote it. From the learners’ perspective, if the app were not developed on a meaningful
scale, or developed as is without contextualisation within a larger program of language learning, or even
just not developed to a high enough standard from a technical perspective, it would seem equally as
unlikely to be adopted. Thus, it would appear that, unless such issues can be addressed, a commercial

Language Learning & Technology

43

Oliver James Ballance

MALL—Somewhere between the Tower, the Field, the Classroom, and the Market

developer might be the only viable way forward.
IMPLICATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
The discussion above has attempted to highlight the significance of conceiving of MALL design from
more than a just technological perspective. To only discuss MALL in terms of the technology it is realised
on is to discuss little more than mobile-enabled CALL. Though discussion of how a design is realised
through available technologies is certainly important, there are clearly other important factors in
designing for MALL which must also be considered: (a) how, or indeed whether, it is to be integrated
within a wider pedagogical context, whether as a supplement, a substitute, or a core component of a
clearly delineated program of study; (b) how the design attempts to account for MALL’s likely
psychological contexts of use, whether in terms of motivation, learner autonomy or learners’ views of
MALL as an educational resource; (c) how the design attempts to account for MALL’s likely
environmental contexts of use, in relation to issues such as times of use, spaces of use, and their various
implications for engagement and cognitive load; and (d) the design’s potential for learners, educators, and
possibly even investors in terms of such constraints as how to make the software available, how to
promote it and, in some cases, even just how to produce it on an adequate scale. When these various
design factors are considered simultaneously, it becomes clear that MALL designs could be usefully
delineated by the degree to which they are either mobile-enabled CALL (designs which have been
adapted to the technological potentials of MALL so as to deliver a generic learning activity), MALLresponsive (in the sense of learning activities having been designed so as to accommodate a specifically
MALL profile of use, such as the design sketched above), or MALL-imperative, designs in which
mobility is truly the raison d'être (see Stockwell, 2012b, Emerging Directions, for an insightful
discussion of potential developments in this area relating to MALL and environmental responsiveness). If
research on MALL can address such issues in a more explicit and systematic manner, then the field would
surely be better positioned to form an integrated view of the potentialities of mobile platforms in all their
various guises.
CONCLUSION
My commentary (Ballance, 2012) really was not intended as a critique of Stockwell (2010), but rather a
call for more field research like Stockwell’s to examine some of the exciting potentialities of MALL, and
to bring back comparable data to that of Stockwell’s, only with reference to learning activities designed
specifically for the platform. Indeed, this would allow of a comparison which could potentially tell us
something about the effect of the platform regardless of the learning activities it carried, and perhaps even
of the potentialities of learning activities designed specifically for specific MALL platforms. However,
through discussion of what a learning activity for MALL would be, a gap between research and
production seems evident. While research on teacher-generated and web-based apps is certainly of value,
the potentials of MALL increasingly point towards qualities which would seem very difficult to achieve
for individual teachers or researchers working within typical constraints. Indeed, while I applaud efforts
to utilise technology on a teacher-by-teacher basis, whether such efforts will have a mainstream impact
remains doubtful. My commentary questioned the scope of Stockwell’s (2010) research in terms of the
significance of the type of learning activity engaged with as a variable in regards to research on “the
effect of the platform;” however, as the discussion has moved forward, it also seems important to question
the positioning of MALL research in relation to learners, teachers, publishers and educational institutions
as variously both consumers and producers of MALL research and MALL technology. How MALL
research can be positioned within the constraints researchers find themselves within so as to be most
relevant to mainstream contexts of production and consumption is, it could be argued, one of the most
pressing issues in MALL today.

Language Learning & Technology

44

Oliver James Ballance

MALL—Somewhere between the Tower, the Field, the Classroom, and the Market

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author would like to thank Professor Glenn Stockwell for his invaluable help and support in writing
this article: Professor Stockwell’s generosity both in terms of his time and his willingness to encourage
and support someone who viewed his work with a critical eye is an impressive testament to the spirit of
academic enquiry. The author would also like to thank the Managing Editor of LLT, Gerriet Janssen, for
his warmth, patience, and sound-advice regarding improvements to the manuscript submitted.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Oliver James Ballance has been teaching English for Academic Purposes in the United Kingdom and
China since 2004, and is currently researching Vocabulary Apps for Mobile Assisted Language Learning.
His research interests include vocabulary acquisition, language for specific purposes, corpora, and
computer assisted language learning.

REFERENCES
Ballance, O.J. (2012). Mobile-language learning: More than just ‘the platform’. A commentary on: Using
mobile phones for vocabulary activities: Examining the effect of the platform, Stockwell, 2010. Language
Learning & Technology, 16(3), 21–23. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2012/ballance.pdf
Elhindi, Y. (2005). Ferdinand de Saussure. In Chapman, S. and Routledge, C. (Eds), Key thinkers in
linguistics and the philosophy of language (pp. 251–248). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Garris, R., Ahlers R., & Driskell, J.E. (2002). Games, motivation, and learning: A research and practice
model. Simulation Gaming 33(4), 441–467. Retrieved from http://sag.sagepub.com/content/33/4/441
Godwin-Jones, R. (2011). Mobile apps for language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 15(2),
2–11. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/emerging.pdf
Hatch E., & Brown, C. (1995). Vocabulary, semantics and language education. Beijing, CN: Foreign
Language Teaching and Research Press.
Hsu, W. (2011). A business word list for prospective EFL business postgraduates. The Asian ESP
Journal, 7(4), 63–99.
Laufer, B. (1997). What’s in a word that makes it hard or easy: Some intralexical factors that affect the
learning of words. In N. Schmitt & M. McCarthy (Eds.), Vocabulary: Description, acquisition and
pedagogy (pp. 140-155). Shanghai, CN: Shanghai Foreign Language Education Press.
Laufer, B. (2010). Form-focused instruction in second language vocabulary. In R. Chacón-Beltrán, C.
Abello-Contesse, & M. Torreblanca-López (Eds.), Insights into Non-Native Vocabulary Teaching and
Learning (pp.15–27). Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Llach, M. P. A., (2011). Lexical errors and accuracy in foreign language writing. Bristol, UK:
Multilingual Matters.
Murphy, M.L. (2010). Lexical meaning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Nation, I.S.P. (1998). Helping learners take control of their vocabulary learning. GRETA, 6(1), 9–18
Nation, I.S.P. (2001). Learning vocabulary in another language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.

Language Learning & Technology

45

Oliver James Ballance

MALL—Somewhere between the Tower, the Field, the Classroom, and the Market

Oswald, D. (2012). Non-speech audio-semiotics: A review and revision of auditory icon and earcon
theory. Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Auditory Display, Atlanta, GA, USA, June
18–21, (pp. 36–43). Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.net/1853/44434
Schmitt, N. (2000). Vocabulary in language teaching. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Stockwell, G. (2007). Vocabulary on the move: Investigating an intelligent mobile phone-based
vocabulary tutor. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 20(4), 365–383.
Stockwell, G. (2008). Investigating learner preparedness for and usage patterns of mobile learning.
ReCALL, 20(3), 253–270.
Stockwell, G. (2010). Using mobile phones for vocabulary activities: Examining the effect of the
platform. Language Learning & Technology, 14(2), 95–110. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/
vol14num2/stockwell.pdf
Stockwell, G. (2012a). Working with constraints in mobile learning: A response to Ballance. Language
Learning & Technology, 16(3), 24–31. Retrieved
from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2012/stockwell.pdf
Stockwell, G. (2012b). Mobile-assisted language learning. In M. Thomas, H. Reinders, & M. Warschauer
(Eds.), Contemporary Computer-Assisted Language Learning (pp. 201–216). London, UK: Continuum
Books.

Language Learning & Technology

46

