Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2013/review3

February 2013, Volume 17, Number 1
pp. 60–63

REVIEW OF WORKING PORTUGUESE FOR BEGINNERS
Working Portuguese for Beginners

Monica Rector, Regina Santos, & Marcelo Amorim
with M. Lynne Gerber

2010
ISBN: 9781589016385
US $74.95
512 pp.

Georgetown University Press
Washington, DC
Review by Vivian Flanzer, The University of Texas at Austin
In a moment when the Brazilian economy is booming and the demand for learning the Portuguese
language is at its peak, especially for professional adults, Working Portuguese for Beginners is a welcome
addition to the editorial market, filling a lacuna for business Portuguese as spoken in Brazil. This book
with CD-ROM is part of the Working Language series, designed for English-speaker business
professionals interested in acquiring the basic communication skills of a foreign language in order to
function in a business or professional setting. The materials for Working Portuguese were initially
developed for the Kenan-Flagler Business School at the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, for
students in a course that combined classroom time with remote learning methods, culminating in a twoweek trip to Brazil. According to the authors, Working Portuguese can be used as materials for a regular
university course, in which the materials can be divided into two or three academic semesters; as a
combination of face-to-face instruction and remote learning, in the case of busy professionals; or as selfpacing materials for self-taught students. In any of these cases, it is expected that students do much of the
learning outside of the classroom (estimated to take two or three hours per week) by studying each
lesson’s dialogues, new vocabulary, grammar, and cultural sections. To this end, Working Portuguese
includes a CD with audio for the vocabulary, the dialogues, and the exercises for each lesson. The audio
is in MP3 format, making it very convenient for busy students to listen to their materials.
The textbook itself, which has 512 pages and is written in Brazilian Portuguese with English translations,
includes a series of chapters. First, it opens with a strong introduction and focus on pronunciation and
spelling with important tips such as the pronunciation of stressed vowels. Next, there are six units:
“Building Business Relationships,” “At Work,” “Social Interactions and Trips,” “Meetings,”
“Management Challenges,” and “Using Working Portuguese.” Each of these units contains four lessons,
followed by an appendix with the lessons’ dialogues translated into English, as well as an English-toPortuguese Glossary and a Portuguese-to-English Glossary.
Each lesson opens with a statement of its objectives that inform students about what they should be able
to acquire by the end of the lesson regarding each of the components of Communication Skills, Culture
and Business Relations, and Grammar. Next, dialogue sections introduce the vocabulary and the grammar

Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501

60

Vivian Flanzer

Review of Working Portuguese for Beginners

that appear. This section is divided into formal and informal dialogues. The formal dialogues are always
based on a professional and business setting, while the informal dialogues that mention everyday life
themes are usually based on a student life scenario. The grammar points mentioned in the lesson appear in
bold. The audio for the dialogues are recorded by native Brazilians (two men and two women from Rio de
Janeiro, São Paulo, and Minas Gerais) who read their parts very clearly and in a professional tone. For
each dialogue there is both a complete and a paused version, the latter allowing students to repeat portions
of the dialogue. The dialogues are well constructed and do an excellent job incorporating the vocabulary
and the grammar from the lesson within various Brazilian professional and academic scenarios. The
vocabulary is varied but is also repeated during the dialogues. However, it is noticeable that whenever
there is a scenario in which a boss (supervisor, sales director, managers) interacts with a subordinate
(usually the secretary), the former is represented by a male and the latter by a female. This detail might
reinforce gender stereotypes concerning Brazilian culture, even though women are increasingly in
supervisory positions in the Brazilian workplace—including in the presidential palace.
The dialogues are followed by the vocabulary section, which offers exhaustive lists of work-related
lexicons as well as many commonly used verbs and everyday expressions. All vocabulary words and
expressions are translated into English, and their audios are available in the MP3 files so students can also
master the pronunciation. The grammar sections offer very comprehensive explanations (written in
Portuguese and translated into English) and cover all the topics traditionally taught in many other
beginning-level Portuguese for foreigners’ textbooks: Ponto de Encontro (Klobucka, Jouet-Pastré,
Moreira, Sobral, & Hutchinson, 2007) and Falar, Ler, Escrever… Português (Lima & Iunes, 2003). In the
practice sections students will find some multiple choice, fill-in-the-blanks, and matching exercises.
These also include an experience exercise that prompts students to produce language by creating a
dialogue or writing a description, and a conversation assignment, in which topics for discussion with
classmates are offered. Although the proposed exercises are good practice activities, they are few in
comparison with the extensive vocabulary and grammar topics previously covered in the lessons and are
not sufficient enough to consolidate all the information given.
Each lesson ends with the culture section, which comprises small texts written by the authors that offer a
window into Brazilian society, geography, language, customs, and work-related issues. Some topics are
enlightening, such as the section on salary (Lesson 11), in which the student learns that Brazilians refer to
a monthly rather than a yearly salary, as well as other terminology particular to Brazilian work-related
culture such as the décimo-terceiro (an amount equivalent to the monthly salary that is paid around
Christmas time). Other texts, however, reinforce stereotypes about Brazilian national character. For
example, in Lesson 5, whose cultural topic is “What is it to be Brazilian?” the authors assert: “the great
virtue of the Brazilian is informality; in a way, the Brazilian continues being like a Tupinambá Indian,
opening his house and his family to visiting gringos” (p. 102).
The Working Portuguese Teacher’s Edition comes with a DVD-ROM that includes, in addition to the
audio file exercises previously mentioned, a teacher’s manual, the answer key for the exercises in the
book, quizzes and a midterm exam with answer keys. One drawback, to my mind, is the brevity and focus
on basics of the quizzes and midterm. Also included are four special activities, including a dinner at a
Brazilian restaurant, an activity fair in which students are prompted to ask and answer questions related to
hotel booking and checking-in, a visit to a travel agency, and trip to the theater. Finally, 21 PowerPoint
files are included, which may well be the most useful tool on the disk. Each PowerPoint file contains an
outline of the lessons that can work as a plan or guideline to be followed in class. The slides start with the
correction of the most common mistakes from the previous lesson’s homework, followed by a revision of
the previous lesson’s grammar points and an introduction of the new lesson’s vocabulary and grammar
topics, with suggestions for activities and exercises. They are saved in Word format so that teachers can
modify them (adding or deleting information, adding photos, audio, or videos) according to their personal
teaching style or the needs of their individual students. The Teacher’s edition also comes with free access

Language Learning & Technology

61

Vivian Flanzer

Review of Working Portuguese for Beginners

to Quia’s website (http://books.quia.com), a course management tool also available for students for a
small fee. Quia is very user-friendly and easy to navigate. Once an account is created, the site prompts
instructors to create a class and gives the option to add class location and meeting days times, assistants
and additional classes. This logistical information is followed up with the receipt of printable registration
instructions to provide students. Once in a created class, instructors can access all exercises from the book
and decide which activities they want to assign. When students are doing the online exercises, they can
write, listen to the audio and record their answers. Once they submit their responses, they receive
immediate feedback in form of an answer key or a rubric. Quia allows students to resubmit their
assignment multiple times, but instructors can determine the number of attempts made, as well as the
grading options and decide, for example, how the final score will be calculated.
A few more comments about these materials are worth noting. First, the preview link allows users to
access the entire content of the book, including the exercises and the audio. Also, the technical support of
Quia provides efficient and professional answers to questions. A few drawbacks are worth mentioning,
too. Although using Quia and managing the online version was easy, the online content is exactly the
same as the content in the book. Additional exercises, as there are few in the book, would have been
useful. I also expected different types of audio that would allow students to receive authentic aural input,
since the MP3 files available are limited to voice recordings by actors, who speak with unnatural clarity
and pacing. Such authenticity would have been a nice feature, since the students are expected to do most
of their learning outside of class and have limited time to practice listening and speaking with the
instructor and peers. In addition, the Working Portuguese online component does not explore resources
available on the web, nor does it make use of newer technologies, which misses the opportunity to use
videos that could otherwise showcase Brazil and Brazilians and allow students to have the chance to hear
Portuguese spoken by natives in natural speech. Personally, I also would have liked to see authentic
readings (from newspapers, business-related magazines, or even some short stories) or Brazilian websites
related to the working world. The instructor adopting Working Portuguese would have to fill in these
missing gaps. Other resources for instructors seeking such additional supports might include, for example,
authentic readings from Brazil’s main online newspapers and from a designated website for the Brazilian
work-related magazine called Você S.A., which uses business language accessible for the beginner to lowintermediate levels (http://vocesa.abril.com.br/). A database of authentic videos and several Portuguese
language and Brazilian culture teaching materials can also be found at the BrazilPod
(http://www.coerll.utexas.edu/brazilpod/index.php), which was created as an open-source site by the
professors of Portuguese at the University of Texas at Austin.
Given its emphasis on professional context, its focus on work-related vocabulary, and its premise that
most of the work should be done outside of the classroom, I would recommend Working Portuguese for
corporate language training courses and for self-taught professionals seeking basic interactional skills if
working with Brazilians. These learners can obtain solid explanations of grammar, but will need
additional resources to increase the amount of authentic input available as they build their communicative
skills.

ABOUT THE REVIEWER
Vivian Flanzer, a Senior Lecturer and the Portuguese Language Program Coordinator at the Department
of Spanish and Portuguese of the University of Texas at Austin, is the author of the website ClicaBrasil:
Portuguese Language and Culture to Intermediate Students.
Email: vflanzer@austin.utexas.edu

Language Learning & Technology

62

Vivian Flanzer

Review of Working Portuguese for Beginners

REFERENCES
Klobucka, A., Jouet-Pastré, C., Moreira, M., Sobral, P., & Hutchinson, A. (2007). Ponto de Encontro.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Lima, E., & Iunes, S. (2003). Falar, ler, escrever… Português (2nd ed.). São Paulo, BR: Luso Brazilian
Books.

Language Learning & Technology

63

