Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2013/emerging.pdf

February 2013, Volume 17, Number 1
pp. 7–19

EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
THE TECHNOLOGICAL IMPERATIVE IN TEACHING AND LEARNING
LESS COMMONLY TAUGHT LANGUAGES
Robert Godwin-Jones, Virginia Commonwealth University
Anyone in the United States who wants to learn Spanish can easily find local instructional options.
Opportunities abound as well for maintaining oneʼs Spanish: all-Spanish television stations, widely
distributed print media, and an abundance of native speakers. Learning opportunities and resources for
other commonly taught languages (CTL) such as French or German are fewer than for Spanish, but still
much greater than for less commonly taught languages (LCTL) such as Russian. Prospective Russian
students will have considerably more difficulty in finding classes offered locally. That is true as well for
local conversation partners and other available means to maintain proficiency. If this is the case for
Russian, with its over 150 million speakers and geo-political clout, one can imagine the difficulty wouldbe learners of Dari or Ojibwa face. It’s likely that learners of LCTLs will find and use online resources for
learning and maintaining the language, because there may be no other option available.
One might assume therefore that LCTL learners would be eager to embrace technology for language
learning. Paradoxically, however, surveys have found that LCTL learners are by and large less computersavvy and not as interested in online language instruction (Winke, Goerther, & Amuzie, 2010). The latter
finding is particularly ironic because for some languages, classes may be possible only through distance
learning. In this column, we will discuss some of the ways technology is being used in LCTL instruction
and explore the dynamics of the integration of technology into the learning of LCTLs. The languages
discussed here are those less commonly taught in the United States. Grouping the diversity of world
languages (except for English, French, German, and Spanish) together in a single category ignores the
huge differences among them, both in terms of the nature of the language and the dynamics of language
learning for native speakers of English (the perspective used here). Nevertheless, from an educational and
pragmatic perspective, there are still enough commonalities to warrant some observations and
recommendations.
PRACTICAL ISSUES IN TEACHING LCTLS
In the United States, there has been considerable growth in interest in LCTLs in recent years, with
dramatic enrollment increases in Chinese and Arabic in particular (Furman, Goldberg, & Lusin, 2010). In
fact, the prominent place these two particular languages have begun to occupy in American higher
education puts them into a somewhat different category from the rest of the LCTLs. Administrators in
American universities seem more amenable to supporting Arabic and Chinese instruction (even with
small enrollments), given economic and geo-political realities. In a different category are indigenous
languages, often taught through anthropology or area studies departments, as well as languages like
biblical Hebrew or Tibetan, often associated with religious studies programs. In the United States, the
principal living spoken LCTLs—according to the most recent Modern Language Association report—are
(in order of student enrollments) Italian, Japanese, Chinese, Arabic, Russian, Portuguese, Korean, and
modern Hebrew (Furman, Goldberg, & Lusin, 2010). For most LCTLs, there is a struggle to maintain
enough of an enrollment for courses to be run, particularly at a time when American universities are
tightening budgets and implementing minimum enrollment targets for all classes. Secondary schools in
the United States have had difficulty as well starting and maintaining classes in LCTLs. In my own
county of Henrico, Virginia, Japanese has been taught for a number of years, but only through closed
circuit television broadcasts, due to enrollment considerations as well as to the difficulty of finding local
Japanese teachers. The STARTALK program, which sponsors intensive summer courses in LCTLs for
high school students, has been a successful effort to promote new language options at that level. An
indication of the problem in higher education can be appreciated from an online project for enhancing the

Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501

7

Robert Godwin-Jones

Emerging Technologies: The Technological Imperative in LCTLs

teaching of Finnish in five North American universities, which together had a total enrollment of 18
students (Lehtonen & Tuomainen, 2003). In 2011, the total number of students studying Pashto at
universities in the United States was 128 (Webley, 2011). Beyond the top ten languages, we are talking
about very rarely taught foreign languages.
In the aftermath of the 9/11 events, there has been US government support for learning particular “critical
languages” in the interest of US national security, with enhanced government resources—including
student scholarships—for studying languages such as Azerbaijani, Korean, or Turkish. However, the
difficulty for would-be learners of these or other LCTLs is finding an instructional program. Even for
Chinese and Arabic, it is a challenge for US institutions to mount programs, given the ongoing scarcity of
qualified teachers. Often the only applicants for LCTL teaching positions—almost always part-time—are
native speakers with little to no training or experience in language instruction. As a result of small class
sizes and the inability to find qualified instructors, a number of US universities have programs which
offer individualized instruction in a variety of languages. The format for these classes is self-instructional
but also includes regular meetings with a native informant (usually once or twice a week individually or
in small groups). At the end of the course an outside evaluator (normally an instructor of the language at
another institution) comes to campus to administer a final exam. The emphasis in these programs is
largely on developing a practical communicative ability, with a minimum of grammar and somewhat
reduced emphasis on reading and writing.
The University of Arizona offers self-instructional programs in 15 different languages, including Kurdish,
Nepali, and Ukrainian. Self-instructional language programs (SILPs) are in place as well at the University
of Pittsburgh (12 languages), University of Maryland (11 languages), Vassar College (eight languages)
and many other North American universities. The Five College consortium has a quite extensive program,
offering “mentored courses,” “independent plus,” and “supervised independent” formats depending on
the skills emphasis and the nature and frequency of conversation sessions. CARLA (Center for Advanced
Research on Language Acquisition) at the University of Minnesota maintains a database of LCTL courses
in North America and includes listings for over 300 languages. Some larger language programs at
American universities offer face-to-face classes in a large number of languages, particularly in intensive
summer sessions. The University of Michigan, for example, offers instruction in over 65 languages. Due
to recent budget cutbacks, more universities are collaborating electronically to offer regular classes in
LCTLs. Cornell University, which has traditionally taught many different languages, recently has
arranged to team up through video conferencing with Yale University to offer Modern Greek and Dutch
and with Columbia University to teach Romanian, while Cornell offers Bengali and Yoruba.
Most SILPs in the United States are associated with a national organization that supports and coordinates
such individualized instruction in LCTL, the National Association of Self-Instructional Language
Programs (NASILP). Originally SILPs used a textbook along with a tape program. This was the case
when I took Norwegian as an undergraduate, using the Assimil series (the “with ease” texts, still available
in over 40 languages), which came with cassette tapes. Today, traditional textbooks are still being used,
but electronic delivery of resources is now widespread. NASILP makes some resources available,
including videos, and helps in locating learning materials. The Language Materials Project at UCLA
offers information on and (when possible) links to both teaching aids (textbooks, Web courses, readers,
script tutorials, etc.) and authentic language materials (audio, maps, schedules, TV broadcasts, etc.) for
151 languages. The project also maintains a helpful list of Training and Resource Centers which includes
a number of projects which target particular cultures and languages, such as the resource list maintained
by AATSEEL (American Association of Teachers of Slavic and East European Languages) or
the SEAsite for southeast Asian languages.
There are several repositories of resources that are available for SILPs. LangMedia from the Five College
Center for the Study of World Languages features video clips of interviews and discussions for 41

Language Learning & Technology

8

Robert Godwin-Jones

Emerging Technologies: The Technological Imperative in LCTLs

languages and includes translations and/or transcripts. A recent project is the The Flagship Media
Library (FML), intended to collect multimedia resources for the nine languages of the Language Flagship,
a program to build exemplary LCTL programs across the United States. The FML, a collaboration
between Brigham Young University’s Center for Language Studies and the American Councils for
International Education is building a system for storing, annotating, accessing, and developing
pedagogical materials around Web-based audio and video. The authentic materials collected are being
analyzed and tagged in such a way that they can be used through Web services and a publically accessible
API (application programming interface) in a variety of applications and proficiency levels. Materials will
include captions and transcripts. This approach offers a welcome combination of authenticity and
flexibility, as it promises to provide ready-to-use materials for LCTL instruction, which are often difficult
for individual instructors to create themselves. Because the transcripts will be semantically and
structurally tagged—and I would assume time-coded to the media—they also offer a wonderful resource
for CALL (computer-aided language learning) applications.
Many SILP programs today use the Critical Languages Series for LCTL programs from the University of
Arizona, available in eight languages and featuring lessons built around dialogues or readings, with
extensive use of video and audio. Originally developed as CD/DVDs with MaxAuthor, the courses are
now available in Web versions, as the disc versions were Windows only. Unfortunately, the online
versions use Flash, which makes them unavailable on most mobile devices. Another resource valuable to
LCTL learners is the courseware created by the Defense Language Institute Foreign Language Center for
use by the US military. The Headstart2 series provides introductory language lessons (beginning Pashto,
for example) as well as a military language component. The lessons created at the Institute and available
to the public are available through the Global Language Online Support System (GLOSS); around 40
languages have lessons, including Korean and “North Korean.” A recent article in the IALLT Journal
describes lessons in Dari, Pashto, and Urdu created for GLOSS by the Center for the Study of
International Languages and Cultures at the University of South Florida (Thompson & Schneider, 2012).
Students enrolled in a LCTL tend to have different profiles from CTL learners. This emerges from
information gathered in recent surveys (Brown, 2009; Magnan, Murphy, Sahakyan, & Kim, 2012). LCTL
students are more likely to have studied another language, are older on average, and are more likely to be
enrolled in the language course for personal reasons than to satisfy a curricular requirement. This learner
profile provides valuable information in helping to guide the use of technology. Motivated, mature
students can be expected to take on more willingly and more effectively responsibility for their own
learning, hence the logic of the many self-instructional programs for LCTL. Having more experience with
language learning, such students are likely to have a better insight into their only own learning styles and
study methods. Given that situation, it is important for LCTL instructors to acquaint their students with
the full range of available learning tools and services, to allow them to select those which best fit their
needs and preferences.
LCTL students early on should, for example, gain familiarity with such basics as online dictionaries (and
how to use them effectively), translation services (and their limitations), keyboard layouts/input methods,
and spell/grammar checkers. Important as well in the early stages of language learning are concepts which
get short shrift in textbooks but which are important as foundations for longer-term learning, particularly
of languages radically different from English. These include language variation (so important in many
LCTLs, especially Arabic), language registers (an important cultural as well as linguistic phenomenon),
and pragmatics (including sociolinguistic areas such as politeness formulas). Discussing such linguistic
concepts can provide an opportunity to introduce particular online language learning resources. Giving
examples of collocations, for example, provides insight into a key element of real language use and also
invites discussion and illustration of language corpora and concordances. For the more experienced and
pragmatic LCTL learner, it makes sense to be explicit about what it takes (and how long it takes) to be a
proficient speaker of the target language, including the ability to use idiomatically authentic language and

Language Learning & Technology

9

Robert Godwin-Jones

Emerging Technologies: The Technological Imperative in LCTLs

to adapt oneʼs speech appropriately to the context.
Basic knowledge of how language works and how to learn new languages is especially important for
LCTL learners, who are likely to learn multiple languages. This may be particularly true for those
interested in indigenous languages. For African languages, John Mugabe points to the importance of
learning how to learn languages, with the greater likelihood that such students will become polyglots
(2010). Mugabe stresses the importance of a degree of learner autonomy that goes well beyond what one
would expect of CFL learners:
Learning how to learn a language, then, includes the ability to take charge of one’s
learning in determining the sequencing and elaboration of content. While established
language programs have professional people to teach and guide the learner, students
learning a language with limited or no resources must be prepared to be content designers,
ardent seekers of information, perennial documenters, and keen observers facilitated by
native speakers, linguists and other language professionals. (2010, p. 66)
As Mugabe points out, the typical way SILPs are set up is not likely to work for largely undocumented
languages, due to the lack of teaching resources. In such cases it is all the more important that students
have the knowledge of how to go about finding resources that will enable them to be effective
independent learners.
READING AND VOCABULARY DEVELOPMENT
For languages that use a writing system unfamiliar to learners, one of the early challenges is likely to be
learning how to read and write in the target language. This may be a fairly quick and painless process, as
is the case for Russian, or long and arduous, as is true for Chinese. Fortunately for LCTL learners, the
display of non-Roman systems on computers has become much better, with the current wide support for
Unicode in all major operating systems, including mobile devices. Vastly improved as well is Web
browser support for non-Roman languages. Not so long ago, to display non-ascii characters on the Web,
graphic files had to be used. In fact, there are still a number of widely used Web resources that were built
in that way, such as Zhongwen Zipu, an essential tool for Mandarin learners. Now Web pages written in
Unicode and encoded in UTF-8 or UTF-16 will display correctly in browsers, assuming the necessary
character sets are available. For languages which use character sets not likely to be available by default
(Pashto, for example), the @font-face feature in CSS 3 can be used to specify a downloadable font needed
for text display. Using that CSS feature also has other benefits, including making text more available to
assistive technology like screen readers, enabling translation services, and allowing for the use of
advanced CSS properties to tweak the display. A recent innovation in type fonts, the Web Open Font
Format or WOFF, makes it easier to supply users with any needed font sets, as it compresses the font data
into much smaller downloads. It is widely supported in current browsers. SIL International, which
provides fonts for a variety of LCTLs, has begun to make its fonts available in WOFF.
The current ability to encode texts in virtually any writing system as well as the wide penetration of the
Web today have resulted in a rich set of authentic texts in many different languages. This situation helps
immensely in the ability of learners to find and work with texts actually used by native speakers. This has
until recently been one of the major problems in LCTL instruction: the lack of current materials in the
target language. This is important not only for exposure to the linguistic data authentic materials contain,
but also for providing direct access to the target culture. We know from surveys of LCTL learners that
they tend to have a higher degree of interest in the culture they are studying than is the case for CTL
learners. Culturally relevant learning materials can be an important motivating factor.
It’s likely that learners of LCTLs will need to turn to the Web for engaging and up-to-date materials
rather than to their textbooks. Although the recent increase in interest in learning LCTL has resulted in
more publications that help learners of those languages, they tend to be more in the nature of dictionaries

Language Learning & Technology

10

Robert Godwin-Jones

Emerging Technologies: The Technological Imperative in LCTLs

and phrase books rather than serious textbooks. The market is too small for publishers to be eager to bring
out textbooks that will have such a reduced potential audience. The disadvantage of having students work
with authentic texts is the difficulty in finding materials that are both linguistically accessible and
culturally appropriate. Teachers and language professionals have used a variety of approaches to make
authentic texts available and understandable to learners or to extract from collections of text data that
helps learners with particular aspects of language learning such as vocabulary development. In some
cases, these are ad hoc local efforts, in other cases, they result from CALL projects, sometimes geared to
specific languages. Using all online resources for a language class has a number of advantages, but also
may run up against the preference many students still have (despite the advent of e-books) for the security
and reference value of a print textbook.
For instructors wanting to annotate authentic materials for their students, a number of tools are available.
An instructor of Portuguese reported recently on the modules created with Gloss Maker to provide
comprehension help for short cultural texts (Vasconcelos, 2012). In line with studies showing that
multimedia glosses may enhance comprehension, he also included media such as pictures, audio files, and
YouTube videos. He used the freely available tools Exe and Hot Potatoes to create comprehension
questions and interactive learning activities. The modules were made available to students through
a Moodle LMS and were designed to be flexible enough to be used in classes with different proficiency
levels. A recent example of a project on a larger scale are the CERCLL texts (Center for Educational
Resources, Culture, Language and Literacy) at the University of Arizona (Catalano, 2011). Hypertexts are
being developed in Arabic, Italian, and Portuguese. In this case, glosses are textual (coded blue) or extratextual (graphics or explanatory notes, coded green). In contrast to other programs however, the existing
CERCLL texts were created by local staff. There are a number of free tools for annotations such
as FLAn (Foreign Language Annotator), Gloss Maker, or Annotext.
From the multitude of studies in recent years, use of glosses appears to help motivate and interest
students, but what type of annotation or glosses (translations, target language explanations, images, audio,
video) are most effective for reading comprehension is not clear (Chun, 2007). One meta-analysis of text
glosses has pointed to a consensus view that text glosses are likely to improve reading comprehension at
the intermediate and advanced levels (Abraham, 2008). Given the uncertainty over which glosses work
best for reading comprehension, it would seem advantageous to have a flexible annotating system which
provides a variety of options, allowing the user to maximize the effectiveness on an individual basis. It
would also be preferable to give users the choice of links or glossed items being visible or not, as study
results are mixed in terms of effectiveness and user preference. With the power of today’s combination of
JavaScript and CSS, this kind of customization could be done nicely in a Web app.
Studies do show that glosses can be valuable in incidental vocabulary learning (Chun, 2007). For targeted
vocabulary learning, authentic texts can be a valuable learning resource as well. It’s possible of course for
teachers or individual learners to create themselves vocabulary lists based on online readings. Some of the
flashcard sets on exchange sites such as flashcardexchange.com in fact are taken from readings, although
most often these are from textbooks or from elementary readers. To use current texts for this purpose,
tools are available which crawl the Web or particular Web resources and automatically extract items for
vocabulary study. The Linkit tool, for example, provides a means to look up Chinese characters
encountered in online readings (or in a textbook) and to display rich information on the use of that
character in words and phrases (Shei & Hsieh, 2011). It includes an “explorer” function—for viewing
character use in context—as well as a “practice” feature. The tool is specifically designed for Chinese, for
which the concept of words is problematic. The system searches the Web to find examples of multicharacter phrases to determine if that particular “morpheme stack” is a frequently used idiomatic
expression (important for learners) or an incidental grouping of characters. Very helpful to language
learners would be the ability in such search and explore programs to be able to save particular items into a
personal word inventory or to-learn list, perhaps available on-line through a service such as Dropbox.

Language Learning & Technology

11

Robert Godwin-Jones

Emerging Technologies: The Technological Imperative in LCTLs

As language corpora increasingly become available for LCTLs, CALL tools based on the data they
provide are becoming an ever more valuable resource for teachers and learners. It’s sometimes argued
that having learners access language corpora directly—whether through a basic KWIC display (key word
in context) or through a more user-friendly interface—is too difficult or too confusing. This may be less a
factor for the more motivated and mature LCTL student. What Alex Boulton states in reference to
language learners in general applies, I believe, strongly to LCTL learners in particular, “it would seem
disingenuous to coddle learners with simplified language, disempowering them and leaving them
unprepared for the realities of the authentic language we are presumably preparing them for” (2009a,
p. 89). Boulton advocates creating small, homemade corpora that can match particular needs. In an
experimental use of corpora with beginning learners, Boulton found that even without training, students at
an early stage of language learning were able to use a concordance effectively with better results than
students using a traditional dual-language dictionary or students consulting the textbook (2009b). There
are a number of tools that can be used for creating concordances, including Wordsmith (commercial)
or AntConc (free). One tool that has attracted quite a bit of interest lately is Sketch Engine, which has
been used to create collocation dictionaries in eight different languages including Bulgarian and Maltese.
A valuable tool for teachers and learners is WebCorp, which allows for on-the-fly concordance creation
based on Web documents. It works on top of the user-chosen Web search engine and extracts the desired
data (from a word or phrase search) from the URLs of the sites found. A similar free tool is TextSTAT,
available in a variety of languages.
LISTENING COMPREHENSION
Part of the rationale for creating a language corpus is often to build a tutoring program that uses the data
for natural language processing (NLP). For that to be possible, a significant amount of data needs to be
collected. With the growth of material available on the Web, this is becoming increasingly feasible for a
wide variety of languages. One project recently has reported on the ability to mine the Web (in
particular Wikipedia and NationMaster) to build a corpus of Urdu resources (Mukund, Srihari, &
Peterson, 2010). To create the corpus, the researchers had to solve problems specific to Urdu including
the extent to which Hindi resources could be included, how to deal with word segmentation, and from
where to establish a data set of named entities (i.e., proper names, geographical terms, etc.). In recent
years similar Treebank projects have been built for Arabic, Chinese, and Korean (Mukund, Srihari, &
Peterson, 2010). With appropriately analyzed and tagged language corpora, a variety of applications can
be developed, from basic vocabulary drills to sophisticated automatic tutors using NLP. Examples of the
latter for LCTL include Targarela for Portuguese and Robo-Sensei for Japanese. Such systems go well
beyond grammar and vocabulary to include listening comprehension as well as speaking analyzed
through automatic speech recognition (ASR). ASR is implemented in a variety of commercial language
learning programs including Tell me more (nine languages) and Rosetta Stone (30 languages).
Finding sources for listening practice has become much easier with the proliferation of radio broadcasts,
podcasts, audio blogs, and YouTube videos in multiple languages. Listening comprehension (and
speaking) can be a particular challenge if the target language has specific sounds not present in the
learners native language, such as clicks in Xhosa, for example, or tones in Chinese. Podcast series
dedicated to language learning, such as ChinesePod, tend to focus on how the target language differs from
English (used as the lingua franca in most cases) and can be very helpful in providing sample speech
patterns. Resources for practicing listening comprehension are particularly useful if accompanied by
transcripts, as is the case for many language podcasts. YouTube provides an automatic transcription
service, but unfortunately only for English. An option for working with authentic audio is to use a tool or
service which slows down the audio playback, often available for podcast playback, particularly on
mobile devices. Marty Meinardi reports on the development and use of a system with new, more effective
(i.e., less distorting) slowdown algorithms called DITCALL (2009). Another option for audio is the use of
a text-to-speech (TTS) application. This could be a valuable resource in particular for languages where

Language Learning & Technology

12

Robert Godwin-Jones

Emerging Technologies: The Technological Imperative in LCTLs

there may not be a large number of native speakers available with whom learners could engage in
conversation. Micheál Lochlainn developed a TTS tool for Irish for that reason (2010).
ENHANCING LEARNER ENGAGEMENT
One of the concerns among LCTL instructors in the United States is the low number of students who
enroll in courses beyond the intermediate level, the designation almost universally used in this country for
the second year of language instruction, even though for many LCTLs the proficiency level achieved by
that point is hardly intermediate. The drop-off after two years seems surprising, given the typically higher
seriousness of the LCTL learner, who most often has not enrolled merely to satisfy a requirement. The
enrollment decline may be related to curriculum pragmatics—not enough students to make up an
advanced course, scheduling difficulties due to the low number of options—or to students having
achieved their language goals in completing two years of language study. In other cases it may be that
students with a wide interest in world languages just want to sample a variety of languages. Other
students may lack the patience to achieve the kind of proficiency that may take longer to develop in
languages such as Japanese or Russian. However, there may be a more disturbing reason, namely that
students are not having the kind of language learning experience they were seeking or not achieving the
goals they had in mind in enrolling in the target language class. It would be interesting to see whether the
retention of students is any better in the myriad of self-instructional LCTL language programs that exist
today. If retention is higher, that might point to the greater success of the quite distinct approach used—
centered on practical communication with grammar only as needed—and a heavy emphasis on
development of oral skills.
There are several initiatives underway that hold promise for enhancing the quality of LCTL instruction in
the United States. The National Online LCTL Teacher Training Initiative, a joint venture of the
University of Wisconsin-Madison and the National Council of Less Commonly Taught Languages, is
offering three new online course on teaching LCTLs including “Fundamentals of Language Teaching
Methods” (which includes language learning and technology) and “Teaching African Languages.”
CARLA has created an extensive Web guide to developing classroom materials for less commonly taught
languages. It also offers a summer institute dedicated to that topic. Such efforts are important for the
success of LCTL programs, as beginning teachers may have less pedagogical and technology training
than CTL teachers. The National Foreign Language Resource Center at the University of Hawai‛i has
created online language cafes, which are proposed to serve as models of online communities of language
professionals in a number of LCTLs. This and other initiatives that foster the creation of communities of
practice among LCTL teachers should be welcome resources for teachers struggling with the many
practical issues in creating and running LCTL programs and courses.
For languages using non-Roman writing systems, there has been considerable debate over how to teach
students to read and write at the beginning levels. Studies have shown, for example, that students become
frustrated with having to learn the multiple writing systems used in Japanese and have a particularly hard
time learning the kanji—the characters borrowed from Chinese (Geraughty & Quinn, 2009). Not teaching
writing from the outset hardly seems a viable alternative, if we want students to experience the real
language in its authentic cultural setting. It may be a delicate balancing act for LCTL instructors to
introduce the complexity of the target language without scaring away the students. One recent study
recommends exploring the option of introducing early on only a very reduced set of kanji (Larson, 2006).
In my experience learning Chinese (from three native Chinese teachers), one of the difficulties native
speakers tend to have in helping students learn characters is the method they likely used themselves as L1
learners—memorization through repeated writing. Chinese teachers tend to recommend that same
method, but for L2 learners, a more analytical approach may be more effective, exploring the use and
meaning of radicals and other constituent parts of characters, comparing similar but subtly different
characters, and introducing mnemonic devices. Making students aware of tools, services, and apps which

Language Learning & Technology

13

Robert Godwin-Jones

Emerging Technologies: The Technological Imperative in LCTLs

supply this kind of information is a valuable service Chinese teachers can provide their students. The
article by Chen et al. in this volume provides a helpful example of an analytical approach for learning
Chinese characters, focusing on recognizing phonetic and semantic components. As much of the Chinese
instruction in the United States currently is done by native speakers with limited training in teaching
Chinese as a second language, it’s important that they be able to guide students to resources that supply
the kind of helpful information and practical tips that aid students in making sense of what can seem a
bewildering writing system.
A nice resource for Japanese is SILK, the Strategy Inventory for Learning Kanji, which discusses a wide
range of methods for learning characters, and features descriptions and examples of the many different
strategies available. One study of using SILK in a beginning Japanese class showed that it made a
substantial contribution to learner autonomy (Anderson & Bourke, 2007). SILK also includes a
learner profile generated by a diagnostic test, which helps learners to determine which kanji learning
strategies might work best for them. Developing an agreed-upon format for learner profiles would be a
boon to language learners as well as to CALL developers. Included in such a profile could be information
about the learners linguistic background, language learning history, content and geographic areas of
interest, social media used, as well as links to individual portfolios, learner diaries, or other personalized
learning information (current vocabulary learning list, for example). I am envisioning something akin to
the “Learner Preferences and Needs” profile that is part of the new accessible assessment standard from
IMS Global, APIP (Accessible Portable Item Protocol). Having this kind of information available to
CALL applications would make possible the kind of system envisioned by Chi-Chiang Shei, which
allows user-selected texts culled from the Internet to be richly annotated in a personalized way (2001).
While she suggested giving users a vocabulary pre-test to measure their lexical knowledge in order to
determine the level of items to annotate, pulling that information from an online learner profile would be
preferable and would enable greater customization. Allowing learners to choose texts of particular interest
or need and providing a system for making those authentic texts comprehensible on the fly would provide
an invaluable resource for continued use of the target language beyond any formal educational
experience.
Given LCTL learner demographics, it would seem important from the beginning to incorporate culture,
not from a tourist perspective (as is often the case in textbooks), but as integral to the language. For
students to have a positive and enriching learning experience, this seems even more important for LCTLs,
as affinity with the target culture and its people is an important motivating factor for language learners.
There is no consensus on how that can be achieved. It does seem evident that this should not be a separate
activity, but rather introduced from the earliest stages of language learning. With the interest in social
media among today’s students, it would seem that having students learning a LCTL enter into contact
with native speakers through CMC (computer mediated communication) would be the ideal vehicle for
cultural exchange, as well as, of course, as providing valuable opportunities for real use of the target
language. Opportunities for connecting are numerous, including such services as the tandem network,
the Mixxer, or MyLanguageExchange. Commercial language learning services such
as LiveMocha or italki also offer such opportunities. The connections and exchanges possible through
these services can also provide valuable oral language practice.
Important as well for the studentsʼ decision whether to continue with language study is a sense that they
are progressing in their proficiency. One strategy for students to gain that confidence is to provide them
the means to document their language abilities as they develop. A possible method to achieve that goal is
through a language portfolio, as is done fairly widely today with the European Language Portfolio. One
other possibility is to use some kind of formal proficiency assessment such as the OPI (oral proficiency
interview) or its less comprehensive siblings the SOPI (simulated OPI) or MOPI (modified OPI). An
interesting alternative to a full-fledged proficiency assessment is to create a linguistic profile based on the
acquisition of particular linguistic structures important in the target language. A recent study outlines how

Language Learning & Technology

14

Robert Godwin-Jones

Emerging Technologies: The Technological Imperative in LCTLs

this could work for Russian (Long, Gor, & Jackson, 2012). The idea is to test whether the learner has
mastered particular structures important to functional Russian such as verbs of motion or verbal prefixes.
This may be easier to implement in a heavily inflected language like Russian, but it seems that something
similar could be done in other languages as well. The advantage of this kind of assessment is that it could
be easily implemented online and made available to individual students. Benchmarks could be established
that demonstrate progress towards proficiency, a crucial motivating factor, particularly for students
studying on their own. Somewhat similar, but much simpler, online assessments are available
for Chinese through ChinesePod or for German from the Goethe-Institut. Results from such assessments
could become part of the language learner profile.
OUTLOOK
On the face of it, technology use would not seem to depend on the particular language being taught or
learned. If a particular technology tool or approach works for French shouldnʼt it work equally well for
learners of Indonesian? In practice, however, there are a number of factors that differentiate the teaching,
learning, and technology use of LCTLs. Culturally, a LCTL is likely to be less known and more distant
from the learnerʼs home base. The relationship between culture and language may be quite different as
well. Learning Japanese links learners to a specific historical and geographically defined, and largely
homogeneous, culture; learning English is a much more culturally diverse experience, with a concomitant
differentiation in how language is likely to be taught. For CTLs there are excellent textbooks with a host
of ancillary materials, which include multimedia, cultural information, and practice exercises. Depending
on the specific language this is less often the case for LCTL. It’s likely that basic grammar manuals are
available, but more engaging, culturally relevant, and up-to-date materials may be harder to find, making
it important for learners to know about online resources and how to use them. Increasingly students are
looking to use their mobile devices for language learning and this is certainly a direction that includes
LCTLs. There are a number of apps that have been created for LCTL learning, such as those from
the Defense Language Institute. These tend to be basic language guides or geared toward specific goals
(military deployment). The Mansfield Center at the University of Montana has been creating similar apps
for LCTL, for example, Practical Pashto. It would be wonderful to see apps and tools developed that
would allow and encourage intermediate and advanced stage LCTL learners to interact profitably with
authentic language and culture materials. If we are teaching language as a building block for a fuller life,
then CALL applications should be available in formats that go beyond the educational setting, and
provide opportunities for lifelong language learning and maintenance.
From that perspective, I would hope that we see the development of more sophisticated mobile CALL
apps. It also makes sense to take advantage of the widespread penetration of smart phones (at least in
many countries) to have their excellent audio and video capabilities be incorporated into CALL
applications. Students likely are already using their phones for taking videos and know how to upload
them to their computers. Itʼs not a large leap to having students create video or audio blogs as part of
language learning assignments. The looming ubiquity of smart phones makes even recent surveys asking
if LCTL students are technologically ready for online language learning somewhat outdated (Winke,
Goerther, & Amuzie, 2010). It’s increasingly a mute point whether students have attached microphones or
know how to use a WebCam, as their likely device of choice for audio and video will be a phone or tablet.
Encouraging students to use their personal devices in this way has the added benefit of providing a ready
means to engage in multimedia blogging when studying abroad.
The integration of technology into language learning and teaching might seem to have reached such
widespread use that no arguments need to be made in its favor, with the challenge being to figure out
which of the many technology options are most helpful to student learning. Yet there are still voices
which, while acknowledging some role for technology, do not see it as an integral aspect of current
language pedagogy. In a recent “state-of-the-art” article on materials development for language

Language Learning & Technology

15

Robert Godwin-Jones

Emerging Technologies: The Technological Imperative in LCTLs

instruction, for example, half a page of a 36-page article is devoted to technology use in language
learning; none of the eight “innovative” projects in language materials development discussed involve
technology (Tomlinson, 2012). The article focuses primarily on resources for teaching English, for which
non-electronic materials are abundant. Even though traditional print media for CTL are plentiful, we are
doing a disservice to our students in any language by not including online resources, tools, and services in
setting out options and opportunities for language learning. If we donʼt focus on finding ways for
language learning to be part of what has become an essential thread of our studentsʼ lives today, we are
unlikely to be successful in positioning our students for success in a multilingual, multicultural world in
which language maintenance and language learning aptitude have become so important. It is even more
important for LCTL students to have their instructors from the very beginning incorporate technology in a
way that makes it clear that this knowledge and these skills are essential to learning the target language.

REFERENCES
Anderson, A., & Bourke, B. (2007). Beyond the classroom: SILK for promoting autonomous kanji
learning. In Proceedings of the Independent Learning Association 2007 Japan Conference: Exploring
theory, enhancing practice: Autonomy across the disciplines. Chiba, JP: Kanda University of
International Studies. Retrieved from http://independentlearning.org/ILA/ila07/files/ILA2007_002.pdf
Abraham, L. (2008). Computer-mediated glosses in second language reading comprehension and
vocabulary learning: A meta-analysis. Computer Assisted Language Learning 21(3), 199–226.
Boulton, A. (2009a). Data-driven learning: Reasonable fears and rational reassurance. Indian Journal of
Applied Linguistics, 35(1), 81–106.
Boulton, A. (2009b). Testing the limits of data-driven learning: Language proficiency and
training. ReCALL 21(1), 37–51.
Brown, A. (2009). Less Commonly Taught Language and Commonly Taught Language students: A
demographic and academic comparison. Foreign Language Annals, 42(3), 405–423.
Catalona, T. (2011). Promoting L2 reading in Less Commonly Taught Languages with
hypertexts. NECTFL Review 67, 31–49.
Chun, D. (2007). Come ride the wave: But where is it taking us? CALICO Journal, 24(2), 239–252.
Furman, N., Goldberg, D., & Lusin, N. (2010). Enrollments in languages other than English in United
States institutions of higher education, fall 2009. New York, NY: Modern Language Association.
Retrieved from http://www.mla.org/pdf/2009_enrollment_survey.pdf
Geraughty, B., & Quinn, A. (2009). An evaluation of independent learning of the Japanese hiragana
system using an interactive CD. ReCALL 21(2), 227–240.
Larson, P. (2006). The return of the text: A welcome challenge for Less Commonly Taught
Languages. The Modern Language Journal 90(2), 255–258.
Lehtonen, T., & Tuomainen, S. (2003). CSCL—a tool to motivate foreign language learners: The Finnish
application. ReCALL 15(1), 51–67.
Lochlainn, M. (2010). Sintéiseoir 1.0: A multidialectical TTS application for Irish. ReCALL 22(2), 152–
171.
Long, M., Gor, K., & Jackson. S. (2012). Linguistic correlates of second language proficiency. Studies in
Second Language Acquisition 34, 99–126.

Language Learning & Technology

16

Robert Godwin-Jones

Emerging Technologies: The Technological Imperative in LCTLs

Magnan S., Murphy, D., Sahakyan, N., & Kim S. (2012). Student Goals, Expectations, and the Standards
for Foreign Language Learning. Foreign Language Annals, 45(2), 170–192.
Meinardi, M. (2009). Speed bumps for authentic listening material. ReCALL 21(3), 302–318.
Mugane, J. (2010). Learning how to learn languages: The teaching & learning of African languages.
Language and Linguistics Compass, 4(2), 64–79.
Mukund, S., Srihari, R., & Peterson, E. (2010). An information-extraction system for Urdu—A resourcepoor language. ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing, 9(4), 1–43.
Shei, C. (2001). FollowYou!: An automatic language lesson generation system. Computer Assisted
Language Learning 14(2), 129–144.
Shei, C., & Hsieh, H., (2011). Linkit: A CALL system for learning Chinese characters, words, and
phrases. Computer Assisted Language Learning 25(4), 319–338.
Thompson, A., & Schneider, S. (2012). Bridging the gap: Online modules for less commonly taught
languages. IALLT Journal 42(1). Retrieved
from http://www.iallt.org/iallt_journal/bridging_the_gap_online_modules_for_less_commonly_taught_la
nguages
Tomlinson, B. (2012). Materials development for language teaching and learning. Language
Teaching, 45(2), 143–179.
Vasconcelos, R. (2012). Multimedia activities in L2 course websites: The case study of a site dedicated to
cultural topics of Portuguese-speaking countries. CALICO Journal, 29(4), 639–662.
Webley, K. (2011). Tongue tied: How budget cuts to international education will hurt the
U.S. TimeWorld. Retrieved from http://world.time.com/2011/06/02/the-ramifications-of-cuttinginternational-education-programs/
Winke, P., Goerther, S., & Amuzie, G. (2010). Commonly-taught and less-commonly-taught language
learners: Are they equally prepared for CALL and online language learning? Computer Assisted
Language Learning, 23(3), 199–219.

RESOURCE LIST
LCTL Resources and Information
• National Online LCTL Teacher Training Initiative
• STARTALK
• The Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition (CARLA) : Less
Commonly Taught Languages
• GLOSS Global Language Online Support System
• UCLA Language Materials Project
• LangMedia: CultureTalk
• The Language Flagship
• The Flagship Media Library
• Critical Language Scholarship Program

Language Learning & Technology

17

Robert Godwin-Jones

Emerging Technologies: The Technological Imperative in LCTLs

• The Mixxer - a free educational website for language exchanges via Skype
• NFLRC - National Foreign Language Resource Center
• UCLA Language Materials Project: Links
• CAPL: Culturally Authentic Pictorial Lexicon
• Foreign Language Resource Centers
• Curricular Models for University African Language Programs
Self-Instructional Language Programs
• NASILP National Association of Self-Instructional Language Programs
• Critical Languages Program The University of Arizona
• Less Commonly Taught Languages Center University of Pittsburgh
• Self-Instructional Language Program Vassar College
• HWS: Self-Instructional Language Program
• Five College Center for the Study of World Languages
• Less Commonly Taught Languages Michigan
• Eleven Language Programs Face Uncertain Future | The Cornell Daily Sun
• Tongue Tied: How Budget Cuts to International Education Will Hurt the U.S. |
TIME.com
CALL software and commercial products
• Critical Languages Series
• Arabic Encounters
• Headstart2
• Verbling
• Rosetta Stone
• Tell me more
• A Review of Living Language and Rocket Languages - App Smart | NYTimes.com
• The United States Army HeadStart2 Program
• Assimil
Writing Systems, Encoding, and Fonts
• What to study after Heisig - Chinese Characters - Chinese-forums.com
• All Japanese All The Time Dot Com: How to learn Japanese. On your own, having fun
and to fluency
• Mandarin Chinese after ~3-4 months using Assimil - YouTube
• The Definitive Guide to Web Character Encoding - SitePoint
• Virtual Keyboard Online - Type in your language, anywhere!!!
• Welcome to Computers and Writing Systems

Language Learning & Technology

18

Robert Godwin-Jones

Emerging Technologies: The Technological Imperative in LCTLs

• Google Web Fonts
• Using SIL Fonts on Web Pages
• UIME
• Google lets you translate non-Roman languages
• CSS Fonts Module Level 3
• WOFF File Format 1.0 Submission Request to W3C
• Web Open Font Format for Firefox
• Kanji learning: Strategies, Motivation control and self-regulation. | Heath Rose Academia.edu
• SILK | Strategies for Learning Kanji
Vocabulary Building, Annotating, and Language Corpora
• David Lee’s Corpus-based Linguistics LINKS
• WebCorp: The Web as Corpus
• Sketch Engine: SketchEngine
• Concordance: software for concordancing and text analysis
• Concordance software: MonoConc and ParaConc
• TextSTAT
• Wordsmith
• AntConc
• redhotwords.com Info on FLAn, the Foreign Language Annotator
• Annotext
• Gloss Maker

Language Learning & Technology

19

