Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2013/klimanovadembovskaya.pdf

February 2013, Volume 17, Number 1
pp. 69–88

L2 IDENTITY, DISCOURSE, AND SOCIAL NETWORKING IN RUSSIAN
Liudmila Klimanova, University of Iowa
Svetlana Dembovskaya, Loyola University Chicago
As the integration of Internet-based social networking tools becomes increasingly popular
in foreign language classrooms, the use of modern communication technologies is
particularly critical in the context of less commonly taught languages (LCTLs), where
student exposure to the target language and its speakers is usually minimal. This paper
describes communicative exchanges between native speakers and non-native speakers
(NS-NNS) in a telecollaborative project that spanned two semesters and brought a rich and
authentic social networking community, VKontakte, into college-level Russian classes in
the United States. The analysis of the students' online activities, phenomenological
interviews, and interactions with Russian keypals grounded in the principles of identity
construction through interaction (Bucholtz & Hall, 2005) and Discourse Analysis
Framework (Gee, 2005) shed light on the students' emerging online second language (L2)
identities along the continuum from L2 learners to L2 users. Along with global and local
categories of L2 identity enactment in virtual social spaces, we bring into focus the notions
of digital wisdom (Prensky, 2009) and investment (Norton, 2000), while exploring the
ways in which learners of LCTLs, such as Russian, draw on Internet mediation in order to
compensate for the lack of contact with the L2 and to extend social connections beyond
the confines of a language classroom.
Keywords: L2 Identity, Social Networking, Computer-Mediated Communication, Virtual
Environments, Discourse Analysis
INTRODUCTION
With the emergence of Web 2.0, networking in online environments has become an increasingly popular
form of social interaction that allows participants to express themselves, build profiles, form online
communities of common interests, and interact socially with others (McBride, 2009). This phenomenon
of social networking, made possible by the invention of new communicative technologies, reflects a
changing attitude towards the Internet as a social platform and a greater trust in its possibilities as a social
medium. Participants of online social networks engage in relationships, form friendships, collaborate with
others, and, while doing all that, enact and fashion distinct identities (Lomicka & Lord, 2009).
Social interactivity, as well as an increased popularity among students, has made social networking sites
an attractive environment for language learning and a potential platform for Internet-based cultural tasks
in second language (L2) classes. This instructional use of modern communication technologies has been
brought into a narrow focus with the birth of a new generation of students, often labeled as the Net
Generation (Tapscott, 2009) or digital natives (Prensky, 2001). This generation has grown up depending
on technology, and because of that, Prensky argues, their mental functions are mediated by technology, at
least to the extent that they process information in a fundamentally different fashion than previous
generations of learners did.
Prensky’s (2001) term digital natives seems to rely mainly on age differences, and does not distinguish
among the wide variety of levels of technological preparedness (Winke & Goertler, 2008) or
socioeconomic and cognitive variation within this population (Bennett, Maton, & Kervin, 2008).
Regardless of the limitations of the term, a growing proportion of today’s learners are indeed “digitally
wise” (Prensky, 2009) in the sense that they appear to aptly use new technological innovations in order to
complement their learning strategies and compensate for certain cognitive limitations (e.g., relying on
large bodies of knowledge stored in digital form). Digital wisdom is about a conscious choice to take

Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501

69

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

advantage of technological enhancements, that is, “wisdom arising from the use of digital technology to
access cognitive power beyond our innate capacity,” and “wisdom in the prudent use of technology to
enhance our capabilities” (Prensky, 2009, ¶ 2, emphasis in original).
While Prensky (2009) refers mainly to mental enhancements that technology provides, digital natives also
typically draw on social enhancements, which have become available with the expansion of the Internet
and communication technologies. Digital natives make virtual friends, maintain friendships, and
participate in online social groups of common interests and causes. In other words, they take advantage of
computer mediation in order to compensate for the lack of social contact in real life, often preferring
online interactions to traditional face-to-face encounters. This generation of students is more comfortable
using social technologies than previous generations. Internet mediation and social networking are
indispensable components of their social lives and are venues for exercising and enacting individual or
group identities.
To extend this concept to the reality of L2 learning, we propose that digital wisdom also encompasses a
social dimension. This social dimension manifests itself in students’ conscious choice and purposeful
intent to use Internet mediation with the goal of extending social connections and gaining access to the
target language in the digital realms of the Internet and social networking environments. A digitally wise
L2 learner is one who takes advantage of social affordances that Internet mediation provides for L2
learning in order to legitimize his or her social power as an L2 speaker beyond the socially limited setting
of the L2 classroom. The learner can practice the role of L2 user in various genres of online social
interactions, synchronous and asynchronous, “investing [himself or herself] in an L2 identity—an identity
in the second/foreign language—that is unfamiliar, uncomfortable and indeed unimaginable” (Hanna &
de Nooy, 2009, p. 119). By this notion of investment, we mean one’s commitment to building his or her
other self and recreating oneself as a successful speaker of another language. This level of commitment is
closely tied to the learner’s perception of his or her relationship to the context in which language use takes
place (Norton, 2000). Taking up a new or changed identity under the pressure of a communicative context
is not an easy task, as “it requires not only sensitivity to genre, but in many cases a significant shift in the
way one sees oneself interacting in a second language” (Hanna & de Nooy, 2009, p. 119). As challenging
as this task may seem, it potentially enables L2 speakers to free themselves from the role of language
learner and assume another role of language user, projecting new selves through their language and
discourse in virtual social spaces. In Prensky’s terms, by turning to Internet-mediated social interaction
and constructing their L2 identities online, language learners act as digitally wise users of the Internet.
The purpose of this paper is to investigate how L2 learners of Russian discursively establish their online
L2 identities as they engage with native speakers of Russian in a series of telecollaborative tasks in the
popular Russian social networking space, VKontakte. Our analysis focuses on learners’ discourse, to
examine the patterns in which learners reveal their evolving L2 identities in online interactions and in
one-on-one interviews. We begin by outlining the theoretical conceptualization of identity and its
application to L2 identity enactment in NS-NNS interactions via a social networking site. We then
describe the epistemological and methodological foundations of the study, and the context and
participants of the study, followed by data analyses, conclusions, and study limitations.
THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS OF L2 IDENTITY RESEARCH
Broadly speaking, the issue of identity has been brought into focus with the development of social
approaches in SLA theory, in which learning to speak a foreign language is considered to be a more social
rather than cognitive phenomenon, motivated by “the desire and the possibility of expanding the range of
current identities and reaching for wider worlds” (Kanno & Norton, 2003, p. 242). In this theoretical
framework, L2 identity is understood through the L2 learner’s relationship to the world, to the culture of
the language he or she is studying, and to his or her assumed affiliation with that culture and its natives
(Norton, 2000).

Language Learning & Technology

70

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

In contrast to the traditional structuralist view of identity as a static entity or a collection of social roles
one is assigned to perform, poststructuralists conceptualize identity as a dynamic process of selfidentification on a moment-to-moment basis in social interactions with other members of a particular
community (see Block, 2007, for further discussion). In sociolinguistic research, identity is often
associated with language affiliation, language expertise, language inheritance, and the ability of learners
to invest themselves in a new L2 identity that projects a close connection to the target language and
culture (Norton, 2000).
In the L2 identity literature, virtual spaces and computer-mediated communicative contexts are found to
be welcoming venues where language learners express themselves more freely in a second language (e.g.,
Lam, 2004; Spiliotopoulos & Carey, 2005). Recent research on L2 learners in Internet-mediated
communicative environments has concerned itself with the distinction between L2 learner and L2 user
identities in open Internet environments such as public discussion forums (Hanna & de Nooy, 2003,
2009), transnational gaming sites (Thorne, 2008), social networking sites, and personal interactions
(Pasfield-Neofitou, 2011). These studies examine the informal use of L2 in various target language online
domains. Self-identifying as foreigners, non-natives, or L2 learners was found to be different identityestablishing strategies in these environments. However, researchers do not find these strategies beneficial
in all online social contexts. Hanna & de Nooy’s (2003) work with French online public forums, for
example, shows that L2 user identity enactment leads to social acceptance or eventual authentication by
other native-speaking members of the virtual community. Conversely, the participants who self-identified
as L2 learners failed to accomplish the same goal, and therefore they were denied the opportunity to
participate in the forum activities on par with native speaking members. Pasfield-Neofitou’s study, in
contrast, showed how, by constructing their identities as L2 learners in online social spaces, Japanese (L2)
students “mitigated any potential loss of face due to their language competency, and by construing
themselves as experts in English or as foreigners, they may have made themselves more attractive to
Japanese members who were actively looking for a foreign or English-speaking contact” (p. 105). These
learners benefited from native speakers’ corrections and other forms of feedback, particularly, in the
social networking domains populated by native Japanese speakers. These newer series of studies show the
necessity of continuing to explore L2 learners’ communication and identity building strategies in
interactions with native speakers in Internet-based social spaces.
While the popularity of social technologies grows among foreign language professionals, the learning
opportunities that naturalistic online settings provide for language learning still need to be adequately
researched (Pasfield-Neofitou, 2011). One of the methodological challenges these kinds of studies exhibit
is the need to provide a more comprehensive and systematic approach to the identity work data. In the
present study, we propose a new framework for the investigation of L2 identity in online NS-NNS
interactions. The epistemology of this framework is rooted in the socio-linguistic approach to identity
discursively constructed through and in interaction (Bucholtz & Hall, 2005), while the analytical toolkit is
derived from Gee’s discourse analysis and his building tasks of language-in-use (Gee, 2005). What
follows is the description of this framework as it is applied to the investigation of L2 identity enactment
in the Russia-based social networking site, VKontakte, the Russian counterpart to Facebook.
THE STUDY
Epistemological and Methodological Frameworks
Our approach to the investigation of L2 identity work in online NS-NNS interactions is based on the
principles of identity enactment outlined by Bucholtz and Hall (2005) (see Appendix A). We propose that
L2 learners simultaneously construct in multiple analytical layers their intersubjective L2 identities:
global identities (age, ethnicity, language affiliation, etc.), local community-assigned identities, and,
finally, temporary identities, which can arise from a particular exchange or instructional L2 task. In this
study, we examine students’ interactions in the social networking environment, VKontakte, as instances of

Language Learning & Technology

71

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

L2 identity enactment. For our research questions, we adopted Gee’s (2005, 2011) analytical tools of
discourse analysis. In order to categorize the types of activities in which L2 learners of Russian engaged
by means of language and interaction, we selected five of Gee’s seven building tasks of language, which
act simultaneously in every piece of language-in-use (Gee, 2005). We applied each task to our
examination of L2 use in online NS-NNS speaker interaction and formulated specific questions that
guided us in our approach to L2 identity enactment in interaction. These tasks served as the foci for our
research questions and as the five analytical blocks in our subsequent analyses of student online
interactions, interview data, and L2 identity-building strategies (Appendix B).
Research Questions
Task 1. Significance.
In the context of telecollaborative interactions on an authentic social networking site, how
is language—L1 (English) or L2 (Russian)—used to make certain L2 identity aspects of
interactants significant or insignificant, and in what ways?
For this analytical block, we examined values and qualities that our students attributed to things as they
described one event or fact as important and another as trivial. For example, when one acknowledges that
he or she is not a native speaker of the language his or her interlocutor speaks, thus making this fact
significant for both parties, he or she gives this fact a new value or meaning. Conversely, not mentioning
this fact to a native-speaking interactant leads to an entirely different context in which language affiliation
loses its value, and hence, personalized significance.
Task 2. Activities.
What activities are enacted by L2 learners’ online discourse, and in what ways do such
activities contribute to an unfolding L2 identity or L2 identities?
For this analytical task, we examined how students engaging in telecollaborative exchanges in VKontakte
use their second language (Russian) to make clear to others what it is that they take themselves to be
doing.
Task 3. Relationships.
What sort of relationships (including relations of power) is Russian learners’ online
discourse seeking to enact?
For this analytical block, we investigated how language is used to build and sustain relationships (Gee,
2011). In the case of L2 speakers, signaling relationships also interferes with language proficiency
(see Appendix A, The Partialness Principle). Also, building relationships in a second language may entail
assigning certain roles and construing one’s and others’ identities in a unique fashion.
Task 4. Sign systems and knowledge.
How does the language of students’ interactions privilege (or de-privilege) certain sign
systems and forms of knowledge, and in what ways do such acts of privileging (or deprivileging) contribute to enacting L2 identities online?
Social-networking environments enable users to take advantage of multiple sign systems—linguistic and
non-linguistic (language of pictures, language of emoticons, etc.)—in claiming real and fake identities.
For this analytical block, we examined how sign systems and ways of knowing were made relevant or
irrelevant in social-networking among speakers and learners of Russian.
Task 5. Identities.
What L2 identities are enacted through the language of telecollaborative interactions in
VKontakte, and what opportunities and constraints does the context of a social-networking

Language Learning & Technology

72

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

site create for constructing an L2 speaker’s identity?
Following the principles of L2 identity enactment in interaction, we proposed that L2 identities are
enacted in social interaction with other speakers of L2, and are mutually and dynamically co-constructed
by telecollaborative partners in the course of communicative exchange. In social-networking
environments, L2 speakers fashion themselves and their L2 identities in a number of ways, including
unique I-statements they make at various stages of interaction with their native speaking partners. Their
non-native-speakerness is factored in the sort of things they say or imply about themselves.
These five analytical tasks guided our analysis of online interactions between American learners of
Russian and native Russian speakers. While the methods of discourse analysis enabled us to keep track of
every instance of L2-identity-in-the-making, we could still not fully understand the meaning of individual
L2 learners’ experiences with authentic social networking environments from the discourse data alone
(see also Norton, 2000). In this study, we also utilized line-by-line interpretative phenomenological
analysis (IPA) of the students’ experiential accounts elicited via phenomenological interviews and weekly
reflections. This data gave us access to students’ feelings and emotions at various points of the VKontakte
project. IPA encourages “a reflective engagement with the participant’s account” and focuses on the lived
experience of the participant and the meaning that the participant makes of that lived experience (Smith,
Flowers, & Larkin, 2009). Our students’ individual stories enriched our interpretations of their
interactions with Russian peers via VKontakte and led to a better understanding of participants’
perspective on the L2 online identity building process.
Context and Participants
This study was conceived in the course of our search for effective and exciting ways to bring the culture
of the Russian speaking world into the language classroom and to amplify every student’s language use
experience. With this goal mind, we designed a telecollaborative task-based exchange connecting our
American learners to Russian native speakers, who live in the United States and abroad in Russia and
Ukraine. As the exchange venue, we selected VKontakte, a Russia-based counterpart to Facebook
(www.vk.com or www.vkontakte.ru). Similar to Facebook and other social networking sites (McBride,
Table 1. Number of Project Participants, Number of Posted Messages, and Average Number of Words
per Message
Project 1
American participants (heritage speakers)

28

Russian speaking participants
Pairs of participants

8
28

Total messages posted (%)

(7)

Project 2
33

(8)

33
33

Total
61

(15)

41
61

225

(100%)

884

(100%)

1109

(100%)

by American participants (%)

100

(44%)

413

(47%)

513

(46%)

by Russian speaking participants (%)

125

(56%)

471

(53%)

596

(54%)

Average words per message
by American participants
by Russian speaking participants

26

57

51

25

52

47

27

61

54

Note. In the current dataset, a message consisted of anywhere between 1 word and 421 words.

Language Learning & Technology

73

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

2009), VKontakte requires its users to create a personal profile page containing a user picture and personal
information (birth place and date, marital and relationship status, education, interests, etc.) and provides
comparable features, such as photo albums, status updates, public comments, private messages, chat, and
other features.
Altogether, the participants of this study included 61 American college students of Russian and 41 native
speakers of Russian (Table 1). Fifteen students from the American participant group described themselves
as being of Russian heritage. All project participants registered in VKontakte and were assigned a project
partner.
The VKontakte project was implemented over two semesters. In Project 1, the participants included 8
native speakers of Russian and 28 American students of Russian (22 second-semester and 6 fourthsemester students, 18–23 years old). The native speakers were a heterogeneous group: 3 college
professors (27–45 years old) and 3 college students (18–22 years old) residing in the United States at the
time of the project, and 2 young adults (24 and 28 years old) from Russia. Each American student was
paired with one of the Russian speaking participants and the pairs were asked to exchange written
messages on the wall of their personal profile pages in the VKontakte social space. The American students
were instructed to communicate only in Russian. They received an open-ended task (Figure 1) and
submitted a written reflection following the exchange.

Figure 1. Design and duration of online interaction tasks assigned to American participants in Project 1
and Project 2. VK = VKontakte. In Project 1, other online VK tasks focused on various features available
in VKontakte: classified ads, audio, video, games, applications, and discussion groups.
In view of the participants’ expressed requests, Project 2 was designed to be more extended and was
implemented a year later. The new cohort of students consisted of 33 American students (21 second-

Language Learning & Technology

74

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

semester and 12 continuing fourth-semester students, 18–22 years old). The composition of the Russian
native speaking group was more homogeneous this time: 8 college students from a large Russian
university and 25 college students from a large Ukrainian university located in the predominantly Russian
speaking area of Ukraine (18–22 years old). As in Project 1, the participant pairs were asked to exchange
messages on the walls of their VKontakte pages. After a month of message exchange in Russian, the
participants were asked to switch to the English language and continue communication for another month.
During this time, the American students were not assigned any tasks; the Russian native speaking
students received interaction tasks from their English course instructors in Russia and Ukraine. The
English part of the exchange is not the focus of the present study and is not included in the analysis.
However, it provides an insight into the Russian speaking partners’ motivation for participating in the
project. All Russian participants were studying English as a foreign language at their respective
universities in Russia and Ukraine, and wished to interact with their American peers in English. During
the Russian part of the exchange of Project 2, the American students received three weekly
communicative tasks (Figure 1) and submitted open-ended weekly reflections on their experience.
During Project 1 and Project 2, the participants on both sides did not receive any explicit instructions as to
error correction or message length. The American participants were required to post at least three
messages of unspecified length per week. Both groups were instructed to communicate only in Russian
over the course of 2 weeks (Project 1) and 4 weeks (Project 2).
Data Analysis Procedures
All student interactions and reflections were collected in one database and coded using the qualitative
data analysis package NVivo. The coding book consisted of seven major coding categories—conceptual
nodes adopted from Gee’s analytical tools of discourse analysis—and multiple layers of subcategories;
five of these analytical blocks were selected for inclusion in the present paper. In our interpretation of
students’ interactions, we were also guided by the principles of discursive L2 identity formation in online
interactions (Appendix A). Our analytical task was two-fold: first, to examine empirically the discursive
dimensions of L2 identity enactment in the context of telecollaborative exchanges; and second, to
describe students’ motivations and write comprehensive descriptions of individual student experiences
with this form of language learning. To address the second task, phenomenological one-on-one interviews
were conducted in the form of dialogues with 10 randomly selected participants during the third and last
week of the project activities. Thus, each focal student was interviewed twice. During the interviews the
researcher asked open-ended questions and encouraged emotionally loaded accounts of students’
experience. Each one-hour interview was then transcribed and analyzed for meaning clusters following
the guidelines proposed by Hycner (1985).
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION
Significance
In the course of the analysis, we searched the data for instances of significance, that is, language that
strengthens or lessens what is foregrounded. Regardless of the evolving identities, relationships, and
activities, certain L2 identity aspects came to be given significance in the majority of interactions,
particularly such aspects as language learner role and affiliation with L2 culture. For example, when
prompted to react to statements with regard to learning the Russian language, Daniel1 chose to appear as
an attentive interactant and accept the Russian partner’s invitation to elaborate on the language learner
aspect of his identity (see Episode 1, Turn 4), even though his original intent was to portray himself as a
multilingual American student with diverse interests (Turn 2) (also see Appendix C for a sample of the
original Russian-language text).
By providing an excuse for likely linguistic inaccuracies and asking his Russian partner to correct his
mistakes in Turn 4, Daniel acknowledges the learner aspect of his L2 identity and makes it significant for

Language Learning & Technology

75

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

Episode 1. Excerpt from Online Interaction between Marina (NS – Native Speaker of Russian) and Daniel
(NNS – Non-Native Speaker, Russian L2 Learner)2

Note. *Italics in this and all other episodes were added by the authors and indicate key phrases referenced and discussed in the
analysis. **A number of typographical features and key linguistic inaccuracies are intentionally introduced in the English
translations to give the reader a better sense of the participants’ discourse. ***The phrases that were posted in English in the
original exchange between the two partners are rendered in underlined letters. The rest of the text was written in Russian.

the rest of the conversation. In response, the sympathetic native speaker offers reassurance from her
position of power that Daniel’s Russian was not poor, and offers help in correcting mistakes. In Turn 6,
Daniel asks Marina to teach him Russian, which further foregrounds his perceived learner role, and

Language Learning & Technology

76

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

triggers a lengthy error-correction lecture on the part of the Russian partner. Thus, by showing acceptance
of his non-native speaker identity, Daniel opens the door for the native speaker to make his language
learner role central in this interaction. From that point on, the Russian partner did not hesitate to resort to
English if she was unsure of Daniel’s comprehension of her messages. Daniel’s initial intention however,
was only to ensure mutual understanding in order to keep the conversation going (Episode 2). His
approach evidenced the challenges of assuming (i.e., investing in) a new intimidating L2 identity when
uncertainties are prevalent, misunderstandings are likely, and the power to portray oneself as an
intelligent speaker is hampered by low L2 proficiency.
Episode 2. Excerpt from Interview with Daniel (Russian L2 Learner)
Interviewer: It’s interesting that you switched to English here [Turn 4 in Episode 1]. Why?
Daniel: That I did because it was still my second post, and I was hoping my Russian was
good enough for her to understand, but I wanted to have that English tag right there so she
realizes, “Oh, his Russian isn’t the greatest. If I don’t understand what he is saying I can
respond in English. He understands it that it’s not too great.”
Michael, on the contrary, chooses to downplay the theme of his non-native-speakerness, and instead
focuses on the task of information exchange from the start of the conversation. When Katerina offers him
help with his Russian, Michael ignores the suggested L2 learner identity prompt (Episode 3, Turns 1 and
2). Instead of following up on Katerina’s offer and elaborating on the kind of help he might need from
her, he answers with a perfunctory remark (Turn 6) that he does speak some Russian, but then focuses on
the rest of the message where he talks about traveling.
Episode 3. Excerpt from Online Interaction between Katerina (NS – Native Speaker of Russian) and
Michael (NNS – Non-native Speaker, Russian L2 Learner)

Significance was also given to reasons for studying Russian, which seemed to attribute legitimacy to the
American partners’ learning of Russian and their participation in the exchange. Interestingly, it was the
Russian keypals who frequently brought up or insisted on discussing the theme of connection with the
Russian language and culture, identifying Russian affiliation questions as significant enough to break the
flow of an interaction. In Episode 3, Turn 5, the native speaker Katerina perceives Russian affiliation as a
significant topic for discussion and singles out her question in a separate line. This can be contrasted with

Language Learning & Technology

77

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

her partner’s response in which he briefly answers Katerina’s question, and immediately, without a line
break, shifts to the topic of travelling which he perceives as more important. It is noteworthy that he also
changes the focus of her Russian affiliation question from “learning Russian” to “knowing/speaking
Russian,” thus avoiding learner-related discourse.
Error correction appeared to be one of the most visibly distinct activities because, in addition to
interrupting the flow of information exchange, it was usually presented in a format with different
typographical characteristics than typical message exchanges (e.g., multiple parentheses, quotation marks,
frequent commas, choppy syntax, as in Episode 1, Turn 13). It seemed to clearly evoke the unbalanced
power relationship between partners, in which one acts as an expert correcting a novice learner’s errors.
Yet even more symbolic significance was conveyed through sentence-level code-switching, which
signaled the learner’s perceived inability to express or comprehend a certain message, and indicated a
total abandonment of the speaker’s L2 user identity (Episode 1, Turns 4 and 12).
The two interaction episodes discussed in this section (Episodes 1 and 3) demonstrate the process of
mutual and dynamic co-construction of temporary discourses unique to each pair of keypals by means of
code-switching and error correction in addition to affiliation and identity negotiation.
Activities
Interactants were typically involved in either form-focused or meaning-focused activities. The formfocused activities included (a) error correction, either solicited or volunteered, and (b) consulting a
language expert about a language form. The meaning-focused activities included (a) getting to know each
other, (b) establishing a close relationship, (c) exchanging information, (d) completing project
assignments, and (e) re-claiming one’s cultural identity. Each activity seemed to evoke a distinct part of
the writer’s identity. For example, the form-focused interaction brought to the fore the language learner
role of the American partner, while the meaning-focused interaction suggested the language user identity.
The American keypals preferred to emphasize their global student identity, such as a student at an
American university, in order to place it on an equal footing with the Russian partners’ status of students
at Russian and Ukrainian universities. The few instances when the American keypals evoked their status
of Russian course participants were related to the classroom tasks they were asked to complete by the
course instructor.
Overall, there were three project tasks the students were asked to complete (see Figure 1). The first task in
Projects 1 and 2 (meet keypal and share interests) was nearly invisible because it fit so naturally within an
expected interaction between two strangers in the given context that the American students did not have
to reveal the assignment. The other two tasks in Project 2, however, were given to the students in the
middle of the ongoing interactions, when the norms of interaction unique to each pair were already
gradually taking form. The topics of these communicative tasks did not always fit naturally in the flow of
the exchange. Students often felt the need to apologize for breaking the established interactional routine
within the pair and to give an excuse for a sudden introduction of what appeared as a massive attack of
questions. Some explicitly stated that they had an assignment to complete, as did Daniel in Episode 1,
Turn 12.
As a representative example of reactions by many heritage learners, Claire demonstrated little enthusiasm
for the project assignments (see Episode 4). Instructor-guided communicative tasks presented more of a
challenge because Claire seems to have perceived the entire project as an opportunity to build a close
friendship with someone who shared the same cultural heritage. During her interview, Claire talks about
the project tasks as an uncomfortable nuisance that interfered with the naturalness of interactions, and
prevented her from developing a desired intimate friendship with her VKontakte friend. Her
dissatisfaction with the tasks shows a conflict of expectations: Claire’s desire to “re-fuel” her Russian
heritage by bonding with a Russian native speaker and her instructor’s intention to get her involved in a

Language Learning & Technology

78

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

focused, topic-specific conversation.
Episode 4. Excerpt from Interview with Claire (Russian Heritage Learner)
Claire: I’m enjoying [the project], the only thing that is a little difficult was that we had to
talk about a certain topic, especially when we had to talk about universities because I had
to talk about it and throw it in the middle of the conversation. It was just a little forced,
because I had to make the conversation go in that direction, and it was a little difficult.
Claire does not perceive this interaction as a learning activity and makes an effort to carefully weave the
assigned questions into the conversation flow without acknowledging it was a teacher-controlled activity
(Episode 5, Turn 3). Doing so allows her to avoid being perceived as a student in the eyes of her Russian
partner.
Episode 5. Excerpt from Online Interaction between Oksana (NS – Native Speaker of Russian) and Claire
(HS – Russian Heritage Speaker)

It appears that activities performed by the interactants contribute to the unfolding L2 identity work by
foregrounding either the language learner role (form-focused and classroom-related activities) or the
language user role (meaning-focused activities). However, unlike non-heritage American learners of
Russian, our heritage learners followed distinct goals of building a personal relationship with peers of
similar cultural heritage and sought to avoid any learner-associated activities that could undermine their
power as speakers of Russian.
Relationships
Building relationships in a second language may entail assigning certain roles, negotiating the relations of
power and construing one’s own and others’ identities in a unique fashion. For example, both sides
started Project 2 with certain assumptions and knew that they would take on both the roles of expert
native speakers and novice language learners at different times during the exchange, depending on the
assigned language. During the Russian-only part of the interaction American partners entered the project
with the pre-established role of language learners. It was the American students who took responsibility
for supporting, contesting, re-designing, or expanding their L2 identities if they deemed it desirable, while
the Russian partners had the power to authenticate (confirm the realness or genuineness) or denaturalize
(emphasize the false nature of) their partners’ L2 identities.
For example, no authentication was given to a heritage speaker, Anna. The identity she claimed in her
online discourse violated her Russian partner’s ideological expectation regarding Anna’s language
affiliation. While Anna was striving to legitimize her Russian speaker self, her Russian keypal continued

Language Learning & Technology

79

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

to perceive her as an outsider/foreigner and a language learner, despite the fact that Anna’s Russian was
immaculate in all of her postings. For Anna, striving for perfect grammar became a form of social action
to win her partner’s approval and rise in her partner’s eyes to the level of sameness. Her Russian keypal’s
messages were permeated with colloquialisms and informal expressions. Yet, when Anna used a rather
informal variant of the Russian negative particle netu instead of the standard net, her Russian friend
corrected her in a rather blunt way. Notably, the Russian keypal pointed out that the form is only in use
between “old ladies,” and hence should not be attempted by someone who, due to her non-native
language affiliation, cannot relate to its dialectal connotation. This incident clearly shows the workings of
power relations in NS-NNS exchanges. Even though everything about Anna is clearly Russian—her
name, her profile picture, her idiomatic expression—her keypal continued to perceive Anna largely as a
Russian language learner as their interaction unfolded. During her interview, Anna shared how her
perception of her Russian speaker identity was challenged by this incident:
Episode 6. First Excerpt from Interview with Anna (Russian Heritage Learner)
Anna: It was like a slap. She probably just meant it to be sarcastic, but I think it was kind
of rude. This [netu] is what I always said. I catch myself and I say “net,” now that she
called me out on it. I thought it was a little harsh.
Anna’s motivations to have perfect grammar derive from her desire to pass as a native speaker in order to
claim her Russian speaker identity. She resisted a teacher–student relationship with her keypal from the
start of the VKontakte project.
Episode 7. Second Excerpt from Interview with Anna (Russian Heritage Learner)
Anna: My biggest desire was to be someone on her level, not in a competitive sense at all,
but so that we could correspond not as teacher-student, but just friend-friend. That was a
huge part of it. And in this assignment it’s just normal to have this person as your teacher
and you learn off your corresponding friends.
Both sides in student interactions appeared to be in continuous search for indices of adequation
(positioning as sufficiently alike), such as similar opinions, similar interests, and similar lifestyles. Any
sign of Russian affiliation was welcomed by Russian partners as a uniting factor (e.g., the American
partner’s interest in the Russian politics, literature, culture, friendship with Russian speaking people,
Russian or Slavic heritage). An American student could display a number of such tokens of Russianness,
all contributing to his or her identity, some more durable in nature and having more weight (Russian
heritage) than others (Russian speaking friends or interest in Russian history). Achieved adequation,
however, did not always lead to the authentication of Russian language user identity, as described in
Anna’s example above.
Sign Systems and Knowledge
Besides the most obvious significance of English and Russian with visually distinct graphic
representations (see Appendix C), additional signs systems were given value: other foreign languages that
both interactants had in common (e.g., French or Spanish), smileys, emoticons, and punctuation
conventions associated with either Russian or English. In the medium of social-networking between NSNNS pairs, the language of emoticons and punctuation signs is particularly privileged as an important
source of social information. Repeated use of smileys and exclamation marks may be used to establish a
friendly relationship between keypals. For example, Aaron, a second-year Russian student, noticed how
differently his Russian keypal used exclamation marks and parentheses, and how, throughout their
interactions, he learned to rely on this information in order to decode the emotional tone of his keypal’s
messages. Along with learning how Russians communicate on the Internet, he saw his keypal as a speaker

Language Learning & Technology

80

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

of Russian Internet language: “goofy Internet culture of Russians, with parentheses all over the place, and
the stuff like eight hundred exclamation marks” (from Aaron’s interview).
Social networking sites reveal another dimension of identity enactment—through a conscious and
strategic selection of digital artifacts, such as photos, video postings, layout designs, and music selections.
In text-based intercultural exchanges, participants can only rely on what they read in their partners’
messages, and interpret the information according to what they know about the communicative culture of
the language they are learning. When intercultural exchanges take place in target language socialnetworking sites, students obtain an opportunity to observe how native speakers fashion their cultural
identity in Internet social spaces, and how they present themselves in the photos they post in their
profiles, and in their online activities (e.g., SNS applications).
Episode 8. First Excerpt From Interview With Aaron (Russian L2 Learner)
Aaron: I noticed that a lot of [their] pictures are almost professionally taken, like posed,
very posed pictures, and a lot of ours are like “Oh, whatever. Just … [imitates the sound of
a camera shooting pictures] Just take, who cares? You are not ready for some of them.
You aren’t in the best of shape in some of them. I asked in class, “Why is it that they are
all like professionally taken, definitely set up?” And one of the Russian [heritage] girls
goes, “That’s because the Russian culture and the Russian sense—we are very proud of
who we are. We are a more beautiful people, so we take our pictures to portray that.”
Okay, I guess it makes sense. It’s almost like the difference in cultures. Do we have more
of a free sense to us in public in a kind of egotistical sense, like “I don’t care what you
think of me, I am who I am,” while Russians put up a façade and say, “I’m going to make
you think I am a certain way.”
Aaron’s understanding of Russian culture changed as he started noticing semiotic information in his
keypal’s profile and analyzing it as a cultural artifact. He was able to see beyond the photo images by
tracing down the signs of Russian national identity in the ways young Russians portray themselves in the
VKontakte site. His own use of the VKontakte profile features was not random either. By posting carefully
selected images of himself, Aaron enacts an identity of his own choice (a typical American, an athlete, a
cadet in a college military program); but his identity is also presented through the information that he
chose not to show in his VKontakte profile.
Episode 9. Second Excerpt from Interview with Aaron (Russian L2 Learner)
Aaron: I think they [my photos] represented me as who I am. They are not my pictures.
They are from what I do. I think they represented me as a jock American boy, a military
kid. So, I am definitely shown there as I am not playing video games or any of them and
stuff like that. I think she definitely saw what an active American boy is like compared
to… the [pausing] more athletic, sporty boy instead of an artsy type. That’s who I am
[pausing] … I portrayed myself that way.
Aaron learns to compensate for the limitations of self-expression in Russian by supplying the missing
information in his profile photos. By doing so, he constructs his Russian speaker identity in parallel with
his American self—his idiosyncratic attributes, which have an impact on the way he is perceived by his
Russian partner. The multimodal functionalities of social networking sites enabled Aaron to take
advantage a variety of means, or affordances, to mediate self-positioning and self-expression in
VKontakte. As mentioned in many students’ written reflections and interviews, these affordances
presented themselves in various forms of discursive practices (e.g., status updates, profile wall postings,
private messaging tools) and in various semiotic modes of self-expression, such as photos, avatars, choice

Language Learning & Technology

81

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

of language input, and use of punctuation marks to express emotions.
Identities
As shown previously, the interactants entered the telecollaborative exchange with a number of
assumptions about their partner based on the information they could gather from the partner’s online
profile as well as from the instructor’s description of project participants. However, as the conversation
continued, both partners had the power to redefine their identities by either contesting certain implicatures
and presuppositions or by further developing identity attributes evoked by the project partner. As both
parties negotiated and co-constructed their identities, their perception of the other evolved in an infinitely
dynamic process.
By bringing to light different tokens of L2 affiliation, or social goods, students emphasized points of
intersection with the Russian culture. The accounts of the heritage learners revealed their unique
positioning in VKontakte interactions. For the heritage speakers, being able to connect with native
Russians was a test of their heritage speaker privileges. All students of Russian heritage chose to seek the
points of reference by explicitly announcing their Russian connections to their VKontakte partners during
the first week of interactions. Instead of downplaying their heritage identities, these students brought them
to the fore by explicitly identifying themselves as legitimate speakers of Russian as opposed to L2
learners or foreigners. While non-heritage learners of Russian established the relation of adequation with
the Russian keypals by claiming their genuine interest in the study of Russian language, for our heritage
participants, the verification and affirmation of their already-existing Russian identities made more sense
because they could rely on these similarities in order to legitimize equal relations with their Russian
interactants. The interactions with Russian peers made the heritage component of their contested identities
more salient and significant. They took this project as an opportunity to rework their identities as
American students and intersubjectively reconstruct their Russian speaker identities by trying to establish
intimate connections within the culture of their heritage.
CONCLUSIONS
The present research attempted to delve into the complexities of local identity categories as they
manifested themselves in a moment-to-moment development of an instructionally arranged NS-NNS
exchange. In this study the social networking space, VKontakte, is not only a venue where American
learners of Russian may practice using the target language in communication with NS peers, but it is also
a multimodal cultural space in which they learn to claim and withdraw their first and second language
identities when responding to the demands of interactional momentum and/or the requirements of a class
assignment. By carefully choosing various means of online self-presentation, our students were able to
move in and out of the L2 learner identity frames and accomplish social tasks beyond the scope of the
classroom assignment (e.g., establishing friendships or declaring the relations of sameness and otherness).
Turkle (1995) maintained that in virtual spaces “we are encouraged to think of ourselves as fluid,
emergent, decentralized, multiplicitous, flexible, and ever in process” (p. 263). That seems to be the case
with our Russian learners. Their L2 speaker identity reveals itself as a dynamic identity-in-the-making as
they use their second language to make certain things significant, bring certain activities to the fore,
privilege some semiotic systems at the expense of others, form relationships of specific sorts, and build
connections among concepts and behaviors—and, by doing all of that, they are experiencing themselves
as multilingual users of the Internet (Kramsch, 2009).
As our analysis shows, NS-NNS online interactions often transform into unequal power relations in which
a native speaker is empowered, while a language learner’s role is delegitimized. Yet, these are
collaborative relations of power, as opposed to coercive relations (Cummins, 1996), in the sense that they
are not disruptive or detrimental to L2 identity enactment, provided that NS-NNS interactants choose to
take turns holding power in online communication. Our data shows the power of native-speakerness as

Language Learning & Technology

82

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

mutually and discursively co-constructed by both interactants in on-going communication, in addition to
this power being assigned by a higher institutional order. Power relations enabled our L2 participants to
shift out of the intimidating frames of L2 speakers, and assume the role of L2 learners when a need to
negotiate meaning arose. The necessity to contest the power of native-speakerness was particularly
important for our heritage speakers who, from the very start of the VKontakte project, sought to reestablish their Russian speaker online identities and interact with native Russians on equal terms.
In the introduction to this paper, we addressed two notions that we found to be pertinent to the study of
online L2 identity enactment through interaction. One derives from Norton’s (2000) juxtaposition of
motivation (a desire to learn a foreign language for various instrumental and integrative reasons) and
investment: “the relationship of language learners to the changing social world” (p. 17). When students
use an L2 in communication with others, “they are not only exchanging information with target language
speakers but they are constantly organizing and reorganizing a sense of who they are and how they relate
to the social world around them” (p.18). The framework of discourse analysis allowed us to examine
students’ investment in their L2 identity at various moments of online communication with Russian peers.
The other notion that we discussed was the social dimension of Prensky’s (2009) digital wisdom. We
argued that by investing in an online L2 identity our Russian learners demonstrated their digital wisdom
in that they learned to accomplish a variety of social tasks beyond the scope of a simple exchange of
information with a native speaking peer in a telecollaborative project. They were able to overcome, to a
certain extent, the limitations of low proficiency by resorting to multiple affordances of the social
networking site in order to construct their dynamic L2 learner-user identities and maintain genuine
communication with a keypal across the globe. By doing so, they surpassed the constraints of time and
space and took full advantage of the social enhancements which modern Internet technologies provided
for them. In Prensky’s terms, their digital wisdom manifested both in the use of Internet technologies to
access the artifacts of Russian language and culture in the VKontakte environment, and from the
meaningful use of VKontakte in order to expand the social contact with the target language speakers
outside the confines of formal classroom practices, which are typically limited to teacher-student and
student-student interactions.
IMPLICATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
The study examined one particular context: Russian as an L2 classroom-based project within the confines
of a specific social networking site. The observed patterns of online identity enactment were likely to be
shaped by the prearranged framework of the project and by the design of weekly communicative tasks
students were asked to complete. More research is needed to explore patterns in which online L2 identity
plays out in other language classroom-based telecollaborative projects. It is possible that given different
assigned tasks and different participant roles implicit in the design of the project (e.g., experts or equal
contributors rather than learners), students would avail themselves of different linguistic and nonlinguistic
means to reveal other identity facets. They might enact relationships and activities and attribute
significance to various identity manifestations in patterns different from those observed in this study.
With the increased popularity of social technologies, the concepts of investment and digital wisdom may
require more research attention in both instructional and naturalistic settings. One possibility for future
studies is to examine how various social networking practices translate into students’ investment in their
L2 selves, or, conversely, how such practices lead to resistance in adopting an L2 identity in Internetmediated social communities.

NOTES
1. All participant names used in this paper are pseudonyms.

Language Learning & Technology

83

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

2. The text enclosed in brackets in this and all remaining interaction and interview episodes was added by
the researchers.
APPENDIX A. The Five Principles of Discursive L2 Identity Enactment in Online Interactions
(adapted from Bucholtz & Hall, 2005)
1. The emergence principle enables us to examine L2 identity enactment as a discursive construct
emerging in interactions with native speaking participants in online exchanges as well as in
interactions with speakers of the individual’s native language in which his or her affiliation with the
L2 is overtly identified. A particular L2 identity positioning is occasioned by the interactional
demands of a communicative situation. In the case of a social networking environment, such demands
may require a participant to enact an L2 user identity, an L2 learner identity, or both simultaneously,
or even urge participants to try on a fake identity of an native speaker. They do so in order to
legitimize their presence in a target language’s online domain, with the goal of locating their voices
and their right to participate in an online community on equal terms with other members.
2. The positionality principle enables us to examine L2 identity in NS-NNS online interactions as an
amalgamation of both static ethnographic categories (such as L2 language affiliation through one’s
heritage or mixed culture affiliation, age, race, etc.) and transitory interactional positions: “what I am
and what I am in this particular communicative situation.” The local and global categories of L2
identity exist in parallel. However, unlike face-to-face interactions in which age, race, and foreign
accent are not easy to conceal, in online communication, global categories of L2 identity can be made
less salient. Various categories of L2 identity can be brought to the fore at various moments of online
interactions. In this study, we investigate the micro-details of L2 identity—as it is shaped on a turnto-turn basis in communication with native speakers—merging from temporary roles and positions
that students assume in these interactions. We also observe how our participants occupy and abandon
various interactional positions as speakers of Russian, and how their positions are associated with
global categories of L2 identity and motivated by ideologies about Russian (L2) learning and Russian
(L2) use.
3. Following the indexicality principle, we examine how NNS interactions indexically position self and
other by means of various types of linguistic and non-linguistic resources (an index is understood as a
linguistic or non-linguistic form that depends on the interactional context for its meaning, (Ochs,
1992)). Examples of non-linguistic resources in SNS environments may include personal photo
collages, use of emoticons, music selections posted in one’s profile—these all can be viewed as a
representation of L1/ L2 identity work. L2 identity emerges discursively through overt mention of
identity categories or self-labeling (“I’m not Russian,” “I’m just a learner of Russian,” etc.),
implicatures (an idea that is suggested in an utterance, even though it is neither expressed nor strictly
implied by the utterance), and presuppositions regarding one’s identity position.
4. The relationality principle enables us to approach L2 identity as enacted only in relation to the other.
Hence, in this study L2 identity in social-networking environments is viewed as an intersubjective
accomplishment. L2 identities are constructed intersubjectively through the complementary relations
of similarity/difference or adequation/distinction (native-speakerness/ non-native-speakerness),
genuiness/ artifice, authority/ delegitimacy (as applicable to L2 user/learner versus native speaker/
authority)—the “tactics of intersubjectivity” (Bucholtz & Hall, 2005).
5. Finally, following the partialness principle, we contend that L2 identities do not reside within
individual learners only, but emerge in intersubjective relations of sameness and difference, realness
and fakeness, and power and disempowerment. If all displays of identity, including L2 identity, are
reliant on both interactional and ideological constraints for their articulation (Bucholtz & Hall, 2005),
L2 identities are always partial, that is to say, produced through contextually situated and

Language Learning & Technology

84

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

ideologically informed configurations of self and other: “me and my NS partner.” In the case of L2
speakers, there are certain constraints on individual intentionality caused by limitations of selfexpression in an L2. In online communication to the same extent as in face-to-face exchanges, the
construction of desired L2 identities is restricted by a participant’s L2 proficiency. In other words,
some things can be consciously presented through discourse the way an L2 participant desires (e.g., “I
am in the military,” “I don’t speak Russian well”), while other identity manifestations, while desired,
cannot be easily conveyed by an L2 learner (e.g., speaking in Russian like a member of the military,
using informal register while avoiding social faux-pas). Also, the deliberate role of social actions
fueled by certain power relations may impose constraints on an individual L2 speaker’s intentionality
in the process of L2 identity construction—for example, banning a non-native speaking participant on
an online public forum (Hanna & de Nooy, 2003), or the forum moderator’s decision to delete
messages posted by non-native speaking members.

APPENDIX B. Seven Building Tasks of Second Language-In-Use in Online Interactions*
(adapted from Gee’s Tools of Discourse Analysis, 2011)
Task 1. Significance. For this building task, we examine how L2 words and grammatical devices are
used to build up or lessen significance and how values and qualities are attributed to things as speakers
describe one event or fact as important and another as trivial in their online interactions.
Task 2. Activities. For this building task, we examine what activities and/or practices are enacted in an
online communication, and what activity or activities each communication seeks to get interactants to
recognize.
Task 3. Relationships. For this building task, we examine how L2 language is used to build and sustain
relationships of various sorts among the L2 speaker, other people, social groups, cultures, and/or
institutions.
Task 4. Sign Systems and Knowledge. For this building task, we examine how the L2 language being
used privileges or de-privileges specific sign systems (e.g., linguistic or non-linguistic) or different ways
of knowing and believing, or claims to knowledge and belief.
Task 5. Identities. For this building task, we examine what socially recognizable identities the L2
speaker is trying to enact or to get other to recognize in online interactions with native speaking
interlocutors, and how the speaker’s language treats other people’s identities, and what sorts of identities
the L2 speaker recognizes for others in relationship to his or her own L1 and L2 identity. We also
consider how the L2 speaker positions others and what identities he or she invites them to take up.
Task 6. Politics. For this building task, we seek to unfold the works of politics in NS-NNS online
interactions and to examine how words and grammatical devices are used to build a viewpoint on what
constitutes a social good in a certain interaction and what social goods are recognized as such in online
NS-NNS exchanges. Gee (2011) defines politics as “a situation where the distribution of social goods is at
stake” (p. 90). By social goods, Gee means anything that a social group takes as a good worth having. In
the context of online interactions, participants may share perspectives on what can be construed as a
social good, or their perspectives may diverge leading to confrontation and the need for negotiation.
Task 7. Connections. For this building task, we examine the various sorts of connections that underlie
L2 learners’ discourse in social-networking environments. We also consider intertextuality, or
connections to texts and discourses outside the context of Internet social-networking.
*Gee’s discourse analysis framework includes seven building tasks of language-in-use presented above. This paper presents
analyses for the first five analytical blocks which proved to be most pertinent to the process of dynamic L2 identity enactment.

Language Learning & Technology

85

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

APPENDIX C. Episode 1, Original Interaction in Russian, Turns 1-6

Note. To mask students’ identities, the participants’ photos were replaced with royalty free images.

Language Learning & Technology

86

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

REFERENCES
Bennett, S., Maton, K., & Kervin, L. (2008). The ‘digital natives’ debate: A critical review of the
evidence. British Journal of Educational Technology, 39(5), 775–786.
Block, D. (2007). Second language identities. London, UK: Continuum.
Bucholtz, M., & Hall, K. (2005). Identity and interaction: A socio-cultural linguistic approach. Discourse
Studies, 7, 585–614.
Cummins, J. (1996). Negotiating identities: Education for empowerment in a diverse society. Ontario,
CA: California Association for Bilingual Education.
Gee, J. P. (2005). An introduction to discourse analysis: Theory and method (2nd ed.). New York, NY:
Routledge.
Gee, J. P. (2011). How to do discourse analysis: A toolkit. New York, NY: Routledge.
Hanna, B. E., & de Nooy, J. (2003). A funny thing happened on the way to the forum: Electronic
discussion and foreign language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 7(1), 71–85. Retrieved
from http://llt.msu.edu.eres.library.manoa.hawaii.edu/vol7num1/pdf/hanna.pdf
Hanna, B. E., & de Nooy, J. (2009). Learning language and culture via public internet discussion forums.
New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num1/pdf/hanna.pdf
Hycner, R. H. (1985). Some guidelines for the phenomenological analysis of interview data. Human
Studies, 8, 279–303.
Kanno, Y., & Norton, B. (2003). Imagined communities and educational possibilities: Introduction.
Journal of Language, Identity, and Education, 2, 241–249.
Kramsch, C. (2009). The multilingual subject: What foreign language learners say about their experience
and why it matters. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Lam, W. S. E. (2004). Second language socialization in a bilingual chat room: Global and local
considerations. Language Learning & Technology, 8(3), 44–65. Retrieved
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num3/pdf/lam.pdf
Lomicka, L., & Lord, G. (2009). Introduction to social networking, collaboration, and Web 2.0 tools. In
L. Lomicka & G. Lord (Eds.), The next generations: Social networking and online collaboration in FL
learning (pp. 1–11). San Marcos, TX: CALICO Consortium.
McBride, K. (2009). Social-networking sites in foreign language classes: Opportunities for re-creation. In
L. Lomicka & G. Lord (Eds.), The next generations: Social networking and online collaboration in FL
learning (pp. 35–58). San Marcos, TX: CALICO Consortium.
Norton, B. (2000). Identity and language learning: Gender, ethnicity and educational change. Harlow,
UK: Longman/Pearson Education.
Ochs, E. (1992). Indexing gender. In A. Duranti & C. Goodwin (Eds.), Rethinking context (pp. 335–358).
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Pasfield-Neofitou, S. (2011). Online domains of language use: Second language learners’ experiences of
virtual community and foreignness. Language Learning & Technology, 15(2), 92–108. Retrieved
from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/pasfieldneofitou.pdf
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital natives, digital immigrants. On the horizon. NCB University Press, 9(5).

Language Learning & Technology

87

Liudmila Klimanova and Svetlana Dembovskaya

L2 Identity, Discourse, and Social Networking in Russian

Prensky, M. (2009). H. Sapiens Digital: From digital immigrants to digital natives to digital wisdom.
Innovate: Journal of Online Education, 5(3). Retrieved
from http://www.innovateonline.info/index.php?view=article&id=705
Smith, J. A., Flowers, P., & Larkin, M. (2009). Interpretative phenomenological analysis. Theory, method
and research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Spiliotopoulos, V., & Carey, S. (2005). Investigating the role of identity in writing using electronic
bulletin boards. Canadian Modern Language Review/La Revue Canadienne des Langues Vivantes, 62(1),
87–109.
Tapscott, D. (2009). Grown up digital: How the net generation is changing your world. New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill.
Thorne, S. L. (2008). Transcultural communication in open Internet environments and massively
multiplayer online games. In S. Magnan (Ed.), Mediating discourse online (pp. 305–327). Amsterdam,
NL: John Benjamins.
Turkle, S. (1995). Life on the screen: Identity in the age of the Internet. New York, NY: Simon &
Schuster.
Winke, P., & Goertler, S. (2008). Did we forget someone? Students’ computer access and literacy for
CALL. CALICO Journal, 25(3), 482–509.

Language Learning & Technology

88

