Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2013/review4

February 2013, Volume 17, Number 1
pp. 64–68

REVIEW OF LEARNING IN THE CLOUD: HOW (AND WHY) TO
TRANSFORM SCHOOLS WITH DIGITAL MEDIA
Learning in the Cloud: How (and Why) to Transform
Schools with Digital Media

Mark Warschauer

2011
ISBN: 0807752495
US $31.95
144 pp.

Teachers College Press
New York, NY
Review by Mike Levy, The University of Queensland, Australia
Learning in the Cloud is an informative and thought-provoking book. It is ambitious in its goals for K–12
education and the ways digital media may be operationalized to help achieve a new vision of 21st century
learning. While deeply embedded in the US context and primarily written for this audience, Learning in
the Cloud provides information and discussion that will be of value more broadly. The text moves from
the more theoretical to the practical through its chapters and provides many detailed examples of how—
and how not to—go about implementing digital media in K–12 schools. Essentially, the book may be said
to have a three-part architecture. The early chapters consider the goals for using technology in education
and the tools available. A chapter on exemplar projects from selected schools around the country then
follows. The next two chapters look at designs and environments and further develop the key concepts or
principles introduced earlier. Having the exemplars chapter in the middle of the book is a wise
construction, operating as a consolidation for the earlier discussion of goals and tools, and functioning as
a reference for designs and environments.
In this review I will begin with a descriptive overview of the chapters of the book to give a sense of its
ambition and purpose and the ways in which the central arguments are constructed and presented. I will
then examine in more detail one of the key ideas of the book: the notion of 21st century learning and what
it may entail in a school setting.
The introductory first chapter is built around a contrast. It is employed to illustrate starkly different ways
in which digital media may be introduced into schools. On the one hand, Warschauer uses the case of
Littleton Public Schools outside Denver to exemplify a new curricular initiative for improving writing
and literacy. He returns to Littleton throughout the book as a kind of benchmark or role model of an
enlightened approach. On the other hand, Birmingham Public Schools in Alabama is used to illustrate the
implementation of the One Laptop per Child (OLPC) program. The author uses this contrast as a
springboard to present his central argument, that digital media are part of a “complex sociotechnical
ecology for educational reform,” not merely “a tool to be dropped into schools for bringing rapid

Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501

64

Mike Levy

Review of Learning in the Cloud

change” (p. 5). This core message reverberates through the themes, arguments and examples presented in
the remainder of the book. It is also the catalyst for the core questions the author sets out:
•

What are the goals of reform?

•

What is the particular contribution that digital media can make in helping to achieve
these goals?

•

What kinds of learning environments are best for that process?

•

What kinds of curriculum, pedagogy, and assessment should underlie the reform effort?

•

And how can we develop a long-lasting sociotechnical infrastructure—from affordable
tools, to effective leaders, to skilled and committed teachers—that can sustain successful
reform? (p. 5)

These questions in turn broadly reflect the order and content of the remaining chapters of the book.
Chapter 2 provides the rationale. It is fundamental to Warschauer’s orientation and points of focus, so I
will spend a little more space describing it. He describes three central goals for technology use in
education: (a) to improve academic achievement, (b) to facilitate new kinds of 21st century learning, and
(c) to promote educational and social equity. He supports his arguments with relevant statistics on
students in the United States and gives examples from schools. Each educational goal is discussed in turn.
With academic achievement, he refers to the national No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act adopted in the
United States in 2001. In particular, he considers the pervasive influence of standards-driven curricula in
order to achieve proficiency in standardized tests on reading (“downplaying writing,” p. 7) and math, a
topic that the author returns to later in Chapter 5. He also warns about a continued overemphasis on the
use of drill and practice activities in the classroom, and argues for richer, more open-ended activities such
as project-based learning.
Under 21st century learning, Warschauer argues for a greater concentration on new skill sets that are
relevant for the contemporary world, especially with a view to the workplace and the job market. He
makes the case for learning and innovation skills, as well as expert thinking and advanced pattern
recognition and experience. He also examines the concept of adaptive expertise (Bransford et al., 2009)
and the importance of balancing content knowledge with skill development, and efficiency with
innovation. Again project-based learning is lauded as an example: “If designed well, [it] helps students
pose and test their own conjectures, experiment with ideas, experience the need to change them, and
develop the proficiency to make them work” (p. 20).
The third dimension of the rationale concerns educational and social equity, and Warschauer argues that
“issues of technology access, use, and mastery” (p. 21) are closely connected to these concerns. Here
statistical data from a variety of studies are used quite extensively to identify differences in technology
usage and access across homes, communities and schools, especially according to race and ethnicity and
socio-economic background in the United States. He looks at a range of differences between high-SES
and low-SES schools and the factors involved, including the importance of professional development,
robust technologies, technical support staff and parental guidance in the home setting. He argues that
“technology can play a vital role in promoting educational and social equity if deployed as part of welldesigned educational interventions” (p. 29), but providing the equipment itself only constitutes a small
(but important) part of this effort. These three dimensions of the rationale provide the basis for the
remainder of the book.
Chapter 3 discusses the technological hardware, software and content tools that are required to achieve
the goals described earlier. The chapter is organized around what Warschauer describes as the “four
critical functions of learning” (p. 30) that contribute to achieving the goals of content, community,
construction, and composition (the four Cs). Under content, there is a particular focus on the requirements

Language Learning & Technology

65

Mike Levy

Review of Learning in the Cloud

for successful out-of-school learning and for content that is rich and individualized to motivate the
student. Content is interpreted broadly, covers materials that support process as well as product, and
includes websites, discussion forums, games, mobile apps, and other online resources. Community looks
at collaboration and play, both online and offline. Construction focuses upon the value of creating
“meaningful public entities and artifacts” (p. 30), again emphasizing the importance of project-oriented
learning and student products that have meaning in the world rather than those that are simply classroomoriented, as in a test or an assignment only read by the teacher. Similarly, composition reflects this wider
interpretation as students write for journals, blogs or wikis, and the like. Otherwise, the chapter provides
good coverage of contemporary technological tools, resources and systems that are available (e.g.,
netbooks, tablets open source software, cloud computing) and how they may be utilized to support or
further the goals and functions of learning.
The next chapter is one of the strongest in the book, in my view, because it provides the reader with
exemplars of four outstanding K–12 programs. While examples and contrasts between schools on the use
and application of digital media are a positive feature throughout this book, it is the level of detail in the
case studies in this chapter that is especially illuminating. They provide a fine complementary set of
experiences around technological and curricular innovation. Though the programs differ, there is evidence
in each case of the critical importance of information sharing, curricular innovation, close involvement of
stakeholders from the start, and professional development. One example that “involved a complete
remaking of the school and the curriculum” (p. 61) illustrated perfectly that a digital media component is
not merely an addition that leaves all existing structures and materials untouched, but contributes to
ecological change as referred to earlier. The examples also amply demonstrate that the pathways to
success vary and depend upon the particular goals and circumstances of the setting.
The Designs chapter provides an in-depth, perceptive discussion of curriculum innovation and digital
media. It also includes a much more extensive discussion of the influence of standardized testing in the
United States and its impact upon curricula, especially with a view to flexibility, change and innovation.
The exemplars of Chapter 4 are referred to regularly to support the arguments presented. The
Environments chapter continues with a practical slant and some down-to-earth wisdom on how-to-getthings-done. For example, it looks at the pros and cons of such options as the schools providing their
students with technology versus the BYOT (Bring Your Own Technology) option in which students and
their parents bear the cost; a compromise, middle option is also offered in the example of a volunteer
program. Importantly, this chapter also deals with some other critical components of technology
innovation such as leadership, the roles of internal and external stakeholders, and perhaps most
importantly of all, teachers and how to cater to their needs and professional development. A short
conclusion wraps it all up at the end.
In the space remaining, I would like to return to one of the central platforms of the book, the idea of 21st
century learning. Warschauer cites Shaffer and Gee (2005, pp. 5–6) to help develop his theme: “Our
standards-driven curriculum, especially in urban schools, is not preparing children to be innovators at the
highest technical levels—the levels that will pay off most in our modern, high-tech, science-driven global
economy.” Warschauer argues that there needs to be a better alignment of classroom environments with
the requirements of 21st-century workplaces and communities. He discusses the concept of adaptive
expertise (Bransford et al., 2009) and the importance of simultaneously attending to the dimensions of
inquiry and innovation, as well as to the development of specific skills and knowledge. From a rather
different angle—though still highly relevant in today’s technology-mediated learning settings—he also
considers geeking out in this chapter. It is included under “Educational Equity” and “Home and
Community Use” rather than “21st Century Learning.” Ito and her colleagues (2008) describe geeking out
as a form of interest-driven online practice—as opposed to one that is friendship-driven: “an intense
commitment to or engagement with media or technology, often one particular media property, genre, or
type of technology” (p. 28). Warschauer argues that this kind of activity is to be encouraged because of

Language Learning & Technology

66

Mike Levy

Review of Learning in the Cloud

the high levels of motivation and engagement that derive from students developing and pursuing their
own personal interests.
As elsewhere, Warschauer illustrates the point with a perceptive and telling example. In one school
science program, students were junior science apprentices such that they performed authentic experiments
of the kind scientists might perform (the teacher had been a research scientist at Berkeley and Stanford as
a graduate student). In another program students collaboratively produced a monthly newsletter about
science-related, personal experiences; although engaging and motivating for students, this project had
much less to do with scientific enquiry or disciplinary knowledge. Warschauer concludes: “Instruction
that balances efficiency and innovation seems optimal and should include opportunities to experiment
with ideas and, in the process, experience the need to change them and develop the proficiency to make
them work” (p. 20, italics in the original). Together these ideas and examples inform Warschauer’s
position on 21st century learning. In many ways this idea is central to the book, and numerous other
perspectives in the volume connect or relate to it in some way. As such, it is worthy of further discussion.
If we consider the well-documented endeavors of the Wright Brothers over 100 years ago and their
invention of the control mechanisms that enabled powered flight, we can, I believe, discern numerous
features of what Warschauer describes as 21st century learning. Notable in the case of the Wright brothers
would be the importance of real-world application, disciplinary knowledge, creativity and innovation,
regular correspondence with like-minded individuals, project-oriented learning, and (not forgetting)
phenomenal levels of persistence. The Wright Brothers may be said to have “geeked out.” This episode in
their lives was also a consequence of their own individual personalities, the relationship between the
brothers and mutual interests, as well as their background in the bicycle business. With an example such
as this one as counter-evidence, I am not entirely convinced that there is a distinctive 21st century kind of
learning, although I readily admit that avenues of communication both to knowledge and to people has
changed out of all proportion for students today because of technological advances. However, what I
believe we can say with some certainty, at least for the majority of schools, is that the kind of learning
environment the Wright Brothers created for themselves is rare within an institutional setting. When it
does exist, it may be said to be transitory and perhaps incidental to the “main game” of core content study
and test preparation. In other words, the central question reduces to a concern with the processes,
opportunities, and constraints involved in actually implementing this particular kind of learning
environment in a typical school setting.
It is now that the constraints of providing formalized teaching and learning across the curriculum to large
numbers of students within an institution become so insistent and penetrating. That is why there are
recurring references in the book to time pressures, the restrictive impacts of massively standardized
testing, the crowded curriculum, a focus on the needs of a narrow band of students, and even the
compensatory role of informal, independent, out-of-school learning so that students may develop their
own personal interests. Warschauer’s book wrestles with these challenges for the school and rightly
questions priorities and approaches in light of what is required in today’s workplace and community.
In presenting his arguments for a new approach, and especially through his exemplars and examples,
Warschauer gives us the courage to imagine how it might be different, and he offers practical ways
forward. The examples from Dos Pueblos High near Santa Barbara, where it took two years of
negotiations with the University of California to approve innovative subject-area requirements, or from
King Middle in Maine, where the expeditionary learning program involved a complete remaking of the
school and curriculum, are indeed inspirational. At the same time they also highlight the sheer complexity
and effort required when one wishes to initiate meaningful change for institutional settings that are so
deeply embedded in current practices. Such pathways to the future are not for the faint-hearted. As
Warschauer says, these schools “have achieved their success due to the inspiration and perspiration of
their administrators, teachers, parents, and students” (p. 66). It also is noteworthy that a number of the
examples of success stories involve extra-curricular activity and rely heavily on volunteer labor.

Language Learning & Technology

67

Mike Levy

Review of Learning in the Cloud

Extending these notable exceptions into some kind of broader norm for schools remains a monumental
task. It will require a coordinated approach and action at state and national levels well beyond the scope
of a single institution, or a district. That said, Warschauer’s book provides insights and guidelines on
numerous levels to assist in this task from strategic planning, to leadership, stakeholder participation,
societal repercussions, professional development for teachers, and of course technology choice and
pathways to implementation. As he says in the introduction, we are dealing with a “complex
sociotechnical ecology for educational reform” (p. 5). Nobody said this would be easy if success were to
be enduring. In this volume, by providing well-informed and reasoned arguments drawn from many years
of experience in the field, Warschauer helps show us the way forward.

ABOUT THE REVIEWER
Dr. Mike Levy is Professor of Second Language Studies at the University of Queensland and Director of the
Brisbane Universities Language Alliance (BULA). His research focuses upon Computer-Assisted Language
Learning (CALL) and includes studies on the role of technology in ab initio language learning, teacher
education and learner training, mobile learning for Italian, and distance education for Mandarin Chinese.
His publications include CALL Dimensions with Glenn Stockwell (Erlbaum, 2006) and Teacher Education
in CALL with Philip Hubbard (Benjamins, 2006). He is also Chair of the Steering Committee for
WorldCALL 2013 (www.worldcall.org).
Email: m.levy@uq.edu.au

REFERENCES
Bransford, J., Mosborg, S., Copland, M. A., Honig, M. A., Nelson, H. G., Gawel, D., et al. (2009).
Adaptive people and adaptive systems: Issues of learning and design. In A. Hargreaves, A. Lieberman, M.
Fllan, & D. Hopkins (Eds.), Second International Handbook of Educational Change (pp. 825–856).
Dordrecht, NL: Springer.
Ito, M., Horst, H. Bitanti, M., Boyd, D., Herr-Stepheson, B. Lange, P.G. et al. (2008). Living and learning
with new media: Summary of findings from the digital youth project. Retrieved
from http://digitalyouth.ischool.berkeley.edu/files/report/digitalyouth-WhitePaper.pdf
Shaffer, D. W., & Gee, J. P. (2005). Before every child is left behind: How epistemic games can solve the
coming crisis in education (WCER Working Paper No 2005–7). Madison,WI: Wisconsin Centre of
Education Research.

Language Learning & Technology

68

