Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2013/news.pdf

February 2013, Volume 17, Number 1
pp. 47–49

NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS
Sponsors
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC)
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR)

University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource
Center (NFLRC)
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its
many activities.
3RD INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON LANGUAGE DOCUMENTATION &
CONSERVATION (ICLDC)
Sponsored and organized by the NFLRC and the Department of Linguistics at the University of Hawai‘i
at Mānoa, the 3rd International Conference on Language Documentation and Conservation (ICLDC) will
be held February 28–March 3, 2013, at the Hawai‘i Imin International Conference Center in Honolulu,
Hawai‘i.
This year’s conference theme, “Sharing Worlds of Knowledge,” intends to highlight the interdisciplinary
nature of language documentation and the need to share methods for documenting the many aspects of
human knowledge that language encodes. We aim to build on the strong momentum created by the 1st
and 2nd ICLDCs to discuss research and revitalization approaches yielding rich records that can benefit
both the field of language documentation and speech communities. By popular demand, the 3rd ICLDC
will be a full day longer than the previous two conferences.
Conference highlights include two plenary talks, six Master Classes, papers, posters, and electronic poster
sessions, complemented by engaging social events and an optional Hilo Field Study to the Hawaiian
immersion schools on the Big Island of Hawai‘i. We hope you will join us.
Website: http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/icldc/2013/
SURF’S UP! CALICO 2013 RETURNS TO PARADISE!
The NFLRC and the Language Learning Center (LLC) at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa are pleased
to once again host the annual Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium (CALICO)
Conference, to be held May 21–25, 2013, as it marks its 30th year. The theme will be “Navigating the
Complexities of Language Learning in the Digital Age.” Conference highlights will include two days of
pre-conference workshops, the Developers’ Showcase, and three days of conference presentations. Come
join us for this much anticipated event! Website: https://www.calico.org/page.php?id=492
STAY IN TOUCH WITH SOCIAL MEDIA
Did you know that the NFLRC has its own Facebook page with close to 1,200 fans? It’s one of the best
ways to hear about the latest news, publications, conferences, workshops, and resources we offer. Just
click on the “Like” button to become a fan. For those who prefer getting up-to-the-minute “tweets,” you
can follow us on our Twitter page. Finally, NFLRC has its own YouTube channel with a growing
collection of free language learning and teaching videos for your perusal. Subscribe today!

Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501

47

News from Our Sponsoring Organizations

University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource
Center (NFLRC)
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS

The 7th International Conference & Workshops on Technology & Chinese
Language Teaching: Conference Proceedings 2012, Jun Da, Song Jiang, &
Shijuan Liu (Eds.)
NFLRC Hawai‘i was the 2012 venue for the The 7th Int'l Conference & Workshops
on Technology & Chinese Language Teaching. Seventy-two participant papers,
covering a broad spectrum of topics in Chinese language, linguistics, and pedagogical
technology are collected in this 542-page volume. You may view or download this
publication for free.
Check out our many other publications.
Save the trees! Check out our other two online journals:

Language Documentation & Conservation is a refereed,
open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC and published
by University of Hawai‘i Press.
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to language
documentation and conservation, as well as book
reviews, hardware and software reviews, and notes from
the field.

Language Learning & Technology

Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed
international journal of issues in foreign language reading
and literacy, published twice yearly on the World Wide
Web and sponsored by NFLRC and the University of
Hawai‘i College of Languages, Linguistics, and
Literature.

48

News from Our Sponsoring Organizations

Michigan State University Center for Language Education
and Research (CLEAR)
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States.
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language research.
PERSONNEL NEWS
Congratulations to CLEAR’s Co-Director, Susan Gass, who was recently the co-recipient (with Luke
Plonsky) of the prestigious ACTFL-MLJ Paul Pimsleur Award for Research in Foreign Language
Education.
In other personnel news, CLEAR bid farewell to two long-time team members last year. First, Dennie
Hoopingarner left MSU to move to another position. In his sixteen years with CLEAR (nearly since its
inception), Dennie was the driving force behind our technology projects, putting CLEAR “on the map”
with its Rich Internet Applications and other initiatives. More recently, our nine-year veteran information
technologist, Vineet Bansal, also left CLEAR to pursue other opportunities (and join his wife in New
Jersey!). Vineet came to CLEAR as a graduate assistant and grew to be a valuable full-time member of
the team, lending his considerable programming expertise to our website and web store, RIAs, CDROMs, and a host of other behind-the-scenes initiatives in support of CLEAR’s mission. We sincerely
thank Dennie and Vineet for their dedication and extraordinary contributions to CLEAR’s growth and
success over their combined twenty-five years of service, and we wish them the very best as they begin a
new phase in their careers.
CONFERENCES
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at the upcoming
Central States and CALICO conferences, as well as MIWLA and ACTFL later this year.
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Four professional development workshops are slated for July and August 2013. The early bird application
deadline is May 17, so hurry to choose your courses:
•
•
•
•

Writing in the Foreign Language Classroom
Revisiting the Learning and Teaching of Vocabulary
Rich Internet Applications for Language Learning: Introductory Techniques
Assessing Speaking: For Placement Testing, Classroom-based Assessment, and Midterm and
End-of-term Proficiency Exams
Detailed information on all workshops can be found on our Web site:
http://clear.msu.edu/clear/professionaldev/summerworkshops.php.
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT
CLEAR is developing several new products during our fifth funding cycle. Check our Web site for
updates on new products and services. Some of our upcoming projects include:
•
•
•

Professional development webinars on diverse topics
Online videos for language teaching techniques
Online listening and speaking tests for LCTLs

NEWSLETTER
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials.
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/.

Language Learning & Technology

49

