Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2013/review2

February 2013, Volume 17, Number 1
pp. 56–59

REVIEW OF WORKING MANDARIN FOR BEGINNERS
Working Mandarin for Beginners

Yi Zhou, with M. Lynne Gerber

2007
ISBN: 9781589011373 (student edition)
ISBN: 9781589011397 (teacher edition)
US $64.95
352 pp.

Georgetown University Press
Washington, DC
Review by Haidan Wang, University of Hawai‛i at Mānoa
Working Mandarin for Beginners is an agreeable attempt to integrate traditional business language
teaching materials and an audio CD supported online via Quia Books (http://books.quia.com), creating an
interactive environment. This textbook is part of the Working Languages Series sponsored by the KenanFlagler School of Business at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC), a series that aims to
teach the basic language skills needed for business tasks and cultural awareness. Using a similar template
to other textbooks in this series, Working Mandarin was developed by Chinese language educators in the
language department of UNC with the assistance of the managerial staff of the UNC Business School. It
is intended to help business students and practitioners communicate in everyday Chinese-speaking work
environments. This textbook is designed for use primarily by people studying beginning level Mandarin
for professionals, but is also appropriate for self-directed learners.
AN OVERVIEW
Working Mandarin comes in both a teacher and student edition. The textbook is organized into six
thematic units, totaling twenty-four lessons. Each of the first five units consists of three content lessons
and one review lesson. The themes range from business relationship-building, communications, and
activities in the workplace to exchanges for daily social situations. The three content lessons contain their
own sets of objectives of (a) functional language skills, (b) grammar and phonetics and (c) cultural and
business understanding. Since Mandarin listening and speaking skills are the focus of this textbook, the
first five units present Chinese in the form of pinyin, a Roman-letter spelling system for Mandarin
Chinese. Unit 6 introduces the fundamentals of Chinese Characters. After a series of exercises
familiarizing them with the content of this unit, students are directed to work on a project related to
Chinese characters.
Both the teacher and the student editions come with a CD. The CD for the teacher’s edition contains
audio files with exercises, answer keys for homework, quizzes, and a midterm examination, in addition to
student worksheets and other resources that are commonly provided in teachers’ manuals. This version

Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501

56

Haidan Wang

Review of Working Mandarin for Beginners

also includes several other useful packages, which will be elaborated in the following section. The CD for
the student’s edition contains only audio files for dialogues and listening exercises for all lessons. The
CDrom and online support via Quia provide the ideal program for teachers to develop a hybrid
environment, combining face-to-face teaching with online and classroom activities to create a virtual
second language world.
THE RESOURCE RICH CD FOR TEACHERS
The richness of the CD for teachers is evidenced by the variety of packages in addition to those listed
above. Every package is an ensemble of integrated communicative tasks, simulated contexts, and
scenarios designed and structured for authentic language use.
The Conversation Practice package provides teachers with the tools to enforce the immediate student
application of learned material in real world, authentic situations. Each practice suggests a role-play
activity consisting of a series of scenarios with detailed instructions and clues for complete conversations,
a pragmatic necessity missing in many business Chinese teaching materials available in the market
(Wang, Tschudi, & Jiang, 2007). Instructions for all participating roles as well as for instructors as
organizers are also included. The Supplementary PowerPoint is the biggest package in the CD-rom.
Twenty-six PowerPoint files correspond to the 24 lessons, with an introduction to pinyin and one midterm
review. Each PowerPoint summarizes the language points covered with follow-up speaking exercises, and
most of them are supported with pictures suggesting parts of the scenarios. The second half of each
PowerPoint introduces the content of the following lesson with functional expressions.
The Mini-Immersion package is a well-designed kit for learners to solidify and utilize extensively what
they have learned in current units. It provides five folders of immersion tasks labeled as “hotel station,”
“restaurant station,” “shopping station,” “theater station,” and “travel agency station,” and all are essential
situations for living and working in China. The general instructions in this package provide (a) thorough
guidelines for both teachers and native Chinese speaking volunteers participating in the exchanges; (b) an
all-inclusive check to ensure each immersion is well prepared and smoothly conducted; (c) a glossary for
volunteers to match students’ linguistic levels at the time of performance; (d) printable signs and props for
these stations; and (e) grading rubrics. In each station folder, instructions are presented comprehensively
for both students and volunteers to facilitate students’ completion of the tasks. Each folder also provides
semi-finished worksheets for students to complete.
There is also a separate package for Student Worksheets. Some worksheets are for listening
comprehension and some for speaking purposes, for which detailed instructions and situations are
provided. The last but most fascinating task sheet is Skit, wherein students design and develop a play with
guidelines and rules to simulate a work environment and authentic communications in real-life contexts.
Students have free rein to choose any topics ranging from business meetings to negotiations. The delivery
may be either humorous or serious. The unique Skit provides an authentic, open-ended task that requires
participants’ collaboration and problem solving, thus providing a scaffolded environment for learning
(Arnó-Macià, 2012). In sum, the multiple packages in this CD not only supplement the printed textbook,
but also enrich the instructional materials for Chinese for working professionals, responding to the
continuous call for adequate resources for less commonly taught languages (Grosse & Voght, 1991,
2012).
THE TEMPLATE VIA QUIA
Working Mandarin is one of the few Chinese textbooks for business professionals employing an online
teaching management system such as Quia. The Quia system provides users of this textbook with a
template. Teachers can create their own course page by using the key printed inside the teacher’s edition
at http://books.quia.com. Students registering for a course using this textbook need to purchase an access

Language Learning & Technology

57

Haidan Wang

Review of Working Mandarin for Beginners

key from Quia Bookstore and receive a course code from their teacher in order to log in to the course
page.
The course homepage has an instructor workstation and a student workstation. The instructor workstation
features a series of tab-buttons: Dashboard, Classes, Books, Files, Announcements, and Options. The
Dashboard has a calendar for reminders and also a range of alerted items, such as items to be graded and
new submissions from students and students’ performance monitoring. The Classes section is a
management folder in which teachers may view the results of students’ work on their assignments, view
the roster of their class, and set up the due dates for current class assignments in the assign section. In the
Books section, teachers may create and customize four kinds of activities—“flashcard,” “matching,”
“concentration,” and “word searching”—to engage students in fun practice and review activities based on
textbook or classroom instruction. The activity creation is quite effortless and unlimited. Having created
different activities, teachers can assign these to their class sections, and check the statistics of the
students’ practice time, what they have been working on, and so forth. All homework exercises from
Working Mandarin are transferred to the customized section in the formats of matching, true-or-false,
multiple choice, fill-in-the-blank, and questions for short answers. Students can also record their oral
responses and submit them for their teachers’ review and commentary. Assignments can be automatically
graded upon submission, or the teacher may adjust points after reviewing the results. The adjustment
option is very useful for grading speaking and writing exercises. The options in this section are
particularly appropriate for grading pronunciation using the pinyin-system in Mandarin since it can match
the accent or tones. The Files section enables teachers to upload files or create new folders. The
Announcements and Options sections are for the purpose of course management.
POTENTIALS AND SUGGESTIONS
Working Mandarin, for beginning level learners, offers abundant supplementary materials, much more so
than most other Chinese textbooks for business practitioners. With the technological support available via
Quia, if the authors of this textbook upload all materials in the CD-rom to their Quia course website,
Working Mandarin will present an ideal blended learning environment, an environment that research has
shown to be especially appropriate for learning language for specific purposes (Arnó-Macià, 2012).
Research has also demonstrated the feasibility of this approach (Wang, 2012) to extend the learning
environment and promote learner autonomy and motivation (Nicolson, Murphy, & Southgate, 2011).
Packages in the teacher’s CD such as Conversation Practice, Mini Immersion, and Skit are apt to be
improved and expanded in the web platform. If the internet connectivity is fully utilized, the existing
activity kits and props may become more vivid and thus be closer to authentic real-life situations that
students may be exposed to. Current audio files in the CD can be transformed to click-on button kits,
making each button match one individual sound, thus more accessible and easier to click.
In sum, Working Mandarin is comprehensive and promises to facilitate beginners’ listening and speaking
acquisition in Mandarin. When used as part of a blended learning environment, it will become more userfriendly, and thus more attractive to business Chinese educators and learners.

ABOUT THE REVIEWER
Haidan Wang is an assistant professor, Chinese Language Coordinator, and Coordinator for Business
Chinese Program at the Department of East Asian Languages and Literatures at the University of Hawai‛i
at Mānoa. Her research interests are teaching language with technology, curriculum design and
development, and Chinese semantics and syntax.
Email: haidan@hawaii.edu

Language Learning & Technology

58

Haidan Wang

Review of Working Mandarin for Beginners

REFERENCES
Arnó-Macià, E. (2012). The role of technology in teaching languages for specific purposes courses.
Modern Language Journal, 96, (Focus Issue), 89–104.
Grosse, C., & Voght, G. (1991). The evolution of language for specific purposes in the United States.
Modern Language Journal, 75, 181–195.
Grosse, C., & Voght, G. (2012). The continuing evolution of language for specific purposes. Modern
Language Journal, 96, (Focus Issue), 190–202.
Nicolson, M., Murphy, L., & Southgate, M. (Eds.). (2011). Language teaching in blended contexts.
Edinburgh, UK: Dunedin Academic Press.
Wang, H. (2012). Yi hunhe-xing ketang kuozhan shangwu hanyu kecheng de xuexi kongjian [Expanding
learning environment in a hybrid Chinese language course for professionals]. In J. Da, S. Jiang, & S. Liu
(Eds.), Conference Proceedings of the 7th International Conference & Workshops on Technology &
Chinese Language Teaching (pp. 410–415). Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai‛i National Foreign
Language Resource Center.
Wang, H., Tschudi, S., & Jiang, S. (2007, March). Completing transactions: Enhancing pragmatic input
in business Chinese. Paper presented at the 17th International Conference on Pragmatics and Language
Learning, Honolulu, HI.

Language Learning & Technology

59

